JURNAL TARBIYAH 28 (2) (2021) 17-32

                            JURNAL TARBIYAH
                  http://jurnaltarbiyah.uinsu.ac.id/index.php/tarbiyah

        IMPROVING LOYALTY OF SCHOOL MANAGEMENT
           PERSONNEL THROUGH ORGANIZATIONAL
               COMMUNICATIONS APPROACH


                        Aini Safitri1, Heri Rahmatsyah Putra2

                         1,2 STAIN Teungku Dirundeng Meulaboh

                          Email: 1 aini.safitri@staindirundeng.ac.id
                       2 herirahmatsyahputra@staindirundeng.ac.id




                            DOI : 10.30829/tar.v28i2.1108


  Accepted: September 30th, 2021. Approved: December 28th, 2021. Published: December 30th, 2021

                                         ABSTRACT

Teachers and employees are the driving force in the management of school institutions.
Successfully managing a school depends on the flow of information from each level.
Communication as a human need plays a crucial role in increasing the loyalty of school
residents. Leadership communication to subordinates and vice versa and communication
between members is also expected to create a harmonious working atmosphere. This
study aims to determine the efforts to increase the loyalty of school personnel through an
organizational communication approach by school principals by applying qualitative
research methods that describe in-depth what was obtained from the informant. The
study results indicate that the form of organizational communication in increasing the
loyalty of school residents takes place vertically and horizontally. The principal
communicates openly or directly at ceremonies and meetings and personally to teachers
and employees in instructing all kinds of policies and providing encouragement to
improve the performance of teachers and employees. Likewise, between teachers and
employees, there is horizontal communication that creates a harmonious and pleasant
work environment to increase employee loyalty and motivation.

Keywords: Communication Organization, Loyality, School Management




                                                                                                  17

           Aini Safitri, Heri Rahmatsyah Putra / JURNAL TARBIYAH 28 (2) (2021) 17-32


INTRODUCTION
      Communication is something that cannot be avoided in human life. Therefore, it is
necessary to build good communication to create harmonious relationships with other
people in life. Likewise, in an organization, communication is the primary key in
exchanging information between parts of the organization, both between leaders and
members and members with fellow members in the organization. In organizational
communication, communication problems consistently arise in organizational processes.
Therefore, communication within the organization becomes a flow system that connects
and generates performance between parts of the organization to produce synergies.
      Communication is a process because it is a continuous series of activities, which
has no beginning or end and is constantly changing. Communication also involves a
complex variety of interconnectedness that can never be duplicated in the same way: the
interrelationships among people, environments, skills, attitudes, statuses, experiences,
and feelings, all of which determine the communication that takes place at any given time
(Cangara, 2014:35). Communication-based on its scope is divided into several kinds, one
of which is organizational communication. Organizational communication itself is
communication built within an institution that plays a communication role, meaning that
communication occurs from superiors to subordinates (vertical), fellow employees
(horizontally), and so on. (Arni, 1995:66). The statement above emphasizes that
organization is very important for human life. Because almost every aspect of life can not
be separated from the so-called organization. Organizations are formed so that people
can solve their problems and achieve goals by cooperating in an organization (Putra,
2020). In the world of education at Public Elementary School (SDN) 024 Bangko Mukti
Riau, competition for quality and quality and realizing the vision and mission of each
elementary school is unavoidable. Employees (management) of the school plays an
essential role in quality and quality competition and realize the institution's vision and
mission. Employees become one of the fundamental driving forces in advancing the
institution so that the school can grow. Employees who are loyal in their work and can be
relied on to work with dedication make a vital contribution to the success achieved by the
agency.
      In education management, good communication is needed in managing
educational institutions. Communication is a significant activity in the organization. The
results of a communication expert's research concluded that leaders and managers use
about 75%-90% of their working time to communicate. If two or more people work


                                                                                       18

           Aini Safitri, Heri Rahmatsyah Putra / JURNAL TARBIYAH 28 (2) (2021) 17-32


together, there needs to be communication between them: the better a person's
communication, the better possible cooperation with others. Effective communication
requires mutual respect, trust, openness, and responsibility. The leader or, in this case,
the principal conveys all management functions and management tasks through
communication channels. The principal plans, organizes, implements, and controls,
communicating to his subordinates. Likewise, administrative tasks such as students,
teaching and educational staff, finance, facilities and infrastructure, school relations with
the community, and special services are also carried out through communication.
Leadership is translated into terms of traits, personal behavior, influence on others,
patterns of interaction, cooperative relationships between roles, an administrative
position, and perceptions of others about the legitimacy of influence. These different
definitions contain common assumptions that are general. One group phenomenon
involves interaction between two or more people. In involving the influencing process,
where the leader deliberately uses influence on subordinates (Wahjosumijo, 1999:16).
However, sometimes the problem of inequality in the flow of information regarding each
personnel's policies and main tasks often occurs in an organization, especially an
organization or educational institution that sometimes encounters obstacles or
misdirections. Things like this can also trigger the loyalty of members or school personnel
to decrease. It is where the role of the principal as a leader becomes a mediator or
organizer of good relations between personnel. The low loyalty of school personnel is also
indicated by the number of personnel members who arrive late; some rarely attend
school.
       Several previous studies are relevant to this research. Research conducted by
Hidayati reveals that influential educational leaders must make the people they lead,
especially educators and educational staff aware, that good quality education does not
always have to be expensive. With sincerity, tenacity, and good teamwork, all goals can
be achieved, especially the qualification standards of educators and education staff can
be met and achieved, and their sustainability is maintained. Educational leaders have the
responsibility to create an organizational culture and a conducive climate for efforts to
increase growth and enhance the development of educational institutions following the
required quality standards. In this regard, educational leaders have three prominent
roles: leadership, managerial, and educational fields for all elements of the institution
(Ginting & Haryati, 2012). The research also focuses on the leadership of an educational
institution leader in improving the quality of education. In addition, there is also research


                                                                                          19

            Aini Safitri, Heri Rahmatsyah Putra / JURNAL TARBIYAH 28 (2) (2021) 17-32


conducted by Sermal; the results of his research should be leaders, especially leaders in
the field of education, in carrying out their leadership activities in influencing their
subordinates based on sound leadership criteria. Then in making an educational
program, leaders should understand the circumstances or abilities possessed by their
subordinates and divide assignments according to their respective abilities. Leaders must
be able to understand their duties as a leader. In addition, in carrying out their activities,
both leaders and those led establish a cooperative relationship that supports each other
to achieve organizational or agency goals. (Sermal, 2015).


LITERATURE REVIEW
1. Improving Loyality
       Loyalty is a willingness to cooperate, which means a willingness to sacrifice oneself,
exercise self-control, and highlight one's interests. This willingness to sacrifice oneself
involves awareness to devote oneself to an institution (Suwardi, 2015). Loyalty comes
from the word loyal, which means loyal. Loyalty within the company can be interpreted
as an employee's loyalty. Velasques said that employees must work well to achieve
company goals and avoid activities that can threaten or interfere with achieving these
goals and not for the personal interests or benefits of employees. The thing that can cause
difficulties in the realization of loyalty is a conflict of interest, namely a conflict between
the personal interests of employees and the interests of the institution. For the sake of
personal interest, employees may not carry out activities that compete with their
company. In addition, conflicts of interest can also arise by combining several types of
work. According to Sudimin, loyalty means the willingness of employees with all abilities,
skills, thoughts, and time to participate in achieving company goals and keeping company
secrets, and not taking actions that harm the company as long as that person is still an
employee. Except keeping a secret, these things can only be done when a working
relationship with the company still binds the employee. Fletcher defines loyalty as loyalty
to someone and not leaving or defecting and not betraying others when needed
(Frestiawan, 2018). A teacher must meet two categories concerning education: capability
and loyalty. Capability: The teacher must have the ability in the science field and have
good theoretical abilities about teaching, from planning, implementation to evaluation.
Teacher loyalty, namely being loyal to the teacher's duties, not only in the classroom but
also outside the classroom (Suwardi, 2015).




                                                                                            20

               Aini Safitri, Heri Rahmatsyah Putra / JURNAL TARBIYAH 28 (2) (2021) 17-32


       In realizing employee loyalty, it is necessary to have a good relationship between
the agency/organization members built through an effective communication process.
Effective communication can be done by using communication techniques. The effective
speaking technique is speaking interestingly and clearly so that it can be understood and
achieve the expected goals in communication. The technique of speaking in
communication must adapt between the communicator and the communicant to the
message being discussed. Communication techniques are used so that communication
between humans is established effectively. The definition of technique is a method used
to do something. While the notion of communication is the delivery of information from
communicators to communicants through certain media (Rahman, 2000:34).


2. Educational Management (School)
       Management is an effort or action towards achieving goals, a cooperative system,
and optimally involving people, funds, physical and other resources. In education,
management is the activity of combining educational resources to concentrate on
achieving predetermined educational goals. Educational management is the process of
developing the activities of groups of people to achieve the educational goals that have
been set. Educational input is everything that must be available because it is needed for
its survival. Something, in this case, are resources, tools, and expectations as guides for
the ongoing process, a) human resources (HR), namely madrasa principals, teachers,
learning resources, students, employees, security, and resources, the rest is equipment,
equipment, money, materials, etc.) The tools include the school's organizational
structure, laws and regulations, job descriptions, plans, programs, etc.) While the
expectations are in the form of vision, mission, goals, and objectives to be achieved by the
institution.
       Education is adults' conscious and responsible effort in guiding, leading, and
directing humans with various problems or problems and questions that may arise in its
implementation. So, education as a process can be interpreted as changing human
behavior into adults so that they can live independently and as members of society in the
natural environment where the individual is located. UU RI No. 20 of 2003 states that
education is a conscious and planned effort to create a learning atmosphere and learning
process so that students actively develop their potential to have religious, spiritual
strength, self-control, personality, intelligence, noble character, and skills that are needed
by himself, society, nation, and state (Syaiful Sagala, 2015).


                                                                                           21

           Aini Safitri, Heri Rahmatsyah Putra / JURNAL TARBIYAH 28 (2) (2021) 17-32


       In micro-scale education (school level), the educational process is the decision-
making process, the institutional management process, the program management
process, the teaching and learning process, and the monitoring and evaluation process.
The process is said to be of high quality if the coordination and harmonization of the
integration of madrasah inputs (teachers, students, money, curriculum, equipment) are
carried out in harmony, thus creating a learning situation that can encourage motivation
to learn and empower students not only to master knowledge. This knowledge is also a
charge of the conscience of students, internalized, practiced in everyday life, and more
importantly, able to develop themselves. The output (output) of education is the
performance of the madrasa. This performance can be measured by its quality,
effectiveness, efficiency, innovation, quality of work-life, and morale. Output can be said
to be of high quality if the student's achievement shows high achievement in 1) academic
achievement; general test scores, UAN, scientific works, academic competitions; 2) non-
academic achievements, such as faith in piety, honesty, decency, sports, arts, and other
extra-curricular activities (Murni, 2016).
       The success of an educational institution is highly dependent on the principal's
leadership. Because the principal, as a leader in his institution, must be able to bring the
institution towards achieving the goals that have been set, must be able to see changes,
and see the future in a better-globalized life. The principal must be responsible for the
smoothness and success of all arrangements and management affairs formally to his
superiors or informally to the community entrusted to their students. Principals are
formal leaders in educational institutions. It is interpreted as the principal because the
principal is the highest official in the school. The principal is the main structural and
administratively responsible for the school. Therefore, the principal has staff or officials
under his leadership (Sulistiyorini, 2009:133).
       It needs to be considered because every school generally has dreams and
aspirations to become the organizer of a quality education process to support national
education goals, namely the nation's intellectual life. Widodo stated that the education
process involves various inputs, namely: teaching materials, methodologies, school
facilities, administrative support, other facilities, and infrastructure, as well as a
conducive environment. Furthermore, school management must synchronize these
various inputs to create schools with quality services. Based on this opinion,
administrative support, which is a variety of office activities, needs to be considered in its
management so that it can contribute well to school services (Siregar,2017).


                                                                                           22

           Aini Safitri, Heri Rahmatsyah Putra / JURNAL TARBIYAH 28 (2) (2021) 17-32


       Effective principals act as leaders who can move people and encourage
organizations to develop to achieve excellence—acting as a manager in charge of ensuring
that learning takes place effectively and measuring the results achieved to be used as a
reference for quality improvements later. Leadership is an essential part of an
organization. Leadership is an action taken by individuals or groups to coordinate and
provide direction and guide and influence other individuals or groups who are members
of an organization to achieve predetermined goals. The success of a leader can be seen
from the nature and behavior of a leader. Leadership behavior will give birth to leadership
styles according to the abilities, conditions, and situations of the leader and the people
being led (Fadhli, 2016).


3. Organizational Communication
       At first, the study of communication, let alone the science of communication, was
something that had never existed in the treasury of science. When at first all human
problems were still in the study of philosophy, then communication was not thought of
or thought of by humans (latent phenomena). At this time, the science of communication
began to develop rapidly in the realm of social science (Mulyana, 2007:46). The seller
provides an understanding of communication; namely, communication is a process by
which verbal and nonverbal symbols are sent, received, and given meaning (Arni, 2015:4).
Thus, if you look at the understanding conveyed by Williams J. Seller, the communication
process is straightforward, which is only the process of sending and receiving messages.
However, communication is a complex phenomenon that is difficult to understand
without knowing the critical principles and components of communication. In Islam, as
the source of all knowledge, the Qur'an has explained a lot about communication. If in
Islamic communication science, it can be understood that communication in Arabic is
known as al-ittisal, which comes from the root word wasola, which means to convey.
Hussain defines Islamic communication as a process of conveying messages or
information from the communicator to the communicant by using the principles and
methods of communication contained in the Qur'an and Hadith. Thus, in theoretical and
practical aspects, Islamic communication can be different from communication according
to the perspective of general communication because Islamic communication is based on
the Qur'an and Hadith, which upholds the truth. In contrast, general communication
prioritizes political and material gains (Kholil, 2007:2).




                                                                                        23

             Aini Safitri, Heri Rahmatsyah Putra / JURNAL TARBIYAH 28 (2) (2021) 17-32


      Organizations are associations, cooperative groups between people held to achieve
common goals, the composition, and rules of various organs, and so on to be an orderly
unit. The organization is also a place where management activities are carried out. As a
forum for the basic pattern of organizational structure, it is relatively permanent,
meaning that the organizational structure is not changed intermittently (Arni, 2011:3).
Human interaction in an organization is a must. An organization cannot run well without
interaction from its members. The interaction of members of the organization can only
be carried out with the existence of communication. The correlation between
communication science and organization lies in its review, which focuses on the people
involved in achieving organizational goals. Communication science questions what forms
of communication occur in organizations, what organizational methods and techniques
are used, what media is used, how the process is, what factors are the obstacles, and so
on. The answers to these questions are for study material and then present a
communication concept for an organization by considering the particular situation at
which communication takes place.
      Organizational communication is sending and receiving various organizational
messages within the formal and informal groups of an organization. Formal
communication is approved by the organization itself and is oriented to the interests of
the organization. The contents can be in the form of ways of working in the organization,
productivity, and various jobs that must be done. For example, policy memos, statements,
press conferences, and official letters. Informal communication is a socially approved
process. The orientation is not to the organization but rather to individual members. In
other words, organizational communication is a process of creating and exchanging
messages in a network of interdependent relationships to cope with an uncertain or
changing environment (Wursanto, 2003:34).
      The purpose of communication in the organizational process is none other than in
order to establish mutual understanding (mutual understanding). In short, there should
be equality in terms of reference and the field of experience. Although it is almost
impossible to equate the cognitive domains of individuals in an organization, through
planned communication activities and the substance is designed, at least there is a process
of diffusion (diffusion) of organizational dimensions to everyone. Three approaches can
be used to see communication in an organization, macro, micro, and individual (Arni,
2015: 30).




                                                                                         24

           Aini Safitri, Heri Rahmatsyah Putra / JURNAL TARBIYAH 28 (2) (2021) 17-32


RESEARCH METHOD
       This study used the descriptive qualitative method. Qualitative research is research
that can explain and analyze phenomena, events, social activities, attitudes, beliefs,
perceptions of a person or group of things (Hamdi, 2014:9). This study prioritizes direct
data so that the researchers themselves go into the field to conduct observations and
interviews with school structural employees regarding efforts to increase the loyalty of
school personnel through an organizational communication approach at SDN 024
Bangko Mukti Riau.


RESULT AND DISCUSSION
       Conflict is a daily situation faced in school management. When there is conflict,
there are usually differences in thinking and feeling. The real issue in conflict is not the
perception of who is right and who is wrong, but the real issue is how to deal with the
diversity of thought patterns and feelings. Disagreements in conflict and the relationship
between conflict and change provide positive input for school managers to improve the
climate in the schools they lead (Anzizhan. 2015). Organizational communication climate
can be realized by the existence of a good and effective communication process between
organization members. In general, the communication conveyed by the communicator
has a significant influence on the communicant. Both positive and negative influences,
depending on the response of the communicant. An institution in general also wants a
positive influence on the communication they run (Putra, 2020). Effective
communication within the organization is needed to minimize friction that causes
conflict, to create a climate of organizational communication conducive to achieving the
organization's goals.
1.   Top-down Communication
       In simple terms, transforming information from managers at all levels to the
bottom is a communication from top to bottom (top-down or downward
communications). The flow of communication from managers to subordinates is
generally related to their responsibilities and authorities in an organization. A manager
who uses downward communication lines aims to convey information, direct, coordinate,
motivate, lead, and control various activities at lower levels. The communication line that
comes from the top (manager) to the bottom (employee) is the delivery of messages that
can be in the form of orders, instructions, or procedures to be carried out by subordinates
as well as possible. (Handoko, 1998:280). It is necessary to pay attention to using the


                                                                                         25

           Aini Safitri, Heri Rahmatsyah Putra / JURNAL TARBIYAH 28 (2) (2021) 17-32


same language, simple, not long-winded, and easy to understand in delivering messages
to achieve the desired goal. For example, the delivery of messages from the general
manager (general manager) to the production manager, then to the factory, then only to
the employees using a communication channel that is quite long and has the potential to
cause communication misunderstandings (Heri, 2019).
       Top-down communication can be in the form of oral or written. Oral
communication can be in the form of regular conversations, formal interviews between
supervisors and employees, or can also be in the form of group meetings/discussions. In
addition, written communication can also be in memos, training manuals, information
boxes, letters of assignment, warrants, decrees, letters of dismissal/dismissal, bulletin
boards, and manuals for employee duties (Purwanto, 2006:41). The primary purpose of
downward communication is to provide direction, information, instructions, advice or
suggestions, and assessments to subordinates and provide information to members of the
organization about the goals and policies.
       It is necessary to pay attention to using the same language, simple, not long-
winded, and easy to understand in delivering messages to achieve the desired goal. For
example, the delivery of messages from the general manager to the production manager,
then to the factory, then only to the employees uses a reasonably long communication
channel and can cause misunderstandings. In general, downward communication can be
classified into five types, namely:
   1) Task Instructions are messages conveyed to subordinates about what they are
       expected to do and how to do it.
   2) Rational. Work rationale is a message that explains the purpose of the activity and
       how the activity relates to other activities in the organization or organizational
       objectives.
   3) Ideology. The message about this ideology is an extension of the rational message.
       In the rational message, the emphasis is on task descriptions and their relation to
       organizational perspectives. While the ideological message, on the other hand, the
       ideological message seeks to support and enthusiasm from organizational
       members to strengthen loyalty, morale, and motivation.
   4) Information. Information messages are intended to acquaint subordinates with
       organizational practices, rules, benefits, habits, and other data unrelated to
       instruction and rationale.




                                                                                       26

           Aini Safitri, Heri Rahmatsyah Putra / JURNAL TARBIYAH 28 (2) (2021) 17-32


   5) Flip. Feedback is a message that contains information about the individual's
       accuracy in doing his job. One simple form of this feedback is the payment of
       salaries of employees who are ready to do their jobs, meaning the work is
       satisfactory (Arni, 2015:108).
      Responses from informants regarding communication from the principal
(principal) to subordinates in increasing loyalty are as follows;
      “Principal of SDN 024 Bangko Mukti: With the establishment of an exemplary
communication process, the exchange of information from the principal to teachers and
employees goes smoothly. The communication process tends to use vertical
communication and sometimes uses horizontal communication. Vertical communication
seems to be used more effectively because principals and teachers can openly
communicate everything related to work. Vertical communication also makes it easier for
teachers to convey their opinions to the principal. The principal conveys information to
the teacher concerned with the work carried out; then, the teacher will inform other
teachers. The principal also often provides information through the morning ceremony
held every Monday. I indeed communicate according to the level, but sometimes I go
straight to the teacher concerned with an urgent need. Communication with teachers and
staff at this school is like family and open. I hold meetings every three months to evaluate
my work. Not only that, but I also often use the morning ceremony to convey messages to
teachers and employees. It is not uncommon to go directly to subordinates to control the
work of subordinates. The form of organizational communication in this school is that
information from the principal will be conveyed to the respective field teacher and
homeroom teacher only after it is informed to other subordinates. In my opinion, the
principal must be open, firm, and disciplined.
      The teacher in the field of the study said: The principal has an open way of
communicating, where the principal will call the teacher concerned to convey a particular
message and provide direction to motivate teachers and employees here. In addition, the
principal also interacts with teachers and employees by holding meetings to convey
motivation to their subordinates. Teachers in other fields of study also said that the
leadership at SDN 024 Bangko Mukti, in conveying information, uses vertical
communication from top to bottom where the principal will directly call the teacher
concerned with the work to be delivered. If there is an urgent matter, the principal will
also go directly to study teachers and homeroom teachers to other structural employees.




                                                                                         27

             Aini Safitri, Heri Rahmatsyah Putra / JURNAL TARBIYAH 28 (2) (2021) 17-32


      In this case, the form of communication used between school principals and
teachers to increase work motivation is vertical communication, communication from top
to bottom and from bottom to top, namely from leadership to subordinates and from
bottom to leadership reciprocally. In motivating vertically, the principal provides
instructions, information, explanations, and others to teachers and structural employees.
On the other hand, teachers also provide reports, suggestions, complaints, and the
principal. The principal always communicates everything related to the problems at SDN
024 openly by holding meetings and conveying messages through morning ceremonies.
It is very effective to use because teachers and employees know the information conveyed
by the principal. The principal also goes directly to control the work of teachers and
employees.
2. Horizontal Communication
      Horizontal       communication         (horizontal     communications),        or   literal
communication (lateral communications), occurs between parts that have parallel or
equal positions in an organization. The purpose of horizontal communication, among
others, is to persuade, influence, and provide information to sections or departments that
have equal positions. This form of communication is coordinating and results from the
concept of organizational specialization.
      So that this communication is designed to facilitate coordination and problem-
solving, horizontal (lateral) communication and assisting lateral activities also avoid slow
problem-solving procedures. Horizontal communication has a specific purpose, including
coordinating tasks; the heads of sections in an organization sometimes need to hold
meetings or meetings to discuss how each section contributes to achieving organizational
goals. Then share information for planning and activities. Many people's ideas are usually
better than the ideas of one person. Moreover, it can solve problems that arise between
people at the same level.
      Resolve conflicts between members within the organization and sections with
other sections. Guarantee the same understanding. When a change in an organization is
proposed, it needs to be a common understanding between organizational units and
members of an organizational unit about the change. Develop interpersonal support.
Because most of the working time employees interact with their friends, they get
interpersonal relationship support from their friends.
      In practice, there is a tendency that in carrying out their work, managers like to
exchange information with their colleagues in different departments or divisions,


                                                                                             28

           Aini Safitri, Heri Rahmatsyah Putra / JURNAL TARBIYAH 28 (2) (2021) 17-32


especially when unique problems arise in a company organization. Horizontal
communication is coordinated among those with equal positions, both within one
department or between several departments. Horizontal communication becomes
important when every part or department in an organization has a relatively significant
level of interdependence. However, if each part can work independently without having
to depend on other parts, horizontal communication is not often or minimally used. The
informal network structure is to have a minimum of linkages among group members. The
selection, encoding, and decoding processes must be repeated for each link path. So with
the addition of each link line, the possibility of semantic distortion occurs, and
communication problems multiply.
       Informal communication causes personal information to emerge from interactions
among people and flow throughout the organization unpredictably. This communication
network is better known as rumors (grapevine) or Kabarangin. The information flowing
in this grapevine network seems to be fluid and hidden. In communication terms, the
grapevine is a method of passing on secrets from person to person, which is not obtained
through formal communication networks. Informal communications contain confidential
reports of people and events that do not flow officially. Information from hearsay relates
to what is heard or what people are saying and not what is announced by those in power.
Apart from the vertical communication carried out by the principal, teachers, and
employees of SDN 024, it is also effective in carrying out horizontal communication
between fellow teachers and employees for the smooth flow of information within the
school. Fellow teachers at SDN 024 Bangko Mukti always coordinate regarding policies
handed down by the principal. From the results of the interviews, the research informants
explained: establishing good relations by communicating with fellow teachers should
indeed be done for the smooth running of work and the harmony of the school
environment. At the homeroom level, we always communicate about work, even though
we take care of our respective classes." Study teacher Erni Yusnita added that, "to achieve
maximum work results, fellow teachers must form a synergistic relationship, in the sense
of communicating and supporting each other in order to achieve common goals. I think
the communication that has taken place so far is not only about work, but we often talk
about things outside of school. However, we do this to establish friendship and strengthen
cohesiveness at the teacher level."
       Administrative Officer Syafrizal: “My view of the communication that has taken
place at school so far is very stable; although the father (head of school) is busy, he always


                                                                                           29

           Aini Safitri, Heri Rahmatsyah Putra / JURNAL TARBIYAH 28 (2) (2021) 17-32


takes the time to communicate directly with his subordinates. However, the most
important thing is that the communication between teachers and employees goes
smoothly. Because at our level, there are very few formal situations that seem rigid. We
always communicate about performance or not. Most importantly, professionalism must
be maintained. With this kind of communication, I feel I can build a good relationship
which increases my motivation and personal performance.”
       From the findings above, the researchers analyzed that apart from vertical
communication, horizontal communication between teachers and employees at SDN 024
Bangko Mukti is also a driving force for creating a harmonious work environment to
motivate them to improve their performance at the school. A smooth flow of information
and open relationships between individuals (teachers) will create a healthy organizational
communication climate. A healthy communication climate with firmness and openness
makes it possible to achieve a common goal that an organization or agency has aspired to.
Because with this kind of communication, employees will feel happy and appreciated by
their superiors, so they are more motivated to work.


CONCLUSION
       The form of organizational communication that occurs at SDN 024 Bangko Mukti
to increase the loyalty of school personnel takes place vertically and horizontally. Vertical
communication from the principal occurs openly by directly calling the teachers and
employees (subordinates) concerned regarding internal policies, and sometimes it is also
conveyed openly in ceremonial activities and meetings to motivate teachers and
employees to improve performance. Organizational communication at SDN 024 Bangko
Mukti also occurs horizontally between fellow teachers and employees. Communication
takes place in formal and informal situations to create a pleasant working atmosphere to
improve performance at the subordinate level. An excellent organizational climate or
atmosphere will significantly affect the smooth flow of information and emotional
relationships among teachers and employees at SDN 024 Bangko Mukti Riau.


REFERENCES
Cangara, Hafied, 2014.Perencanaan dan Strategi Komunikasi, Jakarta: PT Raja Grafindo
     Persada.
Suwardi, Masni, Fitrin, Pengaruh Loyalitas Terhadap Kinerja Guru SD Awal, Jurnal AL-
     AZHAR INDONESIA SERI HUMANIORA, Vol .3, No. 1, Maret 2015


                                                                                          30

          Aini Safitri, Heri Rahmatsyah Putra / JURNAL TARBIYAH 28 (2) (2021) 17-32


Frestiawan Noringgar Jaya, Pengaruh Keadilan Prosedural, Gaya Kepemimpinan
     Transformasional Dan Motivasi Kerja Terhadap Loyalitas Karyawan, Jurnal Ekobis
     Dewantara Vol. 1 No. 11 November 2018
Rahman, Gazali, 2000. Teori Organisasi dan Komunikasi, Makassar: Universitas
     Hasanuddin.
Handoko,T. Hani, 1998. Manajemen, edisi ke-2, Yoyakarta: BPFE-Yogyakarta.
Purwanto,Djoko, 2006. Komunikasi Bisnis, Edisi ketiga, Jakarta: Erlangga.
Hamdi Asep Saepul, Baharuddin E, 2014. Metode Penelitian Kuantitatif Aplikasi Dalam
     Pendidikan, Yogyakarta: Budi Utama.
Effendy, Onong Uchjana, 2004. Ilmu Komunikasi; Teori dan Praktek, Bandung: PT.
     Remaja Rosdakarya.
Kholil, Syukur, 2007. Komunikasi Islam, Bandung: Cipta Pustaka Media.
Muhammad, Arni, 2015. Komunikasi Organisasi, Jakarta: BumiAksara.
Muhammad, Arni, 2011. Dasar-dasar Organisasi. Jogjakarta: UUI Press Jogjakarta.
Mulyana, Deddy, 2007. Ilmu Komunikasi Suatu Pengantar, Bandung: Remaja
     Rosdakarya.
Susanto, Sosiologi Komunikasi, cetakan ke-3, Jakarta: Kencana Prenada Media Group,
     2008.
Siregar, Fauzan Ahmad. Implementasi Manajemen Perkantoran Modern di Sekolah MAS
     Amaliyah Sunggal, JURNAL TARBIYAH, Vol. 24, No. 2, Juli-Desember 2017.
Anzizhan, Konflik Dalam Organisasi Sekolah, JURNAL TARBIYAH, Vol. 22, No. 1,
     Januari-Juni 2015.
Fadhli, Muhammad. Kepemimpinan Kepala Sekolah Yang Efektif Dalam Menciptakan
     Sekolah Efektif, JURNAL TARBIYAH, Vol. 23, No. 1, Januari-Juni 2016
Ginting, R., & Haryati, T. (2012). Kepemimpinan dan Konteks Peningkatan Mutu
     Pendidikan. Jurnal Ilmiah CIVIS, II(2), 1–17.
Putra, H. R. (2020a). Bentuk Komunikasi Organisasi Di Jurusan Komunikasi Dan
     Penyiaran Islam Uin Ar-Raniry Banda Aceh. SOURCE : Jurnal Ilmu Komunikasi,
     5(2), 68–79. https://doi.org/10.35308/source.v5i2.1714
Putra, H. R. (2020b). Komunikasi Dalam Membentuk Iklim Organisasi Di Lingkungan
     Kampus Universitas Islam Negeri (Uin) Ar-Raniry Banda Aceh. At-Tanzir: Jurnal
     Ilmiah        Prodi          Komunikasi            Penyiaran           Islam,    63.
     https://doi.org/10.47498/tanzir.v11i1.352
Sermal. (2015). Kepemimpinan Pendidikan Untuk Mengembangkan Sekolah Bermutu.


                                                                                      31

          Aini Safitri, Heri Rahmatsyah Putra / JURNAL TARBIYAH 28 (2) (2021) 17-32


    Jurnal Tarbiyah, 22(2), 243–260.
Syaiful Sagala. (2015). Manajemen dan kepemimpinan pendidikan pondok pesantren.
    Jurnal Tarbiyah, 22(2), 205–225.




                                                                                      32