Research on the Role of Interpersonal Relationship in School Management

Feiya Su
Universiti Putra Malaysia, Selangor, Malaysia
DOI: 10.32629/jher.v3i4.913
Abstract: With the deepening of the double reduction policy, the current school management pays more and more attention
to adopting flexible teaching management mode and permeating the people-oriented management concept. Based on this,
school administrators should handle all kinds of interpersonal relationships in schools under the guidance of people-ori-
ented and strive to create a harmonious, relaxed and free interpersonal atmosphere, and strive to build good school inter-
personal relationships, so as to arouse the enthusiasm of teachers' work to the greatest extent.Infiltrating people-oriented
into the process of organizing and implementing management forms can help organize management functions, and further
strengthen the management work can also make it effective. In the process of campus management, we should recognize
the core of personnel management, focus on building a people-oriented management framework, optimize interpersonal
relationships, and build a good campus interpersonal atmosphere.
Keywords: interpersonal relationship, way, school, management


1. Good interpersonal relationship is the foundation of good school management
      Interpersonal relationship refers to the relatively stable psychological relationship between people formed on the basis
of communication, adjusted by the individual personality, and accompanied by emotionally satisfied or dissatisfied states in
a certain group background. The interpersonal relationship of the school is the psychological interdependence and mutual
influence between leaders, teachers and students, between students and students, and between students and students through
communication. Management work, especially the management work of schools, must be people-centered, because people,
financial, material factors, people are the most critical factor, managing people must manage the "heart". Erich From said:
"Human dignity is beyond age, knowledge, ability and experience, and it only depends on the inner nature of man as man."
Therefore, it is very important to establish a good interpersonal relationship with the manager, and to conduct normal
interpersonal communication and psychological communication. The quality of interpersonal relationship reflects whether
the material or spiritual needs in interpersonal communication can be satisfied in the psychological state.Good interpersonal
relationship is helpful to improve the quality of school education, and to improve the correct understanding and handling of
interpersonal relationship, which is also one of the important goals of school education. Students' correct way of handling
and the attitude of communicating with people are the key to school teaching. School in the process of education for students
to teach students, do things to learn to get along with society correctly handle interpersonal relationship, can let students
better adapt to the development of modern society, constantly improve students 'interpersonal behavior, including classroom
behavior, can enhance students' competitive advantage in the future social development.
      The positive impact of the interpersonal relationship in the school on the school management work is reflected in the
following aspects.

1.1 Good interpersonal relationship is the basic means to consolidate and develop the school
collective
      It helps to connect the majority of teachers and staff, form an organic whole, and promote its consolidation and
development. According to Maslow's hierarchical theory of needs, a good school interpersonal relationship can make the
staff have a sense of collective sense of belonging and honor, and then promote the recognition of the school goals, such
as enhancing the coordination effect of the staff behavior in large-scale collective activities or relatively complex work. At
the same time, it can also increase the number of effective interpersonal communication opportunities among the group
members, and promote the better personality development of the faculty and staff.

1.2 Good interpersonal relationship is one of the main conditions to mobilize the work enthusiasm
of the staff
     In school, whether between colleagues, between cadres and the masses and between teachers and students, a good


Volume 3 Issue 4 | 2022 | 373                                                               Journal of Higher Education Research

interpersonal relationship, can meet the communication needs of teachers and students, can be used as an external condition
to stimulate people's enthusiasm for work and learning, promote people's enthusiasm for work and learning to play, improve
work efficiency.

1.3 Giving full play to the coordination function of interpersonal relationship can avoid or
eliminate preventing conflicts
      One of the organizational functions of the school is to coordinate the thoughts and behaviors of the members between
and within the organization. This coordination is firstly to eliminate and avoid internal conflicts and contradictions among
different members, to keep faculty and students more consistent in thoughts, emotions and attitudes, and to ensure the
effectiveness of various information communication. Therefore, the study of the law of the school interpersonal relationship,
can be better used to play the coordinating role of the school organization, in order to achieve the purpose of improving the
level of education and management efficiency.

1.4 Good interpersonal relationship is the basic condition of individual psychological development
     Marx once said that the development of a person depends on the development of another person who is gradually
or directly involved. It can be seen that in the school environment, interpersonal relationship is directly related to one's
own development. The psychological development between teachers and students in the school is achieved through close
communication with each other. In the process of close communication, apart from imparting professional knowledge and
professional ability, it is also possible to develop individuals' ideological beliefs, emotions and attitudes that infect good
interpersonal relationships. It refers not only to the close communication frequency between people, but also to the attraction
between teachers, students and school staff.

2. Characteristics of school interpersonal relationships
      School interpersonal relationship has the characteristics of educational sex and rich sex
      (1) The educational nature of the school interpersonal relationship mainly refers to that the school has the function of education,
in addition to cultivating students to learn scientific and cultural knowledge, but also to teach students how to be a man. Constantly
cultivate students' interpersonal skills and environmental adaptability, so that students can have rich abilities in the process of future
growth and development and even after entering the society in the future. The handling of interpersonal relationships in schools
is directly related to students' planning for their future growth. Good school interpersonal relationship can help students improve
their social communication skills. With the rapid development of economy and society, the communication between people is
closer, and the regional scope of activities is also wider. There are not only simple cooperative and communication relations
between people, but also may even have interest relations, which requires the correct handling of interpersonal relations. Based on
this, constantly improving the level of interpersonal relationship in the school, can build a harmonious interpersonal relationship
training atmosphere for students, but also can make the overall work of the school in an orderly manner and efficient operation, and
thus improve the overall work efficiency of the school. In addition, the construction of good interpersonal relationship in schools
can also play a good role in encouraging and promoting the quality of education, especially in the process of ideological education
development, a good relationship between teachers and students makes the classroom atmosphere become intimate, and students
are more likely to accept teachers' opinions.
      (2) The richness of the school interpersonal relationship refers to the direct communication in all the members of the
school organization, whether between colleagues, cadres, teachers and students, reflecting the rich and colorful characteristics.
The main reason for this characteristic is that: ① educational activities are characterized by interpersonal communication. In
school, almost all educational activities are in the form of interpersonal communication: ② school organization management
level, less time and space isolation between members, communication is very convenient; ③ school is a place to spread
spiritual civilization, the pursuit of spiritual life is the characteristics of school members. Therefore, in the school, people's
social life and friendship are very active and rich.
      (3) School interpersonal relationships are pure. At present, China is in a critical period of realizing the great rejuvenation
of the Chinese nation. We must ensure that school teachers bear in mind the mission of educating people for the Party and
being talented for the country, and teachers should shoulder the responsibility of the spiritual civilization construction of
the new generation of young people. The nature and role status of teachers' work show that teachers themselves must
be strict with themselves, regulate their own behavior, in order to provide students with scientific guidance and correct
guidance, teachers should practice to be an example for students to learn, and set up a good standard for the growth of
students. The school should strive on building the spiritual civilization construction center and the spiritual civilization
practice workstation in the new era, which determines that the school should be purest and cleaner than the social normal,


Journal of Higher Education Research                                                                                        374 | Feiya Su

and all kinds of interpersonal relations in the school should be more pure. The purity of interpersonal relationship is mainly
reflected in the following aspects: First, the purpose of communication between people is pure. School is the main place for
education activities, is in order to cultivate socialist modernization talents and founded institutions, so in the school of the
communication activities should strive to realize the cultivation of high-quality talents, and should not be interests, all school
teaching activities should be pure and clean, education to promote the development of society, national progress and national
prosperity. Under the purpose of pure education, interpersonal relations will also be more pure, including the relationship
between cadres and the masses, colleagues, friends and the relationship between teachers and students.
      For teachers themselves, everyone is devoted to the education cause, teaching love students is the duty of every teacher,
each teacher should cooperate with peers to study accurate teaching scheme and scientific teaching methods, especially
under the promotion of double reduction policy, the communication between teachers should pay more attention to how to
improve the quality of the goal into the classroom teaching content; how to cultivate the students' core quality under the
guidance of five education. Teachers should unite and cooperate to study new educational concepts and methods, and take
the healthy growth of students and adult success as their common responsibilities and goals.
      In addition, the standards and content of the school interpersonal relationship are also pure. The most common
relationship in the school is the relationship between teaching and learning, which is also the relationship between the two
kinds of classroom teaching subjects. The relationship between teachers and students is directly related to the classroom
teaching efficiency and the overall teaching effectiveness. Classroom teaching between the two sides is the relationship of
the transmission and receiver of knowledge, pure between each other.

3. Interpersonal relationship processing strategies in school management
3.1 Use the emotional effect, pay attention to the emotional migration
     Interpersonal relationship is characterized by psychological relationship and emotional relationship. Emotion is the
regulator of interpersonal relationship. Strengthening the emotional connection with the managed is conducive to the
management work. If the manager feels comfortable, it is easy to be infected, produce emotional resonance and accept the
opinions of the manager. Otherwise, emotional opposition, it may make people produce reverse psychology, resulting in
cognitive impairment, affect the management benefits. In the management work, in addition to adhering to the principles,
follow the rules, we must pay attention to the role of emotion. To the manager not only to understand the reason, but also to
move to the feelings, but also to move the true feelings.
     In specific work, managers should also pay attention to the emotional transfer of the managers, use positive emotional
transfer, and transfer the admiration, love, convincing and worship of the managers to the relevant work, so as to improve
the work and learning efficiency; prevent negative emotions such as distrust of managers and emotional antagonism to affect
the work and learning efficiency. This requires managers, one is to improve their own quality cultivation, pay attention to
working methods and management art, so that the manager from the heart of you trust, reverence, love, admire; two is to
really care about the masses, care about students, understand and respect them. This will not only make the manager have
good psychological effects and positive emotions, but also have the function of regulating the manager's own behavior, thus
narrowing the psychological distance between the two sides.

3.2 Pay attention to the role of the first impression, scientific planning for the later development
      The first impression, namely the initial impression, refers to the impression made during the first contact with strangers.
It often becomes the basic impression of people and plays a guiding role in the future interpersonal perception. Therefore,
managers should pay attention to leaving a good impression on the manager and laying a foundation for the management
work. For managers, the first meeting with the manager, the first conversation of the manager is very important, should make
full preparation, give play to their own advantages, to try to dress clean, dignified and generous, natural attitude, sincere
meet.Vivid, interesting, concise and clear, substantial content, full of emotional, accurate expression, strong logic. Avoid not
slovenly, cold attitude, affectation and so on. At the same time, managers should also prevent the "halo effect" of mistakes.
The biggest mistake of the halo effect is to overgeneralize the individual phenomena as the essential characteristics, or the
general characteristics, or to treat the appearance without internal connection with the essence as the essence of internal
connection, and to make subjectivist mistakes. Managers should obtain information through various channels, such as
investigation and research, conversation, and make specific analysis to overcome the idea of "ancestors first".

3.3 Prevent psychological conflicts and eliminate antagonistic emotions
     In the process of work, managers often encounter conflicts with the managers, resulting in antagonistic psychological


Volume 3 Issue 4 | 2022 | 375                                                                  Journal of Higher Education Research

and emotional disorders, which is not eliminated, and it is difficult to carry out the management work. Because once the
antagonistic psychology, it will make people's mind has a closed and repulsive nature, external information is difficult to play
a role. Managers encounter this situation, should take the "cold treatment" method, do not be emotional, eager to solve.The
causes of antagonism should be calmly analyzed to eliminate psychological barriers. In general, the counterpsychological
causes are cognitive, mood, and behavioral disorders. The cognitive obstacle mainly shows that the manager and the manager
are far apart, which is obviously opposite, and it is difficult to accept. For this case, it should not be simple and rough, can
not ask to solve the problem immediately. You can retreat, step by step, so that each other's views from opposition to close,
and then the reasoning is easy to accept. Emotional disorders are a "defensive response" caused by self-esteem caused by the
dynamics formed by people's specific attitudes.
      Dynamic shaping is systematic and conservative. Changing motivation is often subject to an instinctive antagonism.
Strong antagonism makes people become irrational. People with strong self-esteem are unwilling to accept opinions under
pressure. Therefore, the school administrators in the specific work process should vary from person to person, the appropriate
medicine. According to personality characteristics, take appropriate methods to ease antagonistic emotions, eliminate
emotional disorders,Reduce the psychological distance. Behavior disorder is that the wrong behavior itself becomes a
confrontation Psychological barriers of persuasion. When persuading the message was connected with his line When he was
inconsistent, he felt unable to change, and always found reason For your own behavior. To eliminate the managed Behavior
disorders, we must be patient and fine from multiple angles and aspects Do the work, guide it, persevere, see the tube The
difficulty, complexity and possibility of the work.

3.4 Achieve equal dialogue and equal exchanges
     Equal dialogue is the premise of mutual respect between the two, mutual communication between people, should
be under the premise of mutual respect, only respect each other, there will be subsequent development, the harmonious
interpersonal relationship needs, in respect for each other's values, whether in the family or in the society everyone's cognition
will have certain differences.
     But we must learn to respect them in the process of communicating with people, Individual characteristics of each
individual, Don't use your own ideas to measure others' understanding, There is an inevitable generation gap between
people, Especially in the schools, We must deal with the relationship between teachers and students, If you can have an equal
dialogue as a friend, Will largely achieve the goal of teaching and learning, It is also an effective way to close the relationship
between teachers and students, Successful school management must be a harmonious progress between teachers and students,
Whether equal dialogue and mutual communication between social individuals or among groups is an important guarantee
of the communication and equality of dialogue, It directly determines that the quality of school management is the quality
of mutual communication with the promotion, Is an important prerequisite and link of school management teachers should
give enough respect to students, Respect for students' cognitive laws and development characteristics, Based on the reality
of students 'situation, the analysis of students' emotional fluctuations, Even with the sudden physical problems, Give your
students enough love and respect, So that students can really trust the teacher is willing to sincerely deliver to the teacher
do not arbitrarily contusion students' enthusiasm for knowledge and the desire to explore, For each student, both grades or
outgoing, To respect the inner world of the students.
     Interpersonal relationship exists widely in every corner of the society. Building a harmonious interpersonal relationship
can promote the stable development and orderly advancement of various undertakings. School management is also the same,
a good campus interpersonal relationship is directly related to the normal operation of the school work.In the process of
school management, we should create a good interpersonal relationship, use the emotional effect and notice the emotional
migration, and also pay attention to the role of the first impression, and make scientific plans for the later development.
Secondly, we should prevent psychological conflicts and eliminate antagonistic emotions. The most important thing is to
give each other enough respect in the process of interpersonal communication, and to conduct dialogue and communication
under the premise of equality.

References

[1] Wang Ning. The influence of school interpersonal relationship on the formation of teachers’ professional beliefs[J].
    Journal of the Northwest College of Adult Education, 2022(03):39-44.
[2] Qiang Xiaohua. On the Construction and Maintenance of Harmonious Campus — A kind of sociology of education[J].
    Contemporary educational science, 2019(01): 85-92.


Journal of Higher Education Research                                                                                  376 | Feiya Su