The Effectiveness of Vocational High School
          Management: Role of Principal Leadership
                           Behavior

                      Herry Sumual1 and Grace Jenny Soputan2(B)
         1 Faculty of Engineering, Universitas Negeri Manado, Tondano, Indonesia
    2 Faculty of Economics and Business, Universitas Negeri Manado, Tondano, Indonesia

                               gracesoputan@unima.id



       Abstract. This study aimed to analyze the role of school principals in imple-
       menting effective vocational school management. The object of the research was
       determined at SMK N 2 and SMK N 3 in Manado City. This research uses a qualita-
       tive approach with a case study method. Informants came from school principals,
       vice principals, and teachers of productive subjects. Data collection techniques
       were carried out through in-depth interviews and focus group discussions. The
       results of the study indicate that the implementation of School Management can
       run effectively if the principal plays a maximum role both as a manager and in his
       leadership behavior. The leadership behavior of the principal can motivate school
       residents to improve the quality of graduates.

       Keywords: Vocational High School Management · Principal · Leadership
       Behavior · Graduate Quality



1 Introduction
Unqualified Human Resources (HR) and lack of skilled skills to enter the world of
business and industry or the world of work are current problems in Indonesia. This
includes graduates of Vocational High Schools (SMK) who account for the largest num-
ber of open unemployment rates. The Open Unemployment Rate for Vocational High
School graduates throughout Indonesia is 11.13 percent [1]. Similar to data in North
Sulawesi Province, the largest contributor to the Open Unemployment Rate is 7.37 per-
cent [2]. Moreover, in the last 2 years, many workers have lost their jobs due to being
hit by COVID-19. Employment opportunities are decreasing, but SMK graduates as
candidates for middle-class workers are increasing.
    Strengthening the quality of SMK graduates must be carried out from several aspects,
including the quality of teachers who teach, especially teachers in productive subjects,
students’ learning abilities and interests, facilities/infrastructure. Schools are required to
prepare students to master hard skills and soft skills in facing challenges in the industrial
era 4.0. Therefore, schools must be able to manage these organizations professionally so
that graduates can have competencies following the chosen field of expertise. Graduates
who have competencies that match the needs of the Business World Industry and the

© The Author(s) 2023
R. Harold Elby Sendouw et al. (Eds.): UNICSSH 2022, ASSEHR 698, pp. 1129–1134, 2023.
https://doi.org/10.2991/978-2-494069-35-0_135

1130    H. Sumual and G. J. Soputan

World of Work (IDUKA) will find it easier to get a job or become a young entrepreneur.
Competencies possessed by graduates, the Ministry of Education and Culture of the
Republic of Indonesia already has a mechanism called the Expertise Competency Test
(UKK) as evidenced by a certificate. Various programs have been launched by the gov-
ernment, starting from the revitalization of vocational schools to the eighth Merdeka
learning, namely the SMK Center of Excellence, all of which is to strengthen the quality
of graduates. Although in reality there are still some vocational schools there are many
problems in school management [3].
    The principal plays a very important role in implementing school management to
achieve effective and efficient results. To carry out its role, competence is needed in
managerial tasks, academic supervision, and entrepreneurship [4]. The success of an
organization is largely determined by its leaders in influencing members of the organi-
zation to provide maximum performance [5] including the impact of principal leadership
on student achievement growth mediated by teacher collaboration and collective efficacy
[6]. The focus of the research problem is School Management and Principal Leadership
Behavior with the following research questions:

1. How is the effectiveness of the implementation of school management in producing
   quality graduates or human resources
2. How is the principal’s leadership behavior to achieve school management effective-
   ness

   This study aims to analyze the role of the principal in achieving the effectiveness of
school management.


2 Research Methods
The research method uses a qualitative approach with a case study method. The schools
that became the research subjects were SMK N 2 and SMK N 3 Manado. Key informants
were taken by the principal and vice principal. Complementary informants for productive
subject teachers and program managers for the Center for Excellence. Determination of
informants based on mastery or understanding of the focus of the problem in this study.
In-depth interviews and Focus Group Discussion techniques were used to collect data on
the effectiveness of school management and principals’ leadership behavior. Interviews
use an open system which means that the subjects know that they are being interviewed
and understand the purpose of the interview. The data collected was analyzed by an
interactive model from the perspective of Miles Huberman.


3 Result and Discussion
Following the focus of the study on School Management Effectiveness, researchers
took the model developed by Arie Wibowo Khurniawan [3] there were 6 elements
or indicators, namely (1) Strong leadership; (2) Emphasis on basic skills; (3) Secure
environment; (4) The high expectation for achievement; (5) Continuous assessment; (6)
Budget management flexibility.

                           The Effectiveness of Vocational High School Management      1131

3.1 School Management Effectiveness

The principal as a manager is responsible for implementing school management with to
achieve maximum school performance. School performance can be seen, among others,
through the quality of graduates each year. The quality of graduates can be demonstrated
through the competencies possessed by each individual in accordance with the area of
concentration of expertise.
     Strong leadership, principals in carrying out their leadership functions, the two
schools apply cooperation and collaborate with teachers to unite ideas, and tasks that
are their respective responsibilities. The principal in carrying out this element, applies
exemplary-based leadership, by setting an example of work discipline. In addition, the
principal directly directs and controls the teachers in carrying out their duties. To the
students, the principal of the school gives an example of discipline when he comes to
school.
     Emphasis on basic skills, principals implement this function by upgrading the abil-
ities and skills of teachers according to their respective fields of expertise. Teachers
must have basic skills by referring to 4 teacher competencies, namely Pedagogic, Pro-
fessional, Social, and Personal competencies. Especially teachers who teach productive
subjects are required to improve their skills by increasing their knowledge and skills in
the industry. There is also training organized by the government in this case the SMK
Directorate. Teachers must be linear with the area of expertise. The results of interviews
in the two vocational schools have problems for the next three to 5 years, most of the
productive teachers will retire, and there will be no replacement. Especially in SMK N
3, there are very few teachers in the field of beauty expertise, because it is universities
that produce prospective teachers in that field. Teachers who will be internal examiners
in the Expertise Competency Test must have a certificate in accordance with the area of
expertise to be tested.
     A secure environment, a safe environment both physically and socially will provide
comfort for school residents to carry out their duties. In creating and maintaining a safe
environment, the principal creates a conducive working atmosphere for teachers and
employees. The physical environment of the school is in an area far from the crowds
of vehicles. A safe social work environment by implementing a transparent interaction
relationship with teachers and education personnel. A safe and comfortable school envi-
ronment will increase a conducive learning atmosphere. Opportunities for students to
enter and exit the school complex are small because entrances and exits are limited. This
makes it easier for teachers to control students wandering around during school hours.
The school also applies a culture of cleanliness for all school residents. The real activity
of the students when they go home from school they have to look for / take the garbage
around the school to throw it in the trash. This has been entrenched in SMK N 2 Manado.
While in SMK N 3, students are given the task of monitoring the classes and whether
the learning process is going well.
     The high expectation for achievement, every principal in the two schools targeted
for research has high expectations to achieve proud achievements. The hope of every
principal in carrying out school management is none other than to produce quality grad-
uates. Graduates who can immediately fill the needs in the Business and Work Industry

1132    H. Sumual and G. J. Soputan

(IDUKA). The achievements of SMK N 3 in the context of schools have received facil-
ities from the Ministry of Education and Culture, starting from the Teaching Factory,
Revitalizing Vocational High Schools, to the Center for Excellence Vocational School.
Future plans to promote to the international world, especially the concentration of culi-
nary expertise. The implementation of the independent curriculum at SMK N 2 for grade
10 using an independent curriculum changed to 12 concentrations of expertise. SMK N
3 has implemented an independent, self-sharing curriculum. This is a commitment to
achieve proud school achievements by providing skills to students according to industry
needs and entrepreneurship. Every student who passes has a certificate of competence.
The certificate can be one of the requirements in the industry that will accept these
graduates to become employees.
     Through Continuous assessment, principals and representatives conduct continuous
assessments of teachers and employees. Aspects that are continuously assessed include
4 competencies that must be possessed and implemented. The assessment is also carried
out when the teachers are in the industry with the students.
     Budget management flexibility. Principals in implementing this indicator feel inflex-
ible because the funds provided by the government in the form of BOS funds and Center
of Excellence facility funds already have rules for their use. The budget has given already
rules for its management. Schools do not have funds to manage flexibly because there
are no sources of income from students or other parties. Areas of expertise that have
their production units manage their own budgets with sources of income from the prod-
ucts and services they perform. The budget is managed for the procurement of practical
materials and other equipment to support the learning process.

3.2 Principal Leadership Behavior
Leadership behavior is the result of several studies divided into three aspects, namely:
task-oriented, relationship-oriented, and change-oriented. Task-oriented leadership
behavior is associated with achieving the goals set by the group and following the steps
to achieve the principal’s leadership behavior goals seen in the three aspects mentioned
above.

3.2.1 Task-Oriented
The leadership behavior applied in SMK N 2 and SMK N 3 is task-oriented by involving
all teachers to collaborate in improving individual and school performance. The principal
plans, directs, coordinates, and communicates work standards in accordance with the
duties of each teacher and employee. Principals set an example in carrying out their
duties for both teachers and employees as well as students. For teachers and employees
who do not carry out their duties in their respective fields, the principal does not hesitate
to give a warning. Teachers and employees who carry out their duties to the maximum
are given awards.

3.2.2 Relationship Oriented
In this aspect, the principal applies formal and informal interactions with teachers and
employees. The principal maintains a harmonious relationship with the vice principal as

                          The Effectiveness of Vocational High School Management      1133

well as the teachers and staff. This aspect emphasizes teacher welfare and empowerment.
This leadership behavior encourages a supportive work environment and creates an
environment in which teachers can thrive. The principal provides the opportunity for
teachers to provide opinions on the progress of the school.


3.2.3 Change Oriented
The principal encourages teachers and employees to be able to adapt to the changes. The
principal acts as a change leader to encourage his subordinates to be more creative and
innovative. Especially in managing schools that implement an independent curriculum
that changes for SMK N 2 and independently shares for SMK N 3. As leaders, school
principals challenge teachers to be able to anticipate rapid changes in the Business and
Work Industry (IDUKA). Not all teachers can carry out these challenges. The indepen-
dent curriculum is one of the changes that must be quickly accepted and adapted by
looking for new ways to provide hard skills and soft skills competencies to students.


3.3 Discussion

The role of the principal as a manager is obliged to carry out school management effec-
tively. Competencies are needed to manage such as competence in the managerial field,
academic supervision competence, and entrepreneurial competence [4]. The managerial
competence of a principal has the ability and skill to carry out the functions of planning,
organizing, directing, and controlling. The principal’s academic supervision compe-
tence can examine learning activities along with supporting documents. Entrepreneurial
competence emphasizes how principals can encourage teachers to be more creative and
innovative.
    Increasing the effectiveness of school management has a positive effect on integrated
quality management, which can improve school governance [3]. School management can
be effectively implemented if the principal’s leadership behavior is carried out by taking
into account 3 dimensions, namely task-oriented, relationship-oriented, and change-
oriented. The three types of leadership behavior also play a role in public organizations,
but the effect is greater for relationship-oriented leadership, followed by change-oriented
leadership [7] Vocational High Schools need leaders who have leadership behaviors that
can bring graduates into superior human resources following their respective fields.


4 Conclusion
The principal’s leadership role can contribute to the effectiveness of school management.
The principal as a manager can improve school performance through the implementation
of good school management. The principal has can apply six aspects of the school
management effectiveness model.

Acknowledgments. Researchers would like to thank to Rector of Manado State University and
all informants who have supported this research.

1134     H. Sumual and G. J. Soputan

References
1. Central Bureau of Statistics (BPS), Monthly Socio-Economic Data Report (in Bahasa). Jakarta,
   2021.
2. Central Bureau of Statistics (BPS), North Sulawesi. 2020.
3. A. W. Khurniawan and Et.al, “The improving of effectiveness school-based enterprise: A
   structural equation modeling in vocational school management,” Int. J. Eval. Res. Educ., vol.
   10, no. 1, pp. 161–173, 2021.
4. G. J. Soputan and E. M. S. Tinneke, “The Principal’s Roles in Revitalizing Vocational High
   School, Advances in Social Science, Education and Humanities Research.”
5. J. Shen and Et.al, “The relationship between growth in principal leadership and growth in
   school performance: The teacher perspective,” Stud. Educ. Eval., vol. 70, 2021.
6. X. Dumay, T. Boonen, and J. Van Damme, “Principal leadership long-term Indirect effects on
   learning Growth in mathematics,” Elem. Sch. J., vol. 114, no. 2.
7. M. A. Demircioglu and F. Chowdhury, Entrepreneurship in public organizations: the role of
   leadership behavior. Small Bus Econ.




Open Access This chapter is licensed under the terms of the Creative Commons Attribution-
NonCommercial 4.0 International License (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc/4.0/),
which permits any noncommercial use, sharing, adaptation, distribution and reproduction in any
medium or format, as long as you give appropriate credit to the original author(s) and the source,
provide a link to the Creative Commons license and indicate if changes were made.
     The images or other third party material in this chapter are included in the chapter’s Creative
Commons license, unless indicated otherwise in a credit line to the material. If material is not
included in the chapter’s Creative Commons license and your intended use is not permitted by
statutory regulation or exceeds the permitted use, you will need to obtain permission directly from
the copyright holder.