Characteristics Of Transformational Educational Leadership In
             The Era Of Society 5.0 The Perspective Of The Quran

     Ahmad Hadi Pranoto 1); Oseolla Savana 2) ; Ulfatussyarifah 3); Faiz Abdul Majid Assharofi 4);
                                            Lutfiyah5)
                                     1,2,3,4,5)
                                             Universitas Islam Negeri Walisongo
     Email: 1) ahmadhadi2051@gmail.com         ,2) oseollaghozali@gmail.com ,3) ulfasyarifah1312@gmail.com
                               4) faizshaarofy@gmail.com ,5) lutfiyah@walisongo.ac.id

ARTICLE HISTORY                 ABSTRAK
RReceived [09 Maret 2025]       Artikel ini membahas tentang karakteristik transformasional kepemimpinan pendidikan di era
Revised [10 April 2025]         masyarakat 5.0 dalam perspektif Al-Qur'an. Tujuan dari penelitian ini adalah untuk
                                menganalisis karakteristik kepemimpinan transformasional dan implikasinya terhadap
Accepted [11 April 2025]        pendidikan di era masyarakat 5.0 dalam perspektif Al-Qur'an. Penelitian ini menggunakan
                                metode penelitian library research. Dalam proses penafsiran ayat-ayat tentang kepemimpinan
                                dalam pendidikan, penulis menggunakan metode maudhui (tematik). Adapun hasil dari
                                penelitian ini adalah bahwa karakteristik kepemimpinan transformasional perspektif Alquran
                                dapat dilakukan melalui musyawarah sebagai kunci keterbukaan dalam sebuah lembaga
                                pendidikan, keadilan, kejujuran dan obyektifitas, inovasi, dan bekerja sama. Sedangkan
                                mengenai implikasi kepemimpinan transformasional pendidikan di era society 5.0 perspektif
                                Alquran sangat berpengaruh dalam memajukan pendidikan, yaitu dengan pemimpin tidak
KEYWORDS                        hanya memiliki sifat-sifat kepribadian yang baik, tetapi pemimpin di era sekarang juga harus
Transformational                mampu mengembangkan teknologi yang sedang berkembang, memperhatikan dampak
Characteristics, Educational    sosial yang terjadi dilapangan, serta menjaga privasi dan keamanan data sebagai proses
Leadership, Al-Qur'an           menciptakan lembaga pendidikan yang lebih maju.
Perspective.
                                ABSTRACT
                                This article discusses the transformational characteristics of educational leadership in the
                                era of society 5.0 from an Al-Qur'an perspective. The aim of this research is to analyze the
                                characteristics of transformational leadership and their implications for education in the era
                                of society 5.0 from a Koranic perspective. This research uses the library research research
This is an open access          method. In the process of interpreting verses concerning leadership in education, the author
article under the CC–BY-SA      uses the maudhui (thematic) method. Meanwhile, the results of this research are that the
license                         characteristics of transformational leadership from a Koranic perspective can be carried out
                                through deliberation as the key to openness in an educational institution, fairness, honesty
                                and objectivity, innovation, and working together. Meanwhile, regarding the implications of
                                educational transformational leadership in the era of society 5.0 from the Koranic
                                perspective, it is very influential in advancing education, namely by leaders not only having
                                good personality traits, but leaders in the current era must also be able to develop
                                developing technology, paying attention to the social impacts that occur. in the field, and
                                maintaining data privacy and security as a process of creating more advanced educational
                                institutions.


                                                   INTRODUCTION
        The low competence and professionalism of leaders is one of the keys to the problems of Islamic
education in Indonesia. The leadership crisis is a problem for many Islamic educational institutions. And
the leadership crisis in Islamic educational institutions can also cause the loss of the vision of Islamic
education in anticipating the industrialization of education and finding solutions to go beyond it (Inayati,
2017). To face this challenge, educational institutions seem to need to improve their quality towards a
better direction. Efforts to improve the quality of education will not be separated from the role of
educational leaders as top figures who "manage" all educational activities. A leader must have high
abilities and qualities in influencing his subordinates through careful management and planning (Hasna
Nabilah Mumtaz, Ismatu Zahroh, 2023).
        Previous studies that discuss the transformation of educational leadership in the modern era and
leadership based on QS Ali-Imran/3: 159 are categorized into 3 tendencies: First, the characteristics of
transformational leadership in Islamic education (Hifza, Muhamad Suhardi, Aslan, 2022; Ilham Yahya
Romandoni, Sulistyorini, 2023; Kurniawan, 2022). Second, the perspective of leadership in education
(Fairus Athiyah, 2019; Muhayanah et al., 2020; Ulfah et al., 2022). Third, transformational leadership to
improve education in the era of society 5.0 (Akhmad et al., 2021; Anam, 2022; Zulkhairi, 2021). These
findings have not discussed in detail the transformational characteristics of educational leadership in the
era of society 5.0 from the perspective of the Qur'an in detail.
        This study aims to expand and complement the lack of studies on the characteristics of
transformational leadership in education in the era of Society 5.0, by reviewing through the Qur'anic
perspective. The main focus is to identify leadership principles that are in line with the challenges of the



                                                     Jurnal Multidisiplin Dehasen, Vol. 4 No. 2 April 2025 page: 269 – 276| 269

                                                                                            e-ISSN 2828-1799

digital era and technology-based society. This study also aims to explore the values in the Qur'an that can
serve as guidelines for producing educational leaders who are visionary, innovative, and oriented towards
the benefit of the people. In addition, this study seeks to find practical ways to apply these leadership
characteristics in an effort to improve the quality of education, encourage teacher and student motivation,
support learning innovation, and create an inclusive and spiritual value-based educational community. In
line with this, three problems can be formulated
        Leadership in education today faces major challenges amid the global crisis, where many
education leaders are struggling to manage complexity and rapid change. Much data shows the high
turnover rate of principals and other education leaders due to heavy work pressure, frequently changing
policies, and minimal resource support. These conditions affect teacher motivation, hinder innovation, and
reduce the quality of learning. However, leadership in education is not only about carrying out
administrative tasks. More than that, education leaders are expected to be good role models,
implementing knowledge in deeds and practicing deeds with knowledge, as taught in the Qur'an. This
aims to create benefits, both for life in this world and the hereafter (Inayati, 2017). Therefore, efforts to
develop strong and innovative educational leaders are becoming increasingly urgent to answer future
challenges.

                                          LITERATURE RIVIEW

Transformational Leadership Characteristics
       Transformational leadership is characterized by four main elements: idealized influence,
inspirational motivation, intellectual stimulation, and individualized attention (Al Yahyaee & Mohamad,
2021). Leaders with this style are able to inspire and motivate their followers to achieve extraordinary
results, while encouraging creativity and innovation (Gonfa, 2019). They serve as role models, build a
shared vision, and provide a meaningful sense of purpose (Niphadkar & Kuhil, 2017). In the context of
organizations, transformational leadership has proven to be very effective in facing challenges and
adapting to environmental changes (Gonfa, 2019; Niphadkar & Kuhil, 2017).
       In the public sector, younger and less experienced employees tend to prefer individual attention,
while more senior and experienced employees value idealized influence and intellectual stimulation (Al
Yahyaee & Mohamad, 2021). Interestingly, these leadership characteristics are also in line with the
teachings of Ki Hajar Dewantoro, an Indonesian educational figure, who emphasized the importance of
role models and empowering followers (Samsudin & Azizah, 2021).

Society 5.0 Era in Education
       The Society 5.0 era brings major changes in the world of education, emphasizing the importance of
social responsibility and the integration of innovation in the learning process. In this era, students are
required to develop creativity, critical thinking skills, effective communication, and collaboration skills
(Harahap et al., 2023). The role of technology is very crucial in transforming education, facilitating active
learning, and improving the overall quality of education (Legi et al., 2023). As the COVID-19 pandemic
further emphasizes the relevance of technology integration in education, it allows the teaching and
learning process to continue even without direct face-to-face meetings (Hikmat, 2022).
       In preparing society for the Society 5.0 era, the education system is required to adapt to rapid
technological developments, especially by prioritizing digital skills, creativity, and problem-solving abilities
(Legi et al., 2023). This transformation requires both educators and students to be more innovative,
productive, and able to compete at the global level (Harahap et al., 2023). Overall, Society 5.0 not only
presents challenges, but also opportunities for the world of education to develop and meet the needs of a
technology-based future.

Leadership Characteristics of Society 5.0 Era
       Leadership in the Society 5.0 era requires an approach that combines democratic and laissez-faire
leadership styles, considering that society is now more educated and has broader insights (Imtinan, 2021;
Pinggala & Wibawa, 2022). Effective leaders need to be able to manage change, promote collaboration,
inspire innovation, and build solid relationships amidst the complexity of the work environment (Diana &
Soeratin, 2023). The main skills that leaders must master include language skills, information technology
literacy, and writing skills (Imtinan, 2021). The transformational leadership approach, also known as
integrated intelligent leadership, is key to developing smart cities in the Society 5.0 era. This approach
emphasizes the importance of building smart communities, governments, and smart infrastructure,
technology, and environments (Ardinata et al., 2022). In addition, both leaders and employees are
expected to maintain transparent communication and provide constructive feedback to support



270 | Ahmad Hadi Pranoto, Oseolla Savana, Ulfatussyarifah, Faiz Abdul Majid Assharofi, Lutfiyah;
      Characteristics Of Transformational Educational Leadership ...

organizational growth (Pinggala & Wibawa, 2022). These leadership characteristics are essential to face
complex challenges in an increasingly connected society in the era of Society 5.0.

                                                                                             METHODS

        This study uses a library research model, because it analyzes documents and information
sources related to what is being researched (Zed, 2008). The purpose of this study is to analyze the
transformational characteristics of educational leadership in the era of society 5.0 from the perspective of
the Qur'an, to understand the meaning of a transformational characteristic of educational leadership in the
Qur'an that has developed in the era of society 5.0, and what the instructions of the Qur'an are related to
leadership. In the process of interpreting the verses concerning leadership in education, the author uses
the maudhui (thematic) method. The maudhu'i method is a method that directs views to a particular
theme, then seeks the views of the Qur'an on the theme by collecting all the verses that discuss it,
analyzing and understanding verse by verse while enriching its description in various perspectives
(Suhartawan, 2021).
                                                                      RESULT AND DISCUSSION

Characteristics of Educational Leadership from the Perspective of the Qur'an
        In the current era of globalization, a change in leadership becomes a characteristic that must be
carried out by educational institutions as a form of adaptation to the times. If the leader in the educational
institution does not make changes, in the sense of following the current developments, then the
educational institution will also be left behind. The Qur'an itself explains the characteristics of leadership
that can be applied in educational institutions, this is stated in QS. Al-imron 3: 159, namely:

                              َ ْ ‫ع ْن ُه ْم َوا ْستَ ْغف ِْر لَ ُه ْم َوشَا ِو ْرهُ ْم فِى‬
            ‫اَل ْم ْۚ ِر فَ ِاذَا‬                                                           ُ ‫ب ََل ْنفَض ُّْوا مِ ْن َح ْول َِۖكَ فَاع‬
                                                                                          َ ‫ْف‬                                        ِ ‫ظ ا ْلقَ ْل‬
                                                                                                                                                  َ ‫غ ِل ْي‬
                                                                                                                                                          َ ‫ظا‬    ًّ َ‫ّٰللا ِل ْنتَ لَ ُه ْۚ ْم َولَ ْو كُ ْنتَ ف‬
                                                                                                                                                                                                             ِ ‫فَبِ َما َرحْ َم ٍة ِمنَ ه‬
                                                                                                                                                    َ‫ّٰللا يُحِ بُّ ا ْل ُمت ََو ِك ِليْن‬
                                                                                                                                                                                    َ‫ه‬        َّ
                                                                                                                                                                                             ‫ِن‬   ‫ا‬ ِ     ‫علَ ه‬
                                                                                                                                                                                                      ‫ّٰللا‬
                                                                                                                                                                                                       ِۗ   ‫ى‬   َ ْ‫عزَ ْمتَ فَت ََو َّكل‬
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       َ

        "So, thanks to Allah's grace, you (Muhammad) were gentle towards them. If you act hard and have
a rough heart, they will certainly distance themselves from those around you. therefore forgive them and
ask for forgiveness for them and consult with them in this matter."
        In the interpretation of Al Misbah, Quraish Shihab explains that in an organization when holding a
meeting, and the person is in the position of a leader, then the things that must be avoided are harsh
words and stubbornness. If this is not done, the members of the meeting will leave (M. Quraish Shihab,
2016).
        This emerged with the existence of al-asbab An-Nuzul from the verse, which is related to the
Muslims who experienced defeat during the battle of Uhud. Actually, in that incident, there were many
things that happened, namely inviting human emotions, but with the gentleness of the Prophet
Muhammad SAW, this began to exist. He deliberated before going to war, namely accepting proposals
from various parties and the prophet himself did not side with one.
        The above wording is related to the command of Allah to the prophet to forgive as a form of good
personality character. As stated in the interpretation of Quraish Shihab regarding the next verse which
reads "if you were hard and harsh-hearted, they would certainly distance themselves from those around
you", this is understood if from the word (‫ )لو‬the word is used to describe something that is conditional but
the condition is not realized (M. Quraish Shihab, 2016).
        After that Quraish Shihab interpreted a verse, namely "to be harsh", this indicates the external
aspect of humans. While the word to be harsh refers to the internal side of humans. It can be interpreted
that the best is a combination of external beauty and accompanied by good morals. This is closely related
to verse 128 of QS. at-Taubah (M. Quraish Shihab, 2016).
        Next, Quraish Shihab just entered the key word that is the main emphasis in this verse, namely
regarding "deliberation". The word deliberation basically comes from the word ‫ شور‬which means
something can be taken or removed from another or can be said as an opinion. Deliberation in this case
is likened to a bee that is able to produce honey, even the honey can be used as a medicine for disease
and as a source of health. Therefore, the prophet likened a believer to a bee, because a believer will not
damage but will carry out amazing cooperation wherever they are. As the message of the Qur'an
conveyed in the verse above ‫واستغفرلهم‬.
        Based on the interpretation above, it can be concluded that a person should be gentle towards
others and avoid being stubborn. Because every problem must have a way out, namely through
deliberation.After describing Quraish Shihab's interpretation of the verses related to leadership
characteristics, the researcher in this case will analyze Quraish Shihab's thoughts in relation to the
characteristics of transformational leadership. A transformational leader not only has a firm nature but



                                                                                          Jurnal Multidisiplin Dehasen, Vol. 4 No. 2 April 2025 page: 269 – 276| 271

                                                                                                                                                                                                          e-ISSN 2828-1799

also has a gentle and forgiving nature. This attitude will create a conducive climate for change. Because
members of an organization will also be more open to creating innovations and new ideas because they
feel appreciated.
       Not only that, this transformational leader in his decision making is different from authoritarian
leadership. If authoritarian leadership is only from the leader, but for transformational leadership itself also
involves deliberation or joint decision making, namely by asking for opinions and listening carefully to
consider all input. This will create a sense of responsibility for each other towards the decisions that have
been taken.
       Meanwhile, according to Jamal Makmur Asmani, a leader in an educational institution, namely the
head of a madrasah, is a functional teacher who is given the mandate to lead a madrasah, a place where
the teaching and learning process is held or where interaction occurs between educators and students in
learning (Asmani, 2012).
       Based on the theory above, there is a general outline that can be concluded if the principal is a
teacher who is given tasks and responsibilities and has the competence to lead an institution optimally to
achieve goals. As the word of Allah in QS. Shad 38: 26 which reads:

           ِ‫ّٰللا‬           َ َ‫ضلُّ ْون‬
                       َ ‫ع ْن‬
             ‫سبِ ْي ِل ه‬              ِ َ‫ّٰللا ا َِّن الَّ ِذيْنَ ي‬               َ َ‫ُضلَّك‬
                                                                             َ ‫ع ْن‬
                                                              ِ ِۗ ‫سبِ ْي ِل ه‬           ِ ‫ق َو ََل تَتَّبِ ِع ْال َه ٰوى فَي‬
                                                                                                                            ِ ‫اس بِ ْال َح‬
                                                                                                                                        ِ َّ‫ض فَاحْ كُ ْم بَيْنَ الن‬
                                                                                                                                                              ࣖ
                                                                                                                                                                           َ ْ ‫ٰيد َٗاو ُد اِنَّا َجعَ ْل ٰنكَ َخ ِل ْيفَةً فِى‬
                                                                                                                                                                     ِ ‫اَل ْر‬
                                                                                                                                                            ‫ب‬
                                                                                                                                                            ِ ‫سا‬      ْ
                                                                                                                                                                 َ ِ‫ش ِد ْي ٌد ۢ بِ َما نَسُ ْوا يَ ْو َم الح‬      َ ‫لَ ُه ْم‬
                                                                                                                                                                                                            َ ٌ‫عذَاب‬
       O David, we have made you Caliphs (rulers) on the earth, so judge between men justly and do not
follow your lusts, for they will lead you astray from the path of Allah. indeed, those who go astray from the
path of Allah will have a severe punishment, because they forget the day of reckoning.

       Based on the verse above, it can be explained that a leader has the power and position in
managing an educational institution, in addition to providing all decisions that handle the work program
that is implemented, namely being carried out fairly, honestly and objectively. For example, a leader in a
Madrasah educational institution makes decisions regarding the work program that will later be carried
out and carried out fairly, objectively and in accordance with the conditions that occur.
       Based on the explanation above, it can be concluded that in educational institutions, the
characteristics of leaders, namely having fair, honest and objective nature, are a character that must be
possessed by leaders, especially in making decisions on programs that will be run. Therefore, these
characteristics can be used as characteristics of transformational leadership as a form of change in the
character of the leader to make the leader better in the future.
       Not only that, there are also verses of the Quran that refer to discoveries or innovations that can
benefit humans. This can be connected to the technology that is developing at this time, which can be
connected to the letter An-Nahl verse 14, namely:

           ‫ضل ِٖه َولَعَلَّكُ ْم‬                                                                                                                                              َ ‫س َّخ َر ا ْلبَحْ َر ِلتَأْكُلُ ْوا مِ ْنهُ لَحْ ًما‬
                               ْ َ‫ط ِريًّا َّوتَ ْست َْخ ِر ُج ْوا مِ ْنهُ حِ ْليَةً تَ ْلبَسُ ْونَ َه ْۚا َوت ََرى ا ْلفُ ْلكَ َم َواخِ َر فِ ْي ِه َو ِلتَ ْبتَغُ ْوا مِ ْن ف‬                                                    َ ‫ي‬ْ ‫َوه َُو الَّ ِذ‬
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  ‫۝‬ ١٤ َ‫تَ ْشكُ ُر ْون‬
       It is He who has subjected the sea (to you) that you may eat fresh flesh (fish) from it, and you
extract from it ornaments which you wear, and you see the ships plying therein, and that you may seek of
its bounty, and that you may be grateful.

         In the verse it is explained that if Allah has controlled the water for us, which allows us to sail and
send products to their destinations. In that case, so that you seek the virtue and sustenance of Allah by
way of boarding ships and trade and other needs.(Shiddiqiey, 2000)
         So based on the verse it emphasizes the importance that a person is encouraged to be grateful to
Allah for the gifts given to humans and the importance of using natural resources carefully. And humans
are encouraged to find something new with their wisdom. While associated with leadership, a leader in
this case must make a new innovation by using something that existed before. So to determine the
program that will be run in the future, a leader can make an innovation or breakthrough something new by
linking something that already existed before.
         Basically, the success of an institution depends on the leadership of the principal. Because the
principal is a vital element for the effectiveness of educational institutions.(Kurniawan, 2022). In Islam
itself, the verses of the Qur'an that discuss leadership are not few. As in the Qur'an, verses are found that
relate to the issue of leadership. One of them is in QS. Al-Baqarah 2: 71

                                  َّ َ‫ص ٰلوةَ َويُؤْ ت ُ ْون‬
       َ ‫الز ٰكوةَ َويُطِ ْيعُ ْونَ ه‬
       ‫ّٰللا‬                                                                                           َ َ‫ض يَأ ْ ُم ُر ْونَ بِا ْل َم ْع ُر ْوفِ َويَ ْن َه ْون‬
                                                           َّ ‫ع ِن ا ْل ُم ْنك َِر َويُ ِق ْي ُم ْونَ ال‬                                                         ٍۘ ٍ ‫ض ُه ْم اَ ْو ِليَ ۤا ُء بَ ْع‬ ُ ‫َوا ْل ُمؤْ مِ نُ ْونَ َوا ْل ُمؤْ مِ ٰنتُ بَ ْع‬
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 ٰۤ ُ َ
                                                                                                                                                     ‫ع ِزي ٌْز َح ِك ْي ٌم‬َ َ  ‫ّٰللا‬
                                                                                                                                                                                 ‫ه‬        َّ
                                                                                                                                                                                         ‫ِن‬  ‫ا‬ ِۗ ‫ّٰللا‬
                                                                                                                                                                                                  ُ ‫سيَ ْر َح ُم ُه ُم‬
                                                                                                                                                                                                   ‫ه‬                 َ َ‫ول ِٕىك‬      ‫َو َرسُ ْولهٗ ِۗا‬



272 | Ahmad Hadi Pranoto, Oseolla Savana, Ulfatussyarifah, Faiz Abdul Majid Assharofi, Lutfiyah;
      Characteristics Of Transformational Educational Leadership ...

      "The believers, men and women, some of them are helpers for others. 328) They enjoin (do) good
deeds and prevent (doing) evil, enforce prayers, pay zakat, and obey Allah and His Messenger . They will
be given mercy by Allah. Indeed, Allah is All-Mighty, All-Wise."

        This verse explains the nature of believers. And those who believe, with their perfect faith, both
men and women, some of them become helpers to others in matters of truth and goodness. This can be
clearly seen in their attitudes and behavior, namely that they command what is right, and prevent what is
evil, perform prayers, pay zakat, and obey Allah and His Messenger. They are the ones who will always
be given grace by Allah. Indeed, Allah is all-powerful to protect them with His mercy, Most wise in all His
gifts.
        There are Islamic educational values referred to in the verse above, including those that have been
expressed. First, it teaches us to always foster a sense of mutual assistance in every activity of our daily
lives. Helping each other is meant with all our heart, full of affection, a sincere soul, not only in something
that is material but more inclined towards everything related to piety to the Almighty. Second, Amar ma'ruf
nahi munkar, as humans of course we are never free from mistakes and forgetfulness, therefore Islam
teaches its people to remind each other in goodness in a gentle and wise way.(Kusniawan et al., 2021).
        A leader is a figure who is an example for every person he leads. This figure must have a good
profile so that he is worthy of being an example and a role model for every society in general. In the verse
above, Allah has commanded us to always obey Allah and the Prophet Muhammad SAW. With that
obedience, it should lead every person to always follow what has been exemplified by the Prophet
Muhammad SAW. The leadership characteristics contained in the verse above illustrate that: In the
meaning "And those who believe, male and female, some of them are helpers for others." This verse
shows the importance of cooperation in leadership. A leader must be able to work together with his team,
be it fellow leaders or members being led. A good leader understands that success does not only depend
on one individual, but also on the cohesiveness and cooperation of the team. In the context of education,
this means that educational leaders must be able to build a solid team with educators, staff, and parents
of students to create an environment conducive to learning.
        Based on several analyses of the discussion above, it can be concluded that basically there are
several characteristics of transformational educational leadership in the perspective of the Qur'an,
including: 1) deliberation, in this case a leader makes deliberation a way used to establish openness
between leaders and members of an educational institution organization, to produce a new idea or idea
as a form of change in the future. 2) fair, honest and objective nature, a transformational leader in an
educational institution to make changes, this is used as the basis for the characteristics that must be
possessed by a leader. Because in making a change, these characteristics must be upheld as a form of
character of a leader. 3) innovation, the characteristic of innovation is a key characteristic of
transformational leadership. because the characteristic of transformational leadership itself is that the
leader must be able to design a change. 4) working together. Transformative leadership, collaborative
characteristics are inseparable in running an organization. Because to create a change, it certainly
requires teamwork to channel an idea to create a change for the better.

Implications of Characteristics of Qur'anic Educational Leadership in the Era of Society 5.0
      In the current era of globalization, change has become a common thing that must be done in life,
one of which is in educational institutions. Technology is currently becoming something that is
increasingly vital, because technology has become a partner in life. Previously during the Khandak war,
the prophet Muhammad had used Persian war technology, digging a trench that surrounded Medina with
his companions. Even science and technology at that time had advanced rapidly. This is because Islam
has encouraged and demanded the use of whatever Allah has created on this planet as a form of public
welfare(Syamsuri, 2018). The implications of educational leadership characteristics in the era of society
5.0 are stated in QS. Al-Baqarah 2: 30, namely:
                                                                                                                                                                                                                            ۤ
 ‫ِس لَ ِۗكَ قَا َل اِنِ ْْٓي‬
                          ُ ‫سبِ ُح بِ َح ْمدِكَ َونُقَد‬                          ِ ُ‫ْف ِۗة ً قَالُ ْْٓوا اَتَجْ عَ ُل فِ ْي َها َم ْن يُّ ْف ِس ُد فِ ْي َها َويَ ْس ِفك‬
                                                      َ ُ‫الد َم ۤا ْۚ َء َونَحْ ُن ن‬                                                                                           ِ ‫َواِ ْذ قَا َل َربُّكَ ل ِْل َم ٰل ِٕى َك ِة ِانِ ْي َجا ِع ٌل فِى ْاَلَ ْر‬
                                                                                                                                                                      َ ‫ض َخ ِلي‬
                                                                                                                                                                                                                         َ‫اَ ْعلَ ُم َما ََل تَ ْعلَ ُم ْون‬
      Remember when God said to the angels, "I will make a caliph on earth." They said, are you going
to create someone who will cause harm and shed blood there, while we glorify you and sanctify your
name?” he said "indeed I know what you do not know."

      In the interpretation of Fi Zhilalil Qur'an, the concept of caliph is understood as a new living
creature created to carry out its duties and responsibilities for the universe. Allah SWT has basically
bestowed upon the caliph various kinds of competencies and abilities that enable them to carry out their




                                                                                                          Jurnal Multidisiplin Dehasen, Vol. 4 No. 2 April 2025 page: 269 – 276| 273

                                                                                                                                                                                                                         e-ISSN 2828-1799

obligations. This makes this human being have a higher degree in the system of Allah's creation on
earth(Quttub, n.d.).
       Meanwhile, according to the interpretation of an-nur, some interpreters in the word of Allah indicate
that there were other creatures created before the prophet Adam. However, because they violated the
law of Allah, they were destroyed from their place by humans. With this, Allah gave humans reason as an
additional tool to help humans in running their lives. Allah also gave humans the task of becoming caliphs
or perhaps on earth (Hamka, 1989).
       According to Hamka, in any interpretation, it basically invites humans to broaden their minds so as
not to associate partners with Allah. The position of humans at this time that is needed by Allah should
make humans able to provide the best possible benefits from what they do while living in the world
(Hamka, 1989).
       Quraish Shihab in his interpretation of Al Misbah added that this verse is a notification from Allah to
the angels that he will create humans on earth which will later add to the duties of the angels, namely
helping to supervise and guide. For example, such as recording human deeds, and supervising human
actions which will be accounted for later (M. Quraish Shihab, 2005).
       From the letter of al-baqarah can make humans become insan Kamil. Our human being itself is the
ideal criteria to carry out the role of caliph on earth. The caliph who has the character of our human being
can contribute to the formation of a society that is in place. namely a society that is in a harmonious and
balanced social order / civil society.
       The concept of the caliph about the purpose of education in the era of society 5.0 is very important.
Namely explaining how the rapid growth of technology greatly affects aspects of human life. In the
purpose of Islamic education itself, it does not only focus on the formation of personality character, but
also mastery of technology and its use for the common good. The caliph leader on earth at this time must
be able to manage and use technology as well as possible. Because in the era of society 5.0, humans are
placed as the center of technological civilization as the basis for development. Therefore, society is
expected to be able to overcome challenges, especially for leaders in making changes by utilizing
technology.
       In addition to developing technology, the balance between ethics and technology is part of the
implications of developing educational science in the era of society 5.0. A transformative leader, in
implementing changes in the Qur'an has emphasized the importance of balancing technological progress
with Islamic ethics. The development of technology must be focused on the welfare of humanity, namely
by considering the sustainability of the environment and society. The values and teachings of the ethics of
the Qur'an can be applied in the context of technology today. Choosing to be fair and treating everyone
with humanity is emphasized in the Qur'an, namely in the letter al-Maidah 5: 8:

                                                                                                                        ْٓ ‫شن َٰا ُن قَوم‬
                                                                                                                                        َ ‫ّلِل شُ َهد َۤا َء بِا ْل ِقسْطَِۖ َو ََل يَجْ ِر َمنَّكُ ْم‬
                      َ ِۗ ‫ع ٰلى اَ ََّل تَ ْع ِدلُ ْو ِۗا اِ ْع ِدلُ ْو ِۗا ه َُو اَ ْق َربُ لِلت َّ ْق ٰو َۖى َواتَّقُوا ه‬
             ‫ّٰللا ا َِّن ه‬
           َ‫ّٰللا‬                                                                                                          َ ٍْ                                                                   ِ ‫ٰيْٓاَيُّ َها الَّ ِذيْنَ ٰا َمنُ ْوا كُ ْونُ ْوا قَ َّوامِ يْنَ ِ ه‬
                                                                                                                                                                                                                         ‫۝‬   ٨ َ‫َخبِي ۢ ٌْر بِ َما تَ ْع َملُ ْون‬
        “O you who believe, be you upholders of (the truth) for Allah (and) witnesses (who act) fairly. Don't
let your hatred of a people encourage you to act unfairly. Be fair because (fair) is closer to piety. Have
faith in Allah. Indeed, Allah is very careful about what you do”.
        The verse, if related to the context of technology, means considering the social impact that occurs.
The meaning of this is that in developing and using this technology, it does not hurt or harm other people
around it. So leaders in educational institutions, using technology as a form of change in adapting to the
current era must continue to consider the social impact that will occur in the future. So there must be a
balance between ethics and technology.
        The technology that is developing at this time, in its implementation privacy and security are things
that must be considered. The Quran has an individual nature and recommends protecting the honor of
others. As stated in the surah al-hujarat 49: 12:

    ‫ضكُ ْم بَ ْعض ًِۗا اَيُحِ بُّ اَ َح ُدكُ ْم اَ ْن يَّأْكُ َل لَحْ َم اَخِ ْي ِه َم ْيتًا‬                               َّ ‫ظ ِن اِثْ ٌم َّو ََل تَ َج‬
                                                                                           ُ ‫سسُ ْوا َو ََل يَ ْغتَبْ بَّ ْع‬                           َّ ‫ض ال‬
                                                                                                                                                             َ ‫ظ َۖ ِن اِ َّن بَ ْع‬ َّ ‫ٰيْٓاَيُّ َها الَّ ِذيْنَ ٰا َمنُوا اجْ تَنِب ُْوا َكثِي ًْرا ِمنَ ال‬
                                                                                                                                                                                                                   َ ِۗ ‫فَك َِر ْهت ُ ُم ْو ِۗهُ َواتَّقُوا ه‬
                                                                                                                                                                                                       َ ‫ّٰللا اِ َّن ه‬
                                                                                                                                                                                 ‫ّٰللا ت ََّوابٌ َّرحِ ْي ٌم‬

       O believers, stay away from many prejudices! In fact, some prejudices are sins. Do not find fault
with others and do not let any of you gossip about others. Does any of you like to eat the flesh of his dead
brother? Of course you feel disgusted. Fear Allah! Indeed, Allah is Most Accepting of Repentance, Most
Merciful.
       Based on the verse in the context of modern technology, this involves securing personal
information and preventing the exploitation of technology to violate the privacy of others. So the leader of
an educational institution, namely the principal, in this case must carefully guard personal information,
starting from educator data, education personnel to students. The data containing personal information

274 | Ahmad Hadi Pranoto, Oseolla Savana, Ulfatussyarifah, Faiz Abdul Majid Assharofi, Lutfiyah;
      Characteristics Of Transformational Educational Leadership ...

must be secured as well as possible, so that it is not exploited by external parties. So a transformational
leader, in making changes must be careful, especially regarding maintaining privacy and security.
         Therefore, educational leadership in the era of society 5.0 based on the perspective of the Qur'an
has a great influence on the progress of education. Because it functions as a welcoming social
transformation. The implications of the characteristics of educational leadership from the Quranic
perspective in the era of society 5.0 based on the above include: 1) developing technology, Leaders in
this case as the foundation of agents of change. So it can be interpreted that the goal of education in the
era of society 5.0 leaders must focus on developing the skills needed by developing current technology
effectively, so that educational institutions can be more advanced in the future. 2) considering the social
impact that will occur, transformational leaders in educational institutions, namely principals in making
changes, especially after developing technology, must consider the social impact that will occur in the
field. Its function is not to harm either party. 3) maintaining data privacy and security, along with the rapid
development of technology, do not be concerned about data breaches Personal information and
educational institutions often occur. Therefore, the principal as a leader in carrying out agents of change
must always maintain the privacy and security of the stored data.


                             CONCLUSSION AND RECOMENDATIONS

        Educational leadership is characterized by transformative qualities that shape the future of
institutions. One key characteristic is deliberation, where leaders foster openness through discussions
with members of the organization, allowing for the generation of new ideas and innovations. Additionally,
fairness, honesty, and objectivity are essential traits that define a transformational leader, ensuring
integrity in driving change. Another crucial aspect is innovation, as leaders must be capable of designing
and implementing progressive transformations. Furthermore, collaboration plays a vital role in
organizational success, as teamwork is necessary to channel ideas and bring about meaningful
improvements. In the Society 5.0 era, educational leadership is also influenced by the Qur'anic concept
of humans as caliphs on earth. Leaders today are not only responsible for shaping individual character
but also for mastering technology to assess its impact, protect data privacy, and utilize technological
advancements for the betterment of education. With continuous technological growth, adaptive leaders
can create more advanced educational institutions, ensuring a brighter and more innovative future for
learning.Sistem diagnosa penyakit pada ayam menggunakan metode Certainty Factor peternakan ayam
Parude Rude digunakan oleh peternak pada peternakan parude rude untuk menjadi pedoman dalam
memberikan penangan atau pengobatan pada ayam sesuai dengan solusi yang diberikan oleh sistem.
disanping itu sistem juga akan memberika kemungkinan penyakit lain berdasarkan gejala-gejala yang
ada, sehingga peternak dapat mengurangi resiko kematian pada ayam potong


                                              REFERENCES
Akhmad, F., Sofia, M. N., Jayanti, G. D., Lestari, W. M., & Wibawa, Z. T. (2021). Karakteristik
        Kepemimpinan Pendidikan Sesuai dengan Ayat-ayat Al-Qur’an. Masaliq, 1(3), 50–61.
        https://doi.org/10.58578/masaliq.v1i3.44
Al Yahyaee, O. R. H., & Mohamad, M. A. (2021). Perceptions of Public Sector Employees on
        Transformational Leadership Characteristics Which Influencing Job Satisfaction. International
        Journal of Sustainable Construction Engineering and Technology, 12(5 Special Issue), 147–155.
        https://doi.org/10.30880/ijscet.2021.12.05.015
Anam, H. (2022). Sifat-Sifat Pemimpin Pendidik dalam Perspektif Al-Qur’an Surah Ali Imran Ayat 159.
        Risalah: Jurnal Pendidikan Dan Studi Islam, 8(4), 1249–1262.
Ardinata, R. P., Rahmat, H. K., Andres, F. S., & Waryono, W. (2022). Kepemimpinan Transformasional
        Sebagai Solusi Pengembangan Konsep Smart City Menuju Era Society 5.0: Sebuah Kajian
        Literatur [Transformational Leadership As a Solution for the Development of the Smart City
        Concept in the Society Era: a Literature Review]. Al-Ihtiram: Multidisciplinary Journal of
        Counseling and Social Research, 1(1), 33–44. https://doi.org/10.59027/alihtiram.v1i1.206
Asmani, J. M. (2012). Tips Menjadi Kepala Sekolah Profesional. Diva Press.
Diana, A., & Soeratin, H. (2023). Peran Kepemimpinan di Era Society 5.0 dengan Konsep
        Multieduhealthtainment. Masaliq, 3(4), 597–609. https://doi.org/10.58578/masaliq.v3i4.1251
Fairus Athiyah. (2019). PERSPEKTIF KEPEMIMPINAN PENDIDIKAN Fairus. An-Nidhom: Jurnal
        Manajemen Pendidikan Islam, 4(1), 67–79.
Gonfa, B. D. (2019). Arabian Journal of Business and Review on Components of Transformational
        Leadership. Arabian Journal of Business and Managment Review, 9(3), 1–5.



                                               Jurnal Multidisiplin Dehasen, Vol. 4 No. 2 April 2025 page: 269 – 276| 275

                                                                                       e-ISSN 2828-1799

         https://www.hilarispublisher.com/open-access/review-on-components-of-transformational-
         leadership.pdf
Hamka. (1989). Tafsir-Al-Azhar.
Harahap, N. J., Limbong, C. H., & Sinaga Simanjorang, E. F. (2023). the Education in Era Society 5.0.
         Jurnal Eduscience, 10(1), 237–250. https://doi.org/10.36987/jes.v10i1.3959
Hasna Nabilah Mumtaz, Ismatu Zahroh, F. M. (2023). Konsep Kepemimpinan Pendidikan Islam
         Perspektif Al- Qur’an. Gunung Djati Conference Series, 36(2), 1–14.
Hifza, Muhamad Suhardi, Aslan, S. E. (2022). Kepemimpinan Pendidikan Islam Dalam Kajian Islam.
         NidhomulHaq: Jurnal ManajemenPendidikan Islam, 1–12.
Hikmat, H. (2022). The Readiness of Education in Indonesia in Facing The Society Era 5.0. Jurnal
         Basicedu, 6(2), 2953–2961. https://doi.org/10.31004/basicedu.v6i2.2526
Ilham Yahya Romandoni, Sulistyorini, N. E. (2023). TRANSFORMASI KEPEMIMPINAN PENDIDIKAN
         ISLAM: TANTANGAN DAN PELUANG DI ERA DIGITAL. TADBIR: Jurnal Manajemen
         Pendidikan Islam, 11(02), 102–113.
Imtinan, N. F. (2021). Gaya Kepemimpinan dalam Menghadapi Era Society 5.0. Jurnal Kependidikan
         Islam, 11(2), 189–197. https://doi.org/10.15642/jkpi.2021.11.2.189-197
Inayati, I. N. (2017). Kepemimpinan Pendidikan dalam Al-Qur’an. 1(2), 24–38.
Kurniawan, H. (2022). Kepemimpinan Dalam Pendidikan Islam: Mengkritik Gaya Kepemimpinan Klasik Di
         Era Informasi. Proceedings of Internasional Conference on Islamic Studies, 1(1), 5.
         https://jurnal.ar-raniry.ac.id/index.php/icis/article/view/12668
Kusniawan, W., Zaini, H. A., Saputra, R., & Hillay, A. (2021). Diskursus Ayat-ayat Karakteristik
         Kepemimpinan dalam Pendidikan Islam (Kajian Surat At-Taubah Ayat 71 dan Al-Maidah Ayat
         57). Alsys, 1(1), 151–167. https://doi.org/10.58578/alsys.v1i1.32
Legi, H., Damanik, D., & Giban, Y. (2023). Transforming Education Through Technological Innovation In
         The Face Of The Era Of Society 5.0. Educenter : Jurnal Ilmiah Pendidikan, 2(2), 102–108.
         https://doi.org/10.55904/educenter.v2i2.822
M. Quraish Shihab. (2005). Tafsir Al-Musbah “Pesan, Kesan, dan Keserasian Al-qur’an.
M. Quraish Shihab. (2016). Tafsir al-Mishbah: Pesan Kesan dan Keserasian Al-qur’an. PT Lentera Hati.
Muhayanah, L., Atshari, S. T., Sengaji, N. A., & Malang, U. M. (2020). KEPEMIMPINAN ISLAM DALAM
         PERMASALAHAN PENDIDIKAN ERA MILENIAL. 5(36), 183–198.
Niphadkar, C., & Kuhil, A. M. (2017). The New age of Transformational Leadership: Evolution and
         Attributes.     Journal     of    Chemical      Information    and  Modeling,  8(6),    546–555.
         file:///C:/Users/User/Downloads/fvm939e.pdf
Pinggala, M., & Wibawa, A. (2022). Pentingnya Gaya Kepemimpinan di Era Society 5.0. Jurnal Inovasi
         Teknologi Dan Edukasi Teknik, 2(4), 205–210. https://doi.org/10.17977/um068v2i42022p205-210
Quttub. (n.d.). Tafsir Fi Zilalil Quran Surah Al-Baqarah.
Samsudin, S., & Azizah, S. M. (2021). Karakteristik Kepemimpinan Transformasional Di Lembaga
         Pendidikan Islam. AL-MIKRAJ : Jurnal Studi Islam Dan Humaniora (E-ISSN: 2745-4584), 1(2),
         68–77. https://doi.org/10.37680/almikraj.v1i2.763
Shiddiqiey. (2000). Tafsir Al-Quranul Majid An-Nur. Pustaka Riski Putra.
Suhartawan, B. (2021). Konsep Kepemimpinan Dalam Perspektif Al- Qur ’ an. Tafakkur, 2, 1–23.
Syamsuri. (2018). Ekonomi Pembangunan Islam: Sebuah Prinsip, Konsep dan Asas Falsafahnya. Gontor
         Press.
Ulfah, U., Supriani, Y., & Arifudin, O. (2022). Kepemimpinan Pendidikan di Era Disrupsi. JIIP - Jurnal
         Ilmiah Ilmu Pendidikan, 5(1), 153–161. https://doi.org/10.54371/jiip.v5i1.392
Zed, M. (2008). Metode Penelitian Kepustakaan. In Antropologi Indonesia (Vol. 52, pp. 82–92).
Zulkhairi, Z. (2021). Kepemimpinan Pendidikan Kepala Sekolah dalam Perspektif Al-Qur’an. ITQAN:
         Jurnal Ilmu-Ilmu Kependidikan, 12(1), 129–140. https://doi.org/10.47766/itqan.v12i1.104




276 | Ahmad Hadi Pranoto, Oseolla Savana, Ulfatussyarifah, Faiz Abdul Majid Assharofi, Lutfiyah;
      Characteristics Of Transformational Educational Leadership ...