http://wje.sciedupress.com                     World Journal of Education                             Vol. 13, No. 4; 2023


       Critique of Research Methodologies and Methods in Educational
                                Leadership

                                                   Aisha Siddiqua1,*
1
Yanbu English Language Institute, Royal Commission, Yanbu, Saudi Arabia
*Correspondence: Yanbu English Language Institute, Royal Commission, Yanbu, Saudi Arabia. E-mail:
aisha76siddiqa@gmail.com


Received: April 27, 2023         Accepted: July 10, 2023        Online Published: August 10, 2023
doi:10.5430/wje.v13n4p16            URL: https://doi.org/10.5430/wje.v13n4p16


Abstract
The purpose of this exploratory study was to document aspects of research methodology in educational leadership
directed at emerging school leaders and the academic community that supports them. The intricacy of educational
challenges highlights the necessity for a thorough investigation, the results of which will inform suitable reforms.
Scholars have long argued about which of the qualitative and quantitative approaches is more rigorous in its
contribution to the development of education. Some academics contend that since education focuses primarily on
human behaviour, which is value-laden, research in this area should take a qualitative approach. Results indicate that
while qualitative methods were more common in the arts, quantitative methods dominated research in education and
the sciences. However, the social sciences frequently used a blend of qualitative and mixed approaches. The findings'
implications for improving research methodology skills and the integrity of educational research are examined.
Keywords: research approaches, research design, educational leadership, triangulation, ethical issues, sampling
techniques, data collection methods


1. Introduction
This study seeks to comprehend the state of the art by examining the research methodologies employed by
researchers in the study of educational leadership. Researchers and newcomers to the field may be able to spot
potential gaps in the literature by becoming familiar with the various research methodologies and methods. Reviews
of research methodologies can be beneficial to academics in a variety of ways, according to Hallinger (2013), in
addition to synthesizing knowledge, identifying gaps in the literature, and promoting policy recommendations. A
helpful framework for comprehending how "methodology" fits into the research process is provided by McWilliam
et al. (1997). Research involves three different types of work, according to McWilliam et al. (1997), "headwork,
fieldwork, and text work." The methodology is part of the research's "head work," which involves thinking through
the problems, questions, and issues that will arise as the study is conducted. Headwork and text work are frequently
overlooked in "research methods" courses, which traditionally place a greater emphasis on methods for collecting
and analyzing data. Examining methodological issues encourages one to pose inquisitive queries about their own and
other people's research.


2. Different Research Methodologies and Methods
There are three major research paradigms in the literature: qualitative, quantitative, and hybrid (Babbie, 2001;
Creswell, 2014). Since these methods are based on various traditions, they have varied goals and methodologies
(Pyrczak, 2003). Researchers choose one of these three options depending on the type of research they are interested
in. Research methods may be mixed, qualitative, or quantitative, depending on the researcher's viewpoint (Creswell,
2014; Guba, 1990; Neuman, 2009). The quantitative approach, therefore, is dominated by postpositivists and
positivists who favour quantification (Phillips & Burbules, 2000). According to them, cause and effect are causally
related, which means that particular causes have particular effects. Given this, positivists and post-positivists create
hypotheses and research questions, devise numerical measurements, gather data, and use statistical software to


Published by Sciedu Press                           16                               ISSN 1925-0746    E-ISSN 1925-0754

http://wje.sciedupress.com                     World Journal of Education                             Vol. 13, No. 4; 2023

analyse them (Creswell, 2014). Their viewpoint is typically described as empirical science or scientific study that
largely relies on the quantitative method.
The constructivist worldview, which is regarded as deterministic, is an alternative strategy. According to this theory,
studying people with prepared questions, gathering data using tools with closed-ended inquiries, and putting the data
through statistical analysis are necessary because human behaviour is unpredictable. As an alternative, social
constructivism operates in a natural environment, relying on information (data) gathered from participants in the
study (Bogdan & Taylor, 1975; Lincoln & Guba, 1985; Patton, 2002). Through interpretation, the researcher makes
sense of the information (inductive analysis) instead of presenting their findings through numbers. Instead, the
themes that surface do so. The naturalists' approach to qualitative research, which has conceptually impacted the
social sciences and education, is characterised by this stance (Bogdan & Biklan, 1982; Patton, 2002).
The pragmatic attitude, which pays attention to the research topic and applies practical and relevant methodologies to
address the research questions, underpins the mixed methods paradigm. Because research problems must be
addressed in various contexts, including social, economic, historical, and political ones, pragmatists use a variety of
methodologies, or mixed methods, which can be used either for exploratory or explanatory purposes (Babbie, 2001;
Creswell, 2014). As a result of the theory that the world is not static, researchers use mixed methods to collect data
rather than following one specific methodology. Based on the preceding, it appears that mixed-methods approaches
are more appropriate in the behavioural and social sciences than in the core sciences, assuming researchers are
capable of defending their choices.
A protracted argument has developed between researchers from many worldviews, each claiming particular
principles. In contrast, quantitative researchers (positivists) assert that their methodology is more rigorous and based
on science (Carey, 1993). What constitutes scientific research is not entirely clear. In every discipline, scientific
research is a process of careful examination that is supported by the right theory and framework, the research
methods employed, and the results that result from it (Shavelson & Towne, 2002). An investigation must follow a set
of guidelines for performing the research and evaluating the veracity of the results in it to be considered scientific.
Despite the National Research Council's assertion that a study's design does not determine whether a study is
scientific, a study's design must permit direct empirical investigation of a research problem, adhere to the conceptual
framework, take into account the context in which the investigation was conducted, and present the findings so that
they can be discussed by researchers and other stakeholders (Shavelson & Towne, 2002).
However, it is noted that more texts have been produced on quantitative research methods than on qualitative
research and analysis, even though it is not the intention of this work to add to the argument on the superiority of the
quantitative and qualitative approaches (Bogdan & Taylor, 1975; Denzin & Lincoln 2000). Because quantitative
research has dominated the social and behavioural sciences since the 1900s, Pyrczak (2003) highlighted that
reviewers are generally likely to uncover much more articles reporting quantitative research than qualitative research.
Despite these findings, some researchers contend that both quantitative and qualitative methodologies can be
vigorously pursued to provide reliable results and are not inherently fundamentally distinct modes of inquiry (Howe
& Eistenhart, 1990; King, Keohane & Verba, 1994).
According to Shavelson and Towne (2002), social and behavioural sciences have played a significant role in
developing education research, which uses pure quantitative and qualitative design strategies. Moreover, a mixed
methods approach would be advantageous for education research due to its nature. However, there aren't many
empirical studies that back up this supposition.
2.1 Research Methodologies in Educational Leadership
There are surprisingly few reviews of research on educational leadership. According to Hallinger's (2013)
observation, there are fewer than half as many published studies overall. The number of review articles appeared to
be increasing as the field gained popularity, but his analysis of 52 years' worth of data in 2014 revealed 35 reviews
dispersed across nine peer-reviewed journals. The following section focuses on the most recent studies specific to
educational leadership.
2.1.1 Research Approaches
Hallinger and colleagues (2013) reviewed the research on educational leadership and management. In Asia
(Hallinger & Bryant, 2013), Latin America (Castillo & Hallinger, 2018), and Africa (Hallinger, 2018), over 70% of
published articles were empirical instead of theoretical or commentary (Hallinger & Bryant, 2013). African studies
typically use quantitative methods, while Asian and Latin American studies use qualitative ones. In every region, the
number of mixed-methods studies was the lowest. It has also been noted, at least in Asia, that quantitative work is

Published by Sciedu Press                           17                               ISSN 1925-0746    E-ISSN 1925-0754

http://wje.sciedupress.com                     World Journal of Education                             Vol. 13, No. 4; 2023

becoming more popular, according to Hallinger and Bryant (2013).
Thomson (2017) conducted a thorough, critical analysis of research methods in educational leadership, management,
and administration by looking at three North American and three UK-based educational leadership journals. Only 25%
of the data in Thomson's (2017) paper were gathered numerically, and 75% were gathered qualitatively using
methods unique to the journal. This information was gathered using simple questions about the different techniques
used and the degree (if any) of methodological decision-making. However, there were no papers of any kind that
looked at method choices, which left off-field discussions about the development of content knowledge in the dark.
Gumus, Bellibas, Esen, and Gumus (2018) examined more American-centric educational research that focused on
leadership models. They found a reduction in both the number of qualitative studies and the quantity of theoretical,
non-empirical works, despite the fact that qualitative studies were numerically the most prevalent throughout a
24-year period (1990-2014). On the other hand, there has been an upsurge in quantitative and mixed methods studies
on leadership models in education, as was shown in Hallinger and Bryant's (2013) general research on educational
leadership in Asia. When Tian et al. (2016) specifically evaluated the idea of distributed leadership in elementary and
secondary education across eight publications from 2002 to 2013, they found that the rise in quantitative work
observed in these two studies was matched. Contrary to a previous review on the same topic, Tian et al. (2016)
discovered that empirical research predominated in the evaluated publications, with a fairly even mixture of
qualitative, quantitative, and mixed-method techniques.
Murphy et al. (2007) examined 25 years' worth of publications in the journal Educational Administration Quarterly
(EAQ), in contrast to the previously presented evaluations, which either concentrated on a particular area or a
specific subject. They discovered that, as opposed to conceptual or theoretical publications, slightly more than half of
the articles published in EAQ were empirical, with a slight increase in that proportion in more recent years. Each
year, between 45% and 58% of papers were qualitative, followed by 35% to 42% of quantitative papers and 42% of
mixed-methods papers.
2.1.2 Research Design
The research design links conceptual research issues to pertinent and doable empirical studies. Procedures are
provided with specific instructions in research designs (Creswell, 2014). A researcher follows a step-by-step process
before beginning data collection and analysis in order to successfully complete the research objective. Research
designs convert research problems into data for analysis in order to provide pertinent answers to research questions at
the lowest possible cost. According to Kerlinger (1986), the research design is a plan, structure, and strategy for
examining a research question with the intention of controlling variables in the best possible way.
The type of analysis required to produce the desired results is always determined by the research design. In a
research plan, it is specified what information will be gathered, how it will be analyzed, and how the research
questions will be addressed. According to Jongbo (2014), if a researcher gathers data without first considering the
research design and the data required to answer the research questions, the conclusions drawn will be weak and
unconvincing, and the research objective will not be met. The study design must include a method for interpreting
the analyzed data if recommendations or implications are to be based on research findings. There are three distinct
types of research designs: mixed methods, study able variables, objectives, and questions. An issue statement,
research questions, and research goal that are clearly stated serve as the foundation of a research design. When the
researcher is comfortable with the study question and the kinds of theories and ideas that fit it, he should keep
reading the relevant literature.
The researcher should be able to choose the most appropriate and pertinent research design based on prior knowledge
of the various types of research design, guidance from a careful analysis of the research statement of the problem,
research questions, the conceptual or theoretical framework, and analysis of the pertinent literature.
A strong research design develops a strategy that integrates the research problem, research questions, data collection
methods, organizational methods, and analysis methods to produce answers to the research questions that are
supported by substantial evidence and even persuade users to accept the inferences drawn from them as reasonable
ones.
2.1.3 Sampling Techniques
Researchers must thoughtfully consider how they will choose a sample that is representative of the group as a whole
to draw accurate conclusions from the study. It is referred to as a sampling method. There are two main kinds of
sampling techniques that can be applied in research:


Published by Sciedu Press                           18                               ISSN 1925-0746    E-ISSN 1925-0754

http://wje.sciedupress.com                      World Journal of Education                              Vol. 13, No. 4; 2023

• Probability sampling
• Non-probability sampling
Probability sampling employs a random selection process to allow for the generation of reliable statistical
conclusions about the entire group. Each individual in the population has a chance of being chosen when sampling is
done using probability. Most often, it is utilized in quantitative research. If the goal is to generate results that are
representative of the entire population, probability sampling techniques are the best option. Probability samples are
classified into four types:
1. Simple random sample
2. Systematic sample
3. Stratified sample
4. Cluster sample
Non-probability sampling entails non-random selection based on convenience or other factors, making data
collection easier. People are chosen for inclusion in a non-probability sample using non-random criteria, so not
everyone has the same chance of doing so. Although obtaining this type of sample is easier and less expensive, there
is a greater possibility of sampling bias. That means population inferences are weaker than with probability samples,
and the conclusions may be more limited. Even if a non-probability sample is used, the researchers should still strive
to have as accurate a representation of the population as they can. Exploratory and qualitative research frequently
employ non-probability sampling methods. Instead of testing a theory about a large population, the aim of this type
of research is to gain a preliminary understanding of a small or understudied population. The following are the four
primary categories of probability samples:
1. Convenience sample
2. Purposive sample
3. Snowball sample
4. Quota sample
Sampling strategies for quantitative methods used in mixed methods designs in implementation research are
generally well-established and based on probability theory. Comparatively, sampling techniques for qualitative
methods in implementation studies are frequently less clear-cut and explicit. Although the samples for qualitative
inquiry are generally assumed to be selected purposefully to yield cases that are “information rich” (Patton, 2002),
there are no clear guidelines for conducting purposeful sampling in mixed methods implementation studies,
particularly when studies have more than one specific objective. Additionally, it is unclear exactly what sampling
techniques are best suited for the difficulties of using both quantitative and qualitative techniques in the mixed
methods designs used in implementation research. Determining the goals of each methodology is necessary for this
consideration, as is evaluating the potential effects of choosing one strategy to achieve one goal on the decision to
choose another strategy to achieve a different goal.
2.1.4 Data Collection Methods
Surveys and interviews are the two types of data collection that are most frequently used globally, but other
techniques like document analysis and direct observation have also been used (Castillo & Hallinger, 2018). In Latin
America, correlational and multivariate statistics were used to analyze more than half of the quantitative and
mixed-methods research that was conducted. The most common form of quantitative research in Africa was surveys,
with inferential testing used in about half of them and descriptive statistics in the other half (Hallinger, 2018). Tian et
al. (2016) discovered that surveys dominated quantitative work while case studies, observations, and interviews were
the main methods used to collect data for qualitative work. Few qualitative and quantitative papers, according to
Thomson's (2017) research, used critical analytic methods; instead, they tended to take more constructivist stances.
Case studies, surveys, and interviews in particular were frequently used as research methods. Murphy et al.'s (2007)
analysis of the research presented in EAQ (2007) found that surveys were the main methods used to gather
quantitative data. However, they found that only a small proportion of studies employed experimental or
quasi-experimental methodologies, and that about a quarter of the studies employed secondary data analysis.
Inductive analysis and content analysis were the most frequently used frameworks for qualitative work in EAQ,
despite the fact that narrative analysis and phenomenological analysis were two of the many other categories.



Published by Sciedu Press                             19                               ISSN 1925-0746    E-ISSN 1925-0754

http://wje.sciedupress.com                     World Journal of Education                             Vol. 13, No. 4; 2023

2.1.5 Data Analysis
There is no one right way to analyze and present qualitative data, so one should always decide whether the task is
appropriate before moving forward. Additionally, because qualitative data analysis heavily relies on interpretation, it
is important to keep in mind that there are frequently a variety of possible interpretations. This is both their strength
and their downfall.
The type of analysis that is conducted will depend on the objective of the data analysis, so the researcher must be
certain of it in order to uphold the principle of fitness for purpose. Choosing the purpose is important since it will
influence the type of analysis done on the data. Consequently, this will affect how the analysis is written. The data
analysis will also be influenced by the kind of qualitative study being done. For instance, it might be best to write a
biography or case study as a descriptive narrative that frequently follows a chronological order and raises issues
throughout. An ethnography doesn't have to follow a strict timeline of events; it can be written as a narrative or as a
collection of anecdotes with problems highlighted. The description, analysis, interpretation, and defense of a group
or culture's salient traits are also included. A grounded theory and content analysis will proceed through a methodical
set of studies, including coding and categorization until a theory emerges that either explains the events under study
or can be used for prediction. The quantity of data sets and the number of subjects from whom data were collected
will also affect the analysis. Although qualitative data often focuses on fewer people than quantitative data, the data
is typically rich and comprehensive. For instance, researchers will need to decide whether to move forward by
working within a largely established analytical framework of concerns that crosses the persons concerned, or
whether to present data individually before, if desired, combining major issues that emerge across the individuals.
Some qualitative studies (e.g., Ball 1990; 1994a; Bowe et al. 1992) deliberately focus on people and the responses of
important players in a particular scenario, frequently quoting verbatim responses in the final account; others are
content to summarize issues without necessarily identifying exactly from whom the specific data were derived. In
some studies, many verbatim interviews are used, whereas, in others, less verbatim data is used. Direct conversations
can be very in-depth and information-rich. Ball (1990) and Bowe et al. (1992), in their "research transcription,"
admit that they "rarely thoroughly transcribed more than a few interviews for any of their research investigations," in
part because the transcription process required a lot of time. Practically, qualitative research produces massive
amounts of data quickly. The early analysis highlights crucial areas that ought to be the center of future research,
which helps to alleviate the issue of data overload. According to Miles and Huberman (1984), a crucial step in data
reduction and selection is careful data display. The method of gathering data with a wide-angle lens, sorting it, going
over it, and making comments on it until the essential components of the situation become clear was described as
"progressive focusing" by Parlett and Hamilton in 1976. This serves as the strategy for subsequent focus. The
strategy resembles a funneling process from wide to narrow.
An important aspect of qualitative research from a theoretical perspective is the fact that analysis frequently starts
early in the data collection process so that theory development can be done. The fundamental components of the
phenomenon should be outlined by researchers. In order to create a logical whole, they should then join groups or
blocks of data together. By comparing, aggregating, matching, and organizing the notes they took, they should then
carefully analyze their field notes. The objective is to move from description to justification and theory development.
2.2 The Importance of Ethics in Research Practice
The expansion of pertinent literature and the appearance of regulatory codes of research practice developed by
various agencies and professional groups demonstrate the awareness of ethical issues in research. In order to balance
the demands placed on them as professional scientists seeking the truth with the rights and values of the subjects the
research may harm, researchers must overcome a significant ethical challenge. Frankfort-Nachmias and Nachmias
(1992) use the term "costs/benefits ratio" to explain the basics of this idea. When researchers shift from the general to
the specific and from the abstract to the practical, unanticipated ethical issues may appear.
The types of issues that social scientists look into and the techniques they employ to get accurate and trustworthy
data may give rise to ethical concerns. This suggests that ethical issues are brought up at every stage of the research
process. They could be a result of the research's purpose (e.g., racial differences in intelligence), the setting (a
remand home), the procedures to be used (producing high levels of anxiety), the data collection methods (covert
observation), the participants (emotionally disturbed adolescents), the type of data collected (highly personal and
sensitive information), and the intended use of the data (publishing in a way that could lead to participation).
Researchers' actions cannot and shouldn't be subject to a procrustean code of ethics. Each situation frequently
presents a number of options when it comes to resolving a specific moral conundrum. It is crucial to keep in mind


Published by Sciedu Press                            20                              ISSN 1925-0746    E-ISSN 1925-0754

http://wje.sciedupress.com                     World Journal of Education                             Vol. 13, No. 4; 2023

that morality is about right and wrong, good and bad and that procedural ethics by themselves are insufficient.
Instead, one should consider how the research's objectives, subject matter, approach, reporting, and conclusions
comport with ethical norms and practices.
2.2.1 Triangulation and Ethical Issues in Research
Validity and credibility are two factors integral to practical research. Triangulation, therefore, enhances validity and
credibility by mitigating research bias. Any research will benefit from a strategy that incorporates triangulation and
mixed methods. When multiple strict research measures are combined, it clarifies inconsistent results by putting
them in conversation with one another (Mertens and Hesse-Biber, 2012), thus offering a more comprehensive
analysis. Cross-checking the evidence is possible for researchers by combining the two fundamental approaches to
social phenomena. A greater level of confidence can be obtained in research findings that reflect reality by
combining data from multiple sources (data triangulation), methods (methodological triangulation), investigators
(investigator triangulation), or theories (theory triangulation).
In addition to helping to make up for flaws in one method, the combination of complementary methods helps to
ensure that the research is measuring what it is supposed to measure. However, it is asserted that this strategy may be
problematic due to potential imbalances in epistemological presumptions based on the data types. The rationale for
using triangulation must therefore be incorporated into the design (Mertens and Hesse-Biber, 2012).
In order to advance the conversation, it is important to note that using two different methodologies to look into the
same phenomenon places more responsibility on researchers to take any potential ethical concerns into consideration.
As an illustration, a researcher must ensure that the methods and tools used do not infringe upon the subjects' rights
to privacy, anonymity, and confidentiality. The research protocol as well as broader guidelines and codes of conduct
must also be carefully followed by researchers. Healthy research ethics prioritize safeguarding the investigator(s),
study participants, and sponsoring organizations. For example, ethical standards aid in ensuring a high level of public
accountability. If people are to have confidence in the calibre and integrity of the research, issues of research
misconduct, conflicts of interest, and human subject protection must be addressed (Resnik, 2020).


3. Discussion
Despite the predominance of qualitative work projects using mixed and quantitative methodologies also stood out.
Quantitative data was mostly collected through single-time surveys, whereas qualitative data was more varied. There
are fewer alternative sources of data in quantitative research than in qualitative research, though qualitative research
is more varied. Quantitative research still relies largely on one-off surveys that frequently use convenience sampling,
despite the widespread use of big data and social media. Technology has impacted qualitative and mixed-methods
research in addition to video blogs, social media posts, and photos. There aren't many longitudinal studies, and the
methods used aren't very diverse, according to Thomson's (2017) and Hallinger's (2018) reviews of research methods.
Particularly, Thomson (2017) drew attention to the conservative choice of methods, which used surveys and
interviews almost exclusively. Another trend that has been noticed is the inconsistent documentation of data related
to methodological design choices. This unexpected lack of information about the methods used is consistent with
Hallinger's (2014) finding that even reviews of research occasionally forget to mention their own procedures. The
procedures and analysis steps, as well as the discussions of sample participants and references, are only briefly
described methodologically.
This review demonstrated the diversity of approaches used in practitioner scholarship. In the qualitative articles,
some authors referred to their papers as empirical research by using a particular methodological description, such as
autoethnography or action research. Although other researchers conducted similar research on their own teaching,
their papers did not contain explicit language about methods and were not framed in this manner, despite containing
elements of action research, scholarship of teaching research, and pragmatic practitioner research (Osterman, Furman,
& Sernak, 2014). Sometimes the authors provided descriptions that resulted in the separation of articles that were
similar; however, it was not always clear whether or not they were empirical research. This resulted in the inclusion
of papers in the sampling frame primarily based on how authors described their practitioner-scholarship research, the
frame in which they framed their study, and the inclusion of method-related details in the articles, rather than
significant differences in methods used. With the help of a discussion about how the field defines and promotes the
scholarship of teaching, practitioner-scholars may be able to engage with this type of research as a methodology and
examine how this crucial type of work can be structured so that it will remain valuable to educational leaders and
professors of educational leadership.


Published by Sciedu Press                            21                              ISSN 1925-0746    E-ISSN 1925-0754

http://wje.sciedupress.com                     World Journal of Education                             Vol. 13, No. 4; 2023

A more advanced quantitative study in educational leadership is likely to be needed to support causal statements
(Hallinger, 2018), but the ability to tell stories about innovative interventions and move policy through rich
descriptive case studies should not be overlooked. (Kowalski, 2009; Thomson, 2017) There should also be a strong
emphasis on theoretical debates and philosophical debates in the literature (Kowalski, 2009; Thomson, 2017). Due to
the requirement for methodological richness (Bowers, 2017), educational leaders have to stay current with current
research methodologies and analytical techniques. Methodological discussion in the methods section will allow
researchers to debate how knowledge is produced because there are no absolutes in research.


4. Conclusion
Research into educational issues most commonly uses the quantitative method, according to this study. Quantitative
research appears to be more common than qualitative and mixed methods research for a variety of reasons, including
the quantitative method's historical dominance, the belief that "if it's not quantitative research, it's not research," a
dearth of expertise in qualitative and mixed methods research, and others.
The struggle between quantitative and qualitative methods seems to be coming to an end, and the lines between
disciplines are fuzzier than ever. It is crucial to provide students with access to a variety of research methods and to
help them develop their skills so they can choose the right ones based on their research orientations and the type of
inquiry they are conducting. This is because research combining multiple disciplines is becoming more and more
common in today's world. Having a balanced perspective on research methods provides opportunities for researchers.


References
Babbie, E. (2001). The practice of social research. (9th ed.). Belmont, CA: Wadsworth Thomson Learning USA.
Ball, S. J. (1990). Politics and Policy-Making in Education. London: Routledge.
Bogdan, R. D., & Biklan, S. K. (1982). Qualitative research for education: An introduction to theory and methods.
    Boston: Allyn & Bacon.
Bogdan, R., & Taylor, S. (1975). Introduction to qualitative research methods. New York: Wiley.
Bowe, R., Ball, S. J., & Gold, A. (1992). Reforming Education and Changing Schools. London: Routledge.
Bowers, A. J. (2017). Quantitative research methods training in education leadership and administration preparation
   programs as a disciplined inquiry for building school improvement capacity. Journal of Research on Leadership
   Education, 12(1), 72-96. https://doi.org/10.1177/1942775116659462
Carey, J. W. (1993). Linking qualitative and quantitative methods: Integrating cultural factors into public health.
    Qualitative Health Research, 3(3), 298-318. https://doi.org/10.1177/104973239300300303
Castillo, F. A., & Hallinger, P. (2018). Systematic review of research on educational leadership and management in
     Latin America, 1991-2017. Educational Management Administration & Leadership, 46(2), 207-225.
     https://doi.org/10.1177/1741143217745882
Creswell, J. W. (2014). Research design: Qualitative, quantitative and mixed method approaches (4th ed.).
    Thousand Oaks: CA, Sage.
Cross, K. P., & Steadman, M. H. (1996). Classroom research: Implementing the scholarship of teaching. The
    Jossey-Bass higher and adult education series. San Francisco: Jossey-Bass.
Gordon, S. P. (2016). Expanding our horizons: Alternative approaches to practitioner Research. Journal of
    Practitioner Research, 1(1), 1-18. https://doi.org/10.5038/2379-9951.1.1.1030
Denzin, N. K., & Lincoln, Y. S. (Eds.) (2000). Handbook of qualitative research. (2nd ed.). Thousand Oaks: CA.
    Sage.
Frankfort-Nachmias, C., & Nachmias, D. (1992). Research Methods in the Social Sciences. London: Edward Arnold.
Guba, E. G. (Ed.). (1990). The paradigm dialogue. Newbury Park, CA: Sage.
Gumus, S., Bellibas, M. S., Esen, M., & Gumus, E. (2018). A systematic review of studies on leadership models in
   educational research from 1980 to 2014. Educational Management Administration & Leadership, 46(1), 25-48.
   https://doi.org/10.1177/1741143216659296
Hallinger, P. (2013). A conceptual framework for systematic reviews of research in Educational leadership and

Published by Sciedu Press                            22                              ISSN 1925-0746    E-ISSN 1925-0754

http://wje.sciedupress.com                   World Journal of Education                               Vol. 13, No. 4; 2023

     management.           Journal     of      Educational                Administration,       51(2),          126-149.
     https://doi.org/10.1108/09578231311304670
Hallinger, P. (2014). Reviewing reviews of research in educational leadership: An empirical assessment. Educational
     Administration Quarterly, 50(4), 539-576. https://doi.org/10.1177/0013161X13506594
Hallinger, P. (2018). Surfacing hidden literature: A systematic review of research on educational leadership and
     management in Africa. Educational Management Administration & Leadership, 46(3), 362-384.
     https://doi.org/10.1177/1741143217694895
Hallinger, P., & Bryant, D. A. (2013). Accelerating knowledge production on educational leadership and
     management in East Asia: A strategic analysis. School Leadership and Management, 33(3), 202-223.
     https://doi.org/10.1080/13632434.2013.773884
Howe, K., & Eistenhart, M. (1990). Standards for qualitative (and quantitative research): A prolegomenon.
   Educational Researcher, 19(4), 2-9. https://doi.org/10.3102/0013189X019004002
Jongbo, O. C. (2014). The role of research design in a purpose-driven enquiry. Review of Public Administration and
    Management, 3(6), 87-94.
Kerlinger, F. (1986). Foundation of behavioural research (3rd ed.). New York: Holt, Rinehart, and Winston.
King, G., Keohane, R., & Verba, S. (1994). Designing social inquiry: Scientific inference in qualitative research.
    Princeton: Princeton University Press. https://doi.org/10.1515/9781400821211
Kowalski, T. (2009). Need to address evidence-based practice in educational administration. Educational
   Administration Quarterly, 45(3), 351-374. https://doi.org/10.1177/0013161X09333623
Lincoln, Y., & Guba. E. G. (1985). Naturalistic enquiry. Sage Publications: Thousand Oaks, CA.
McWilliam, Erica, Lather, Patti & Morgan, Wendy with McCoy, Kate, Pillow, Wanda & St Pierre, Elizabeth (1997).
   Head Work, Field Work, Text Work: A Textshop in New Feminist Research, Study guide and video, Centre for
   Policy and Leadership Studies, Queensland University of Technology, Brisbane.
Mertens, D. M., & Hesse-Biber, S. (2012). Triangulation and mixed methods research: provocative positions.
    Journal of Mixed Methods Research, 6(2), 75-79. https://doi.org/10.1177/1558689812437100
Miles, M., & Huberman, M. (1984). Qualitative Data Analysis. Beverly Hills, CA: Sage.
Murphy, J., Vriesenga, M., & Storey, V. (2007). Educational Administration Quarterly, 1979-2003: An analysis of
    types of work, methods of investigation, and influences. Educational Administration Quarterly, 43, 612-628.
    https://doi.org/10.1177/0013161X07307796
Neuman, W. L. (2009). Social research methods: Qualitative and quantitative approaches (7th ed.). Boston: Allyn &
   Bacon.
Osterman, K., Furman, G., & Sernak, K. (2014). Action research in EdD programs in educational leadership. Journal
    of Research on Leadership Education, 9, 85-105. https://doi.org/10.1177/1942775113498378
Parlett, M., & Hamilton, D. (1976). Evaluation as illumination. In D. Tawney (Ed.), Curriculum Evaluation Today:
     Trends and Implications. London: Macmillan, 84-101.
Patton, M. Q. (2002). Qualitative research and evaluation methods, (3rd ed.). Thousand Oaks, California: Sage.
Phillips, M. Q., & Burbules, N. C. (2000). Post positivism and educational research. Lanham, MD: Rowman &
     Littlefield.
Pyrczak, F. (2003). Evaluating research in academic journals: A practical guide to Realistic evaluation (2nd ed.).
    Los Angeles: Pyrczak Publishing.
Renisk, D. B. (2020). What is ethics in research, & why is                          it   important?    Retrieved    from
    https://www.niehs.nih.gov/research/resources/bioethics/whatis/index.cfm
Shavelson, R. J., & Towne, L. (Eds.). (2002). Scientific research in education. Center for Education, Division of
    Behavioral and Social Sciences and Education. Washington DC: National Academy Press.
Thomson, P. (2017). A little more madness in our methods? A snapshot of how the educational leadership,
   management and administration field conducts research. Journal of Educational Administration and History,
   49(3), 215-230. https://doi.org/10.1080/00220620.2017.1315381


Published by Sciedu Press                         23                                 ISSN 1925-0746    E-ISSN 1925-0754

http://wje.sciedupress.com                       World Journal of Education                              Vol. 13, No. 4; 2023

Tian, M., Risku, M., & Collin, K. (2016). A meta-analysis of distributed leadership from 2002 to 2013: Theory
     development, empirical evidence and future research focus. Educational Management Administration &
     Leadership, 44(1), 146-164. https://doi.org/10.1177/1741143214558576
Walford, G. (2001). Doing Qualitative Educational Research: A Personal Guide to the Research Process. London:
    Continuum.




Copyrights
Copyright for this article is retained by the author(s), with first publication rights granted to the journal.
This is an open-access article distributed under the terms and conditions of the Creative Commons Attribution
license (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/).




Published by Sciedu Press                              24                               ISSN 1925-0746    E-ISSN 1925-0754