Research in Educational Administration & Leadership
                                          Volume: 6, Issue: 3/September 2021



  Theorising Context in Educational Leadership from a

              Relational Critical Realist Perspective

                             Jean Pierre Elonga Mboyo
                  Teesside University, Middlesbrough, United Kingdom

  Abstract                                                                 Article Info
  Educational leadership scholars are unanimous in their
                                                                         Article History:
  appreciation of the importance of context. As a concept, however,             Received
  context is not unproblematic and, while being scarcely theorised,      January 10, 2021
  the recent growing interest around the topic has shown
                                                                                Accepted
  fundamental differences in the way that it is approached with             April 20, 2021
  repercussions on how the field progresses. The analysis of
  published literature on context undertaken in this article,
  therefore, attempts to look beyond current framing of context as            Keywords:
  antecedent and moderator, in order to propose a relational critical    Context; Relation;
                                                                          Critical realism;
  realist perspective to framing context and, hopefully, shape as well
                                                                              Educational
  as decolonise future policy, practice and theorising in educational
                                                                                leadership
  leadership.
  Cited as:
  Elonga Mboyo, J.P. (2021). Theorising context in educational
         leadership from a critical realist perspective. Research in
         Educational Administration & Leadership, 6(3), 724-740. DOI:
         10.30828/real/2021.3.7

                                     Introduction

          In its most unspecialised understanding, context can be defined
  as ‘the circumstances that form the setting of an event…’ (Oxford
  dictionary). To illustrate this more clearly, the circumstances of an
  isolated police brutality incident towards a black person, for example,
  can form the setting for a ‘Black Lives Matter’ (BLM) event/ protest.

          Elonga Mboyo (2021). Theorising Context in Educational Leadership...




‘The physical environment in which practice [an event] takes place’
(McCormark et al., 2002, p. 96) may become pervasive, in that events,
such as BLM protests, can, for different reasons, spread across settings.
While the expanding collective moral imperative of the BLM
movement might strike a chord with many, expanding an educational
practice or policy that seems to have worked in one setting across all
settings is a bone of contention. The pervasiveness and dominance of
events across settings triggered by certain circumstances, or the
tendency to replicate ‘what works here’ in different contexts, is a
poignant reminder for the need to frame the in situ of each setting and
discern its contrasting and/ or shared positional space, time, actors,
motives and other factors that characterise the here-and-now, as
opposed or related to the there-now and at other times (ex situ) and
vice versa. Understanding these dynamics of context is crucial since
‘there is no leadership without context’ (Rumsey, 2013, p. 3), as
recognised by contributors to this special issue. And although the
framing of the in situ of context is gaining momentum, this article aims
to review the thinking thus far and propose a relational critical realist
way forward when thinking about context. It also serves as a viable
theorised justification for various degrees of hybridisation and
comparative approaches that articles in this special issue grapple with,
as they respectively put forward a comparative research concept and
framework (Elonga Mboyo), Multilateral model (Loomis & Akkari),
TURNS model (Msila) and Post-colonial framework (Morrosi), as
possible ways of decolonising educational leadership in Africa. The
article begins by recasting context as a cross-field of various interacting
factors and acknowledges its contested nature before problematising
how it has been understood as an antecedent and as a moderator. It
goes on to reframe how context should be theorised as a relation from



                                                                                 725

                           Research in Educational Administration & Leadership
                                      6(3), September 2021, 724-740


a critical realist perspective before making some recommendations as
part of its concluding remarks.
Threat to Context and the Role of Educational Leadership
       The focus on the singularity and importance of ‘context’ is not
new (Flikschuh, 2018) but the trend to override the in situ of
educational settings is arguably a real threat that appears to have
peaked and prompted calls for pause. One such call was made by
Harris and Jones (2017), who decry the practices that essentially consist
of copying leadership practices in order to remain competitive in
national and international league tables and, as a result, fail to take into
account the in situ of context without which enduring and embedded
success is unattainable. O’Donoghue and Clarke (2010) have noted
how such an approach has failed, particularly when implementing
curriculum change. Although normative educational leadership
approaches are said to be in response to the ‘centrality of context’, in
order to help practitioners to solve specific problems in schools using
certain types of leadership behaviours (Bush, 2011, p. 27), it can be
argued that normative educational leadership, in the case of formal
models of leadership for example, has, to some extent, served the
sociological order set by the standardised top-down policies that also
affect educational leadership practice.
       It is important to remember that Harris and Jones (2017) do not
explicitly advocate for contextual insularity that makes standardised
external dictates evaporate into thin air without corroding the in situ
of context. Therefore, the moment of pause away from standardised
approaches is, arguably, a moment of immersion into local contextual
racialised, gendered, cultural… epistemologies that are not necessarily
impervious to external realities and wider perspective. It is this
overlapping yet unique nature of context as an intersection, a ‘cross-


726

            Elonga Mboyo (2021). Theorising Context in Educational Leadership...




field’ (Zulfakar, 2020, p. 101) and ‘glocal’ point, where ‘local and global
forces interact to shape context’ (Brooks & Normore, 2010, p. 54) that,
I argue, educators and school leaders are confronted with and that
needs to be theorised in a relational critical realist perspective, in order
to catalyse real change when leading schools and theorising
educational leadership in Africa, as is the case in this special issue.
A Contested Terrain
       Despite its centrality, educational leadership literature has
tended to portray the in situ of context as not the ‘be all and end all’.
To cast the view further afield to the wider context, school leaders have
been urged not to be confined by (the in situ of) context (Day, 2005) and
attempt to abstract what successful leaders do across all contexts (Day
et al., 2011). On their face value, these assertions appear to contest
Harris and Jones’ (2017) insistence on the uniqueness of context and
suggest that a ‘less contextually dependent’ (Eacott, 2019a, p. 67)
approach to school leadership is what is needed.
        While recognising the influence of ‘socio, political, economic,
and professional contexts’, Day (2005, p. 575) also argues that
‘successful heads were driven primarily by individual value systems’.
Although individual value systems and what one does with, or as a
result of, them might impact on context, it can be deduced from the
above authors that those value systems arguably exist outside the
realm of context. The choice between the primacy of something other
than context, on the one hand, or the need to bracket everything else
deemed external, in order to examine an exclusively internal entity
called ‘context’, on the other, can be viewed as an obsolete dichotomy,
particularly when engaged in comparative educational leadership
research,    theory       and      practice       that     require       recognising   the
particularities of the in situ of context while moving beyond it (Sackey


                                                                                       727

                           Research in Educational Administration & Leadership
                                      6(3), September 2021, 724-740


& Mitchel, 2002, p. 909). This flight beyond a singular (aspect of)
context, in order to develop epistemologies that cut across contexts is,
arguably, firmly rooted on the specificity of context. In other words,
developing a sophisticated analysis of context for educational leaders
cannot be achieved if one is exclusively focused on immediate bearings
of a given location, while ignoring the overall cross-contextual map
and vice versa. By suggesting that school leaders be less confined by
context, Day (2005) and Day et al. (2011) arguably seek to recognise the
‘glocal’ contextual dynamism therein, in order to develop core
leadership practices upon which most successful school leaders draw
to embed themselves into unique contextual situations and devise
appropriate responses in order to achieve specific educational goals.
        It is, nevertheless, these not only pertinent but also contentious,
considerations about context and how leadership behaviours should
be in respect of them that make ‘a theory of context’ (Eacott, 2019a, p.
67) necessary and this article aims to do just that, while reframing
previous attempts in an effort to advance an arguably viable
understanding of and impactful (decolonising) approach to theorising
context when leading schools and researching and theorising
educational leadership, particularly in Africa. When recognising the
intricacy of the in situ and ex situ of context in the exercise of leadership
on which the success of schools depends, Day et al. (2011) use previous
research in educational leadership to theorise context as either an
‘antecedent’ or a ‘moderator’. A further concept that this article seeks to
add frames context as a ‘relation’ that is argued here from a critical
realist perspective.
Theorising Context as an Antecedent
        Shaping the notion of context as an antecedent is the perception
that a setting is not an empty vacuum; that context can be framed from


728

          Elonga Mboyo (2021). Theorising Context in Educational Leadership...




pre-existing conditions that need to be identified and matched with
appropriate leadership actions. The most fitting current analysis of
context that integrates studies by Clark and O’Donoghue (2017) comes
from Hallinger (2018). Hallinger’s theorising of six contexts through
institutional, community, national cultural, economic, political and
school improvement lenses can be framed as contextual variables
structuring a given setting that school leaders must seek to analyse,
understand and respond to with an appropriate ‘repertoire of
practices’ (Day et al., 2011, p. 7). The impact of these antecedent
conceptualisations of context on school leadership practice is real, as
Gurr et al. (2018, p. 40) noted that ‘behaviours and intentions on the
part of principals and other school leaders could be linked to each of
the [six] contexts’. If African national cultural context, for example,
finds its corresponding educational leadership approach, it could be
argued that context as antecedent has the potential to decolonise
educational leadership in Africa. However, while these bounded
normative, as well as critical, mechanisms for framing context are
useful in understanding key contextual factors, they structure school
leadership actions from an essentialist understanding of context. This
essentialist reading of context sidesteps various levels of complexity
and hybridity in which school leadership practice in Africa is enacted.
It also ignores the fact that (leadership) actions are not only add-ons to
a pre-existing context but constitutive of it.
Theorising Context as a Moderator
       While leaders approaching context as an antecedent seek to
impact on it, the moderating nature of context is conversely measured
on how contextual factors can ‘dampen or magnify the impact on
organisational outcomes of the same set of leadership practices’ (Day
et al., 2011, p. 7). This is particularly the case where leaders who are
less successful in one setting may thrive in another. What you get in

                                                                                 729

                           Research in Educational Administration & Leadership
                                      6(3), September 2021, 724-740


this conceptualisation is not only an ever-expanding list of leadership
behaviours/ styles in response to varying moderating factors but also
a re-examination of those in order to identify leadership models and
leaders’ traits that are more successful than others (Day et al., 2011). In
reality, context as a moderator does not provide an elaborate
breakdown of a theory of context. Hence, the extent to which context
as a moderator impacts on organisational outcomes, arguably only
goes to validate embodied leadership competencies that need the right
moderated context to unleash potential.
       Most educational leadership literatures are caught up in this
two-way traffic that either views context as an antecedent or a
moderator with educational theories that are shaped around those
notions of context. Although the styles, models of leadership, high
impact and ‘what most successful leaders do in most contexts’
repertoires are not developed outside context, their normative
positioning with regard to context as an antecedent or a moderator
have portrayed both context and leadership approaches from
essentialist and normative perspectives. Educational leadership has
arguably been built around establishing normative inventories of
(antecedent and/ or moderator) contextual factors or variables that, as
noted by Thorpe (2020), have tended to lead to refashioned school
leadership behaviours as tools for (new) liberal managerialism as a
dominant contextual factor. Here, context analysis can become a
mechanical inventory exercise of normative factors that either impacts
on leaders or on which school leaders exert actions. When the merit for
success for these leadership actions are determined by policy makers
in an increasingly neoliberal world, one dominant understanding of
context can easily prevail at the expense of others and structure
leadership behaviours that have prompted calls for pause, such as the
one by Harris and Jones (2017). As the objectification of context (as

730

          Elonga Mboyo (2021). Theorising Context in Educational Leadership...




antecedent and moderator…) is foregrounded, the role of relations that
would have given rise to these normative strands of context in the first
place often goes unnoticed. In this partially flawed understanding of
context, school leaders in various parts of the world, can be compared
to subjectively unengaged scientists, who attempt to objectively dissect
reified and compartmentalised components of context without
contamination of school leaders’ organising activity and other external
factors. The subjective relational involvement in what is effectively an
interplay of contextual factors within a cross-field is hardly articulated
as context. There is, therefore, the need to look through and beyond
the normative theorising of context in order to relationally frame both
the ex-situ and in-situ of context and enrich educational leadership
theorising and practice.
Theorising Context as a Relation
       This conceptualisation is primarily built around the need to
look beyond normative framing of context, in order to view it as an on-
going process and outcomes of agents’ (dis)enabled relations. It
recognises that context is not only an antecedent and/ or moderating
‘state’ but also an ‘act’ or, as framed here, a combination/ hybridisation
of both where, for instance, acting on contextual (antecedent and
moderators) states gives rise to new comparative, postcolonial,
TURNS-framed contextual relations to educational leadership, as
discussed through different contributions in this special issue. It is
worth noting that some theorists favour the bracketing (Eacott, 2019b),
flattening (Deleuze & Guittari, 1987) and stratifying (Baskhar, 1989) of
normative realities, or (states of) contexts in this case. This concluding
rejoinder, however, seeks to advance a relational critical realist
(stratified) reading of context to further cement a viable new departure
in decolonising educational leadership research, theorising and
practice in Africa and beyond.

                                                                                 731

                          Research in Educational Administration & Leadership
                                     6(3), September 2021, 724-740


       Notwithstanding      the     questionable         attempt        to      bracket
normativity as the focus shift to relations (Elonga Mboyo, 2019a),
Eacott’s (2019c) pioneering framing of context as ‘constitutive of and
emergent from activity’ (p. 69) breaks away from the normative
understandings of context as an antecedent and places agents/ auctors’
organising activity at the centre of the emergence of context. However,
Eacott’s focus on context as organising activity of relations only wishes
away the bracketed normative entities, of contexts as antecedents and
moderators in this case, without necessarily demonstrating how agents
(auctors) ward off, engage with and/ or transform normative
international political dictates of what works, for example, that Harris
and Jones (2017) noted can be used to override the in-situ of local
context. If the setting of a school is an open system where (the in-situ
and ex-situ of) mechanisms interact, Eacott’s bracketing of normative
(antecedent and moderator) contextual factors portrays auctors’
organising activity as emerging ex nihilo. In this normativity bracketed,
yet filled with relations, setting, Eacott’s (2019a) empirical study
further recommends three criteria, such as clarity, coherence and
narrative for high-impact leaders in context. In a nutshell, these
defining features of context portray high-impact school leaders as
needing to establish ‘the purpose/s for which a school is working and
demonstrating coherence (or at least naming the criteria by which one
wishes to be judged), [and] the generation of a narrative’ (Eacott,
2019a, p. 72). The reality, however, is that school leaders do not always
have the latitude to bracket normative antecedents of contexts or the
authority to set the criteria by which they are judged, as they are
compelled to implement top-down directives from (inter)national and
even local institutions with abusive and destructive consequences
(Courtney & Gunter, 2015; Harris & Jones, 2018; Krasikova, 2013). The
dominance of certain normative notions of context, whether they are


732

          Elonga Mboyo (2021). Theorising Context in Educational Leadership...




ex-situ (such as universal education policies) or in-situ (in the way of
local tyrannies) can be overcome by reframing context relationally and,
hopefully, within the thrust of this special issue, decolonise
educational leadership in Africa.
       To understand context as a relation from a critical realist
perspective then, involves first recognising that normative antecedents
and moderating factors of context are a real and stratified ontology
(Baskhar, 1989) of, in this case, context that is the bedrock of
educational leadership. Whether imposed or wilfully activated, the
generative presence or absence of these contextual mechanisms can
either perpetuate dominant mono-dimensional perceptions of contexts
or give voice to marginalised elements or forces of context. As part of
critical theories (of context) then, critical realism helps ‘to transcend
appearances and reveal enduring social structures that ratify special
interests and the status quo in society’ (Egbo, 2005, p. 268) and brings
out marginalised gendered, cultural, post-colonial voices, as raw
materials of context. For the most part, educational leadership
theorising reflects western normative approaches that have been
copied across contexts and effectively have perpetuated the colonial
narrative, not only in educational leadership but also the context upon
which the theorising should be rooted. In response, some critical
gender, cultural and postcolonial approaches to context can, arguably,
be said to overcompensate for their systemic exclusion in the ongoing
policy, practice, and research arenas. In so doing, they provide
uniquely exclusive perspectives based on an arguably legitimate
although insular reading of context that is not cognisant of the cross-
field and relational nature of context. When these critical voices are, in
turn, abstracted as bounded essentialist entities, they, I argue, only
echo a one-sided normative narrative of educational leadership in
context. The projected understanding of ‘context’ emerging from

                                                                                 733

                            Research in Educational Administration & Leadership
                                       6(3), September 2021, 724-740


critical approaches to educational leadership is still built on siloed
conceptualisations of context as ‘antecedent’, with arguably the only
difference being the foregrounding of previously marginalised
antecedent factors of context.
        While standing ‘within the stable of critical theories’ as
indicated above, critical realism still ‘stands apart’ (Thorpe, 2020, p.
39). It arguably ‘stands apart’, in that, it allows for the inclusion and
examination/ analysis of ‘a multiplicity of factors, of context in this case
– [my italics], which interact to produce a specific outcome’ (Stylianou,
2017, p. 977). When this is applied to theorising about ‘context’, in this
case and school leadership thereof, it arguably implies perceiving
context as an emergent reality resulting from agents’ organising
activity of all the stratified contextual realities.
        While this emergence (of context as a relation) can be understood
from    three     viewpoints:      unilateral        dependence,            taxonomic
irreducibility and causal irreducibility (see: Stylianou, 2017), the
unlabelled description of emergence in this article can be fully grasped
by reconsidering every antecedent and moderating factor that
constitutes context as formless capabilities which are non-neutral,
intentional and competing forces or potencies that relationally interact
through    agents’    organising       activity.      These      (antecedent      and
moderating) formless capabilities are the raw materials or mechanisms
of context in schools’ open systems; and they are so, not because they
are less important and less unique to their settings but rather because
they are incomplete. Although actual, meaning, existing in their
normative forms as antecedent or moderator, incomplete/ insufficient
contextual raw materials are not fully formed (hence, formless) in as
far as they need to be relationally acted upon to become complete and
arguably result in the flourishing or bringing about of something new



734

            Elonga Mboyo (2021). Theorising Context in Educational Leadership...




in a given setting. The in-situ of context that is a ‘cross-field’ of various
factors (Zulfakar, 2020) is, therefore, a zone of (in)completion (Elonga
Mboyo, 2019b) whose (incomplete or complete) processes and
outcomes, as we are being urged by Harris and Jones (2017) to pause
and reflect upon, are inextricably linked to agents’ organising activity.
Turning a zone or setting from that of incompletion to completion is
not an activity performed from without context but rather from within
it. Organising activity of the stratified layers of context is therefore part
and parcel of context as a zone of (in)completion.
        Decolonising educational leadership in Africa through
contextually responsive school leadership approaches (Reed &
Swaminathan, 2015), is therefore an enterprise that should consist of
relationally engaging with various raw materials of context in order to
develop school leadership approaches that effectively transform the
layered interacting raw elements of context from incompletion to
completion. The need to advance eclectic leadership approaches that
are consistent with and/ or based on the heterogeneity of context
cannot therefore be left to chance on the basis, for example, that ‘most
successful leaders are likely to embody most or all [the leadership]
approaches in their work’ (Bush & Glover, 2014, p. 565). It requires
conscious framing beyond a uni-dimensional perspective of context
and leadership. Articles in this special issue, therefore, set the tone for
a narrative that recognises the nature of context as a cross-field zone of
incompletion and call for or advance consistent models of
hybridisation when seeking to decolonise school leadership in Africa.
Relational critical realism therefore offers an additional valid
conceptual toolkit to ground such a decolonising mindset in African
contexts.




                                                                                   735

                           Research in Educational Administration & Leadership
                                      6(3), September 2021, 724-740


                                Conclusion

       This article has sought to advance an understanding of context
from a relational critical realist perspective. Context as a relation can
therefore be defined as the cross-field zone of incompletion whose
flourishing is constitutive of auctors’ organising activity. This does not
do away with previously theorised notions of context as antecedent
and moderator. These rather structurally layered contextual entities
(Donati, 2020) are instead recast as raw materials of context. Hence,
this article, and indeed this special issue, do not call for an elimination
or bracketing of these raw materials of context. The institutional,
community, national cultural, economic, political and school
improvement lenses (Hallinger, 2018) and many other siloed
normative and critical framings of context and educational leadership
are essential and it is not excluded that a call to pause and reconsider
context (Harris & Jones, 2017) might, for some, mean the exclusive
elevation of long-ignored cultural contexts, for example, and arguably
offer a decolonising educational leadership in Africa. This logic of
competition, in decolonising context and educational leadership, that
arguably defined modernity (Donati, 2014) is flipped here in favour of
relational logics that recognise networks of contextual relations that
need to emerge through agents’ organising activity.
       I therefore want to end this section, article and, indeed, this
special issue by addressing the so what question. This is done by way
of offering some considerations for both researchers and practitioners,
particularly when thinking about decolonising educational leadership
in Africa from a critical realist relational understanding of context. This
arguably requires a certain degree of (1) awareness of the heterogenous
nature of context, (2) engagement in the authoring of that glocal




736

           Elonga Mboyo (2021). Theorising Context in Educational Leadership...




context and (3) framing of consistent decolonising leadership
behaviours.
        An awareness of the heterogeneity of schooling environments
(Maringe Moletsane, 2015, p. 357) is necessary. It recognises context as
a cross-field of various factors that need to be identified; and that those
normative factors are incomplete raw materials of context that need
engagement. Engaging with raw materials of context is far from
mounting a counter-insurgency exercise seeking to occupy previously
dominated spaces. Here, the biological logic of survival of the fittest
(contextual factors) needs to be recast through relational logics
(Donati, 2014) within the stratified factors/ realities of context; and that
organising activity (otherwise referred to wrongly or not as leadership)
is therefore central when seeking to develop the most productive
hybridised relations that may lead, as argued in this special issue, to
the application of a comparative framework (Elonga Mboyo),
Multilateral model (Loomis and Akkari), TURNS model (Msila) and
Post-colonial framework (Morrosi) when leading schools in Africa.

                                      References

Bhaskar, R. (1989). Reclaiming reality. London: Verso.
Brooks, J. S., & Normore, A. H. (2010). Educational leadership and
       globalization: Literacy for a glocal perspective. Educational
       Policy, 24(1), 52-82.
Bush, T. (2011). Theories of educational leadership and management (4th ed.),
       London: Sage.
Bush, T & Glover, D. (2014). School leadership models: What do we
       know? School Leadership & Management, 34(5), 553-571
Courtney, S. & Gunter, H. (2015) Getoffmybus school leaders, vision
      work and the elimination of teachers. International Journal of
      Leadership in Education, 18(4), 395-417,


                                                                                  737

                          Research in Educational Administration & Leadership
                                     6(3), September 2021, 724-740


Day, C. (2005). Sustaining success in challenging contexts: Leadership
       in English schools. Journal of Educational Administration, 43(6),
       573-583.
Day, C., Sammons, P., Leitwood, K., Hopkins D., Gu Q., Brown, E &
       Ahtaridou, E. (2011). Successful school leadership: Linking with
       learning and achievement. Maidenhead: Open University Press.
Deleuze, G., & Guattari, F. (1987). A thousand plateaus: Capitalism and
      schizophrenia (B. Massumi, Trans.). Minneapolis, MN:
      University of Minnesota Press. (Original work published 1980)
Donati, P. (2014). Relational sociology, critical realism and social
       morphogenesis. Sociologia e Politiche Sociali, 17(1), 9-26.
Donati, P. (2020). Fluxes and structures: Which relational gaze? Polish
       Sociological Review, 210(2), 179-198.
Eacott , S. (2019a). High-impact school leadership in context, Leading
        and Managing, 25(2), 66-79.
Eacott, S. (2019b). The relational approach and social epistemology in
        educational leadership: A rejoinder. Research in Educational
        Administration & Leadership, 4(1), 166-193
Eacott, S. (2019c). Starting points for a relational approach to
       organisational theory. Research in Educational Administration &
       Leadership, 4(1),16-45.
Egbo,    B. (2005). Emergent paradigm: Critical realism and
        transformative research in educational administration. MCGill
        Journal of Education, 40(2), 267–284.
Elonga Mboyo, J. P. (2019a). Moving forward amidst the swirls:
      Reframing the relational approach as a step ‘beyond’
      leadership. Research in Educational Administration and Leadership
      (REAL), 4(1), 47-79.
Elonga Mboyo, J. P. (2019b). “A nuanced critical realist approach to
      educational policy and practice development: redefining the
      nature of practitioners’ agency.” Educational Philosophy and
      Theory, 51: 815-828

738

          Elonga Mboyo (2021). Theorising Context in Educational Leadership...




Gurr, D., Drysdale, L., Longmuir, F., & McCrohan, K. (2018). The
      Leadership, Culture and Context Nexus: Lessons from the
      Leadership of Improving Schools. International Studies in
      Educational Administration (Commonwealth Council for
      Educational Administration & Management (CCEAM)), 46(1).
Flikschuh, K. (2018) Kant’s contextualism. Kantian Review. Retrieved
       from
       http://eprints.lse.ac.uk/90302/1/Flikschuh_Kant%27s%20conte
       xtualism_2018.pdf
Hallinger, P. (2018) Bringing context out of the shadows of leadership.
       Educational Management, Administration & Leadership, 46(1), 5-
       24.
Harris, A., & Jones, M. (2017). Leading in context: Putting international
        comparisons into perspective. School Leadership and
        Management, 37 (5), 431-433.
Harris, A., & Jones, M. (2018). The dark side of leadership and
       management. School Leadership and Management, 38 (5), 475-477.
Krasikova, D. V., Green, S. G., & LeBreton, J. M. (2013). Destructive
       leadership: A theoretical review, integration, and future
       research agenda. Journal of Management, 39(5), 1308–1338.
Maringe, F., & Moletsane, R. (2015). Leading schools in circumstances
      of multiple deprivation in South Africa: Mapping some
      conceptual, contextual and research dimensions. Educational
      Management, Administration & Leadership, 43(3), 347-362.
McCormark, B., Kitson, A., Harvey G., Rycroft-Malone, J., Titchen, A.,
     and Seers K. (2002). Getting evidence into practice: The
     meaning of practice. Journal of Advanced Nursing, 38(1), 94-104.
O’Donoghue, T. A. and Clarke, S. (2010) Leading learning: Process,
      themes and issues in international contexts. London:
      Routledge.




                                                                                 739

                          Research in Educational Administration & Leadership
                                     6(3), September 2021, 724-740


O’Donoghue, T. A. & Clarke, S. (2017) Educational leadership and
      context: A rendering of an inseparable relationship. British
      Journal of Educational Studies, 65 (2), 167-182.
Reed, L., & Swaminathan, R. (2015). An urban school leader’s approach
       to school improvement: Towards contextually responsive
       leadership. Urban Education, 51(9), 1096-1125.
Rumsey, M. (Ed) (2013). The Oxford handbook of leadership. Oxford
     University Press.
Sackey, L., & Mitchell, C. (2002). Postmodern expressions of
       educational leadership. In K. Leithwood & P. Hallinger (Eds.),
       Second International Handbook of Educational Leadership and
       Administration (pp.881-913). Dordrecht: Kluwer Academic
       Publishers.
Stylianou, A. (2017). Absenting the absence (s) in the education of poor
       minority       ethnic     students:     A       critical   realist
       framework. International Journal of Inclusive Education, 21(10),
       975-990.
Thorpe, T. (2020). Why has critical realism not been used more in
      educational leadership and management research? A critical
      realist exploration, Journal of Critical Realism, 19:1, 29-44
Zulfakar, Z. (2020). Scientific inquiry in educational administration,
       International Journal of Multicultural and Multireligious
       Understanding, 7 (6), 100-111.
About the author:
Jean Pierre Elonga Mboyo is Senior Lecturer at Teesside University.
He teaches an undergraduate and postgraduate courses and
researches educational leadership.
Email: jp.elonga@tees.ac.uk
Twitter: @jpelong




740