A Study on the Effect of Japanese Parents’
          Participation in School Management System

                                       Wenyan Cui(B)

          School of Foreign Languages, Jiaying University, Meizhou 514015, China
                                 1259535884@qq.com



       Abstract. By examining the evolution and development of the Japanese parental
       participation in the school management system and its implementation effect, the
       characteristics of the Japanese parental participation in the school management
       system and the problems in practice are analyzed in detail. The study found that
       Japan has made continuous efforts to formulate and improve the laws and regula-
       tions related to parent participation in school management, safeguarding the rights
       of parents and clarifying the scope and responsibilities of parents participating in
       school management, laying a solid foundation for the sustainable development of
       parent participation in school management. According to the latest parent ques-
       tionnaire survey, although the main way for Japanese parents to participate in
       school management is Parent Teacher Association (PTA), parents actually want
       to participate in more ways. At present, the Japanese parent participation model is
       gradually developing from home-school cooperation to a three-party collaborative
       education model of schools, parents, and communities, and the three-party mutual
       supervision and self-evaluation mechanism is constantly being improved.

       Keywords: school management · parental participation · home-school
       cooperation · PTA



1 Introduction

Parent participation means that parents actively participate in the learning activities
or educational process of schools and local social organizations for the sake of their
children’s learning and growth. From the point of view of a child’s growth period, from
birth to adolescence, the school and the family share the responsibility for education. In
addition, from the perspective of the place where education is carried out, it is necessary
not only to pay attention to the educational activities carried out by the school, but
also to the educational process carried out by the family and the local society. Over the
years, many studies have pointed out that parental involvement has a positive impact
on the development of children and youth’s cognition, emotion, sociality, academic
achievement, and adaptation to school life [1–5].
    The awareness of the importance of parental participation is gradually increasing,
and parental participation in school management has also attracted social attention.
Parental participation in school management is an important measure for home-school

© The Author(s) 2023
L. F. Ying et al. (Eds.): ICELA 2022, ASSEHR 730, pp. 502–507, 2023.
https://doi.org/10.2991/978-2-38476-004-6_62

                   A Study on the Effect of Japanese Parents’ Participation in SMS       503

cooperation to carry out educational activities and to try to strengthen and improve
school education management. In order to promote the effective participation of parents
in school management, it is necessary to continuously improve relevant laws and sys-
tems. Countries have been working hard to promote parental participation in the school
management system, and have adopted a variety of parental participation methods [6].
This study will specifically introduce and analyze the experience of Japanese parents
participating in the school management system, and discuss the actual effect of partici-
pating in school management from the perspective of parental evaluation, thus provide
an effective reference for improving the relevant system in our country.


2 Overview of Japanese Parental Participation in School
  Management System
2.1 The Development Process of Japanese Parents’ Participation in the School
    Management System

Since the introduction of the modern school system in Japan during the Meiji period, the
construction and maintenance of schools at all levels were financed by local residents in
principle. The school funds were insufficient at that time. Therefore, in order to reduce the
financial burden of school operation, many civic group which are composed of parents
and district residents. These organizations mainly provide financial support to schools
and are basically not involved in educational activities.
     In the early Showa period, due to the impact of the war, the group activities of par-
ents were temporarily suspended. After World War II, the educational mission sent by
the United States published the first report of the U.S. educational mission in Japan.
In the “Administrative Measures for Primary and Secondary School Education”, it is
specifically pointed out that “in order to improve the welfare of students and improve
educational programs, the education director of the Education Committee is obliged to
encourage the establishment of PTA”, indirectly proposes the PTA concept, and empha-
sized its importance [7]. The initial PTA was not formed spontaneously, but was semi-
mandatory under the proposal of the Supreme Commander of the United Nations. In the
short time after that, PTA were quickly established in schools across Japan. In addition,
various non-governmental parent organizations were soon established. For example, the
“Japan Child Protection Association” was established in 1952; the “Mothers and Female
Teachers Association” was found in 1953 etc.
     Although the parent organization was established for the purpose of revitalizing
education, in fact, in the process of development, its role is mainly to provide mate-
rial assistance to schools. In 1967, the Tokyo Minister of Education issued an official
document to each district board of education on “Setting the Standard for Compulsory
Education School Operation Fees and Eliminating the Private Burden by Public Funds”,
which alleviated the parents’ involvement in school management by PTA. There have
also been voices questioning the PTA in the society. In 1969, the Hyogo prefectural
education group proposed the disbandment and adaptation of the PTA [8]. However,
the main channel for parental participation is still PTA. In addition to the PTA, many
schools have established various parent organizations. In 1989, Tokyo established the

504        W. Cui

first school support association. Since then, many schools have also established support
associations, scholarship associations and other parent associations.
     Entering the 21st century, Japanese parents have more opportunities to directly par-
ticipate in school management decisions and educational activities. For instance, the
school councilor system established in 2000 and the school operation council system
established in 2004 explicitly require parents to directly participate in school operations.
It clearly requires parents to participate in specific educational activities and after-school
activities of the school [9]. The purpose of this series of measures is to enable more groups
to participate in the existing school management and education activities centered on
teachers and staff, to achieve mutual cooperation, and to promote the joint management
of schools and the construction of “open schools”.

2.2 Relevant Laws on Parental Participation in School Management System
    in Japan
Japanese parental participation system and laws are first and foremost based on the “Ba-
sic Law of Education”. It is clearly stated that “schools, families, community residents
and other relevant personnel must recognize their respective roles and responsibilities
for education, and strive for mutual cooperation”. In addition, in the development of
the Japanese parental participation system, the government has also promulgated many
related bills. For example, the “School Education Law” specifically requires primary
schools to actively provide information on school educational activities and other school
operations in order to promote contact and cooperation with parents, community resi-
dents and other relevant persons. The “Local Education Administration Law” stipulates
that members of local public organizations should include parents. In order to effec-
tively supervise the implementation of PTA activities, the “PTA Youth Education Group
Mutual Aid Law” was specially established in 2010. The continuous improvement of rel-
evant laws has promoted the implementation and development of parents’ participation
in the school management system.


3 Analysis of the Effect of Japanese Parents’ Participation
  in School Management
The Benesse Educational Research and Development Institute has conducted a “Parents’
Awareness Survey on School Education” among Japanese primary and secondary school
parents every five years on average since 2004. This long-term large-scale questionnaire
survey has well reflected the actual effect of parental participation in school management
in Japanese primary and secondary schools in the past ten years from the perspective of
parental evaluation.
    The latest statistics show that the proportion of parents who are satisfied with their
children’s school has continued to increase from 73.1% in 2004 to 83.8% in 2018 [10].
On the whole, while the parental participation system and laws have been continu-
ously improved, parents’ satisfaction with the school has also increased accordingly,
and has now reached the highest level in history. This reflects the effective participation
of Japanese parents in school management in recent years. For example, with regard to

                   A Study on the Effect of Japanese Parents’ Participation in SMS     505

"communicating the school’s educational policies and guidance to parents", the num-
ber of satisfied parents of primary school students increased by 15.1%, and the number
of parents of middle school students increased by 12.8%; about "teacher’s enthusiasm
for education", the number of satisfied parents of primary school students increased by
12.1%, and parents of middle school students increased by 16.5%. This not only repre-
sents the affirmation of the work of the school and the teachers by parents, but also fully
shows that the parents have close contact and communication with the school and the
teachers, and have a good understanding of the situation of the school and the teachers.
    In addition, in the future, the proportion of parents who hope that the school will
“communicate to parents about their children’s school attendance”, “allow parents to ask
questions and consult at any time”, and “communicate the school’s educational policy to
parents” has been as high as about 90% in the past 14 years since 2004. This shows that
the parents have long been eager to communicate with the school in a timely manner, and
generally very concerned to school education management. In contrast, the proportion
of parents who want to “improve the system for parents to support educational activities”
and “can freely visit schools at any time” is slowly decreasing, only 60% of the total
number of parents. The parents who wanted “a committee of parent representatives to
decide the school’s educational policy” was about 37.2%. It can be seen that although
parents pay close attention to school operation and management, their attitude to the
actual participation is not very positive. In particular, when it comes to school affairs,
which has certain responsibilities, such as deciding school policies, parents are clearly
showing a negative attitude.
    This survey also includes the important content of parents’ participation in the actual
school management. The most answered option by parents is “PTA officer”. It shows
that about 25.3% of primary school parents and 20.5% of middle school parents par-
ticipate in school management through PTA. This was followed by 23.3% of primary
school parents and 11.8% of middle school parents participating in the “tour to protect
children’s safety”. The proportion of parents who participated in the activities such as
“deciding school policies” and “supporting school education” was very small. It can be
seen that in the actual affairs related to school management, most of the parents partic-
ipate in “volunteer activities”, and only a small number of parents are involved in the
core management of school decision-making and operation. It is worth noting that with
regard to choosing “school activities that are willing to participate”, the proportion of
parents who choose various activities, such as “school decision-making, education and
management” is about 10%–20%. It can be seen that although the current popular option
is on volunteer activities, parents also want to participate in more diverse activities in
the future.


4 Conclusions
From the actual experience of Japanese parents participating in school management, it
can be found that the continuous improvement of relevant systems and laws has promoted
the actual participation of parents. Especially since the beginning of the 21st century,
with the implementation of various reforms of the parent participation system, parents’
satisfaction with the school has been significantly improved. Although the culture of

506        W. Cui

parents participating in educational activities as the main body of social education has
not been fully popularized, compared with the past, the awareness of participation of
parents is increasing, and their specific activities involved in school management are also
developing in a diversified direction. The “Basic Law of Education”, “School Education
Law”, “PTA · Youth Education Group Mutual Aid Law” and other relevant laws not only
safeguard the rights of parents, but also clarify the scope and responsibilities of parents’
participation in school management. The establishment of systems such as the school
operation council system and the “after-school children’s plan” has become a norm that
specifically guides parents to participate in school management. Therefore, in order to
enable parents to participate in the sustainable development of school management, it is
necessary to continuously improve the relevant laws and systems as a basis.
    In addition, creating more opportunities for parents to actually participate in school
management will help cultivate parents’ awareness of educational subjectivity and fur-
ther improve the effect of parents’ participation in school management. At present,
the main way for Japanese parents to participate in school management is PTA. The
actual survey shows that parents prefer to participate in all-round by participating in
actual classrooms, reading activities, after-school tutoring and evaluation committees of
school activities. The interaction between schools and parents not only affects family
education, but also plays an important role in school education. Therefore, it is necessary
to create more opportunities for parents to become the main body of school education
and give full play to the role of parents in school education.
    At present, the reform of Japanese parental participation in school management
system is still in progress, and the parental participation model is gradually shifting
from the “bilateral” structure of “parent-school” to the “multilateral” structure of “parent-
school-community”. That is, the way Japanese parents participate in school management
is not limited to the school, but further extends to the community. Parents work with the
community to participate in school education. The Japanese parental participation in the
school system and its related laws fully embody the concept of collaborative education.
Schools, parents, and communities are building a new collaborative education model,
and constantly improving the supervision and self-evaluation mechanism among the
three parties. Although this school management model involving the participation of
three parties has not yet been fully popularized, it is possible to foresee a new direction
for the reform of the school management system in the future. The development of
parents’ participation in school management system is gradually becoming mature in
China, and it will also face various challenges. The school management system will be
improved by constantly innovating the mode of parent participation.


References
 1. J. S. Coleman, E. Q. Campbell, C. J. Hobson et al., Equality of educational opportunity.
    Washington, DC: U.S. Government Printing Office, 1966.
 2. J. L. Epstein, School, Family, Community Partnerships: Caring for the children we share. Phi
    Delta Kappan, 2010, vol. 92, pp. 701–712. https://doi.org/10.1177/003172171009200326
 3. K.V. Hoover-Dempsey, H.M. Sandler, Parental involvement in children’s education: Why
    does it make a difference? Teachers College Record, 1995, vol. 2, pp. 310–331. https://doi.
    org/10.1177/016146819509700202

                     A Study on the Effect of Japanese Parents’ Participation in SMS            507

 4. Q.G. Yang, A Frame work for Family Involvement in Teacher Education Courses, Teacher
    Education Research, 2007, vol. 3, pp. 51–55. https://doi.org/10.3969/j.issn.1672-5905.2007.
    03.012
 5. X.Y. Xia, Socioeconomic Status and Children’s School Readiness Skills: The Mediating Role
    of Parental Involvement, Forum on contemporary education, 2020, vol. 5, pp. 64–73.
 6. X. Qiu, A comparative study of Chinese and foreign parents’ participation in school manage-
    ment, Primary & Secondary Schooling Abroad, 2006, vol. 12, pp. 25–28, 32. https://doi.org/
    10.3969/j.issn.1007-8495.2006.12.005.
 7. National Council of Japan PTA, History of Japan PTA, Chapter 1 Section 1, The Birth of the
    PTA, https://n-pta.sakura.ne.jp/jigyou/ayumi/ayumi01.html
 8. National Council of Japan PTA, History of Japan PTA, Chapter 3 Section 1, Activities of
    social education groups, https://n-pta.sakura.ne.jp/jigyou/ayumi/ayumi03.html
 9. K. Sato, Report on “Overview of International comparison of leisure activities: Survey of
    couples in Japan, the United States, France, and Korea”, Chapter 7, 2008, pp. 133–148.
10. Benesse Educational Research and Development Institute, Survey of Parents’ Awareness of
    School Education, 2018.




Open Access This chapter is licensed under the terms of the Creative Commons Attribution-
NonCommercial 4.0 International License (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc/4.0/),
which permits any noncommercial use, sharing, adaptation, distribution and reproduction in any
medium or format, as long as you give appropriate credit to the original author(s) and the source,
provide a link to the Creative Commons license and indicate if changes were made.
     The images or other third party material in this chapter are included in the chapter’s Creative
Commons license, unless indicated otherwise in a credit line to the material. If material is not
included in the chapter’s Creative Commons license and your intended use is not permitted by
statutory regulation or exceeds the permitted use, you will need to obtain permission directly from
the copyright holder.