Revista Ibero- Americana de Humanidades, Ciências e Educação- REASE




                                                                                          doi.org/ 10.51891/rease.v8i3.4754

       HOMOSEXUALITY AND ''SCHOOL MANAGEMENT'' PROBLEMATIZING
                CONCEPTS OF DESTROYING PREJUDICES

    HOMOSSEXUALIDADE E ''GESTÃO ESCOLAR'' PROBLEMATIZANDO CONCEITOS DE
                      DESTRUIÇÃO DE PRECONCEITOS

                                                Marleide Maria1
                                         Diogenes José Gusmão Coutinho2


RESUMO: É necessário para que tenhamos uma boa compreensão sobre a homossexualidade tanto
dentro como fora do espaço escolar. Sobre as pesquisas aqui citadas levando em consideração em
relação a homofobia causando não só sofrimento como violência. A orientação sexual é um estimulo
intrínseco ao ser humano, seja heterossexual ou homossexual, para tanto, faz-se necessário trabalhar e
discutir este assunto dentro da sala de aula, onde o/ou professor (a) deve está preparado para qualquer
momento em que surgir o debate é um assunto pertinente e complexo por que aborda várias situações,
tais como: escola, família, sociedade, diferenças sociais, religião, economia e política. Sendo assim,
devemos pensar na escola como um universo de relações sem fronteiras, onde aqui se aborda todas os
assuntos em diferentes níveis de situação, é conquistando e enfrentando desafios, valorizando as
diversidades, combatendo a discriminação e violência em todos os sentidos seja de gênero, étnico,
racial ou mesmo da orientação sexual. Para isso, educar a valorização da diversidade não é tarefa só de
um, mais, sim de todos que compõe o mesmo espaço. Essa temática faz parte de uma educação, de
                                                                                                                              1676
uma escola aberta a um público polemico mais consciente de que a discriminação gera violência, sendo
assim, abrir a porta da conscientização do respeito e da alteridade para construirmos um universo
escolar mais democrático.

Palavras-Chave: Homossexualidade. Orientação sexual. Discriminação. Violência e respeito.


ABSTRACT: It is necessary for us to have a good understanding of homosexuality both inside and
outside the school space. About the research cited here taking into account homophobia causing not
only suffering but also violence. Sexual orientation is an intrinsic stimulus to human beings, whether
heterosexual or homosexual, therefore, it is necessary to work and discuss this subject within the
classroom, where the/or teacher must be prepared for any time when arising the debate is a pertinent
and complex subject because it addresses several situations, such as: school, family, society, social
differences, religion, economy and politics. Therefore, we must think of school as a universe of
relationships without borders, where all issues are addressed here at different levels of situation, it is
conquering and facing challenges, valuing diversities, fighting discrimination and violence in all
senses, whether gender , ethnic, racial or even sexual orientation. For this, educating the appreciation
of diversity is not just a task for one, but for everyone who makes up the same space. This theme is
part of an education, of a school open to a controversial public that is more aware that discrimination
generates violence, thus opening the door to the awareness of respect and alterity in order to build a
more democratic school universe.


Keywords: Homosexuality. Sexual Orientation. Discrimination. Violence and Respect.

1
    Master pedagogue in education.
2
    Doctor of Biology. E- mail: gusmao.diogenes@gmail.com


                 Revista Ibero-Americana de Humanidades, Ciências e Educação. São Paulo, v.8.n.03. mar. 2022.
                                                   ISSN - 2675 – 3375

                 Revista Ibero- Americana de Humanidades, Ciências e Educação- REASE




   1. INTRODUCTION

       It is important to open the door to awareness of respect and otherness in order to
build a democratic social and school universe. In this sense, the theme of homo affectivity,
which we will problematize here in this research work, should be a theme addressed under
the profile and look of Human Rights.
       The complexity of this theme is part of a very comprehensive education not only of
society but also of school education that does not cover a teaching and learning process that
takes into account the elimination of prejudices and discrimination, so it is important that we
discuss and dialogue on this subject that emerges in Brazilian society, it is a pertinent subject
with a peculiar vision. Sexual relations were not hierarchical through a distension of those
who practiced and opted for homo or heterosexual habits.
       According to Dr. Dráuzio Varella: Homosexuality is an island surrounded by
ignorance, discrimination and violence on all sides. What is the idea we make about
homosexuality and those who think that homosexuality is an aberration of nature is pure
ignorance, even between animals and primates has homosexual behaviors. Heterosexuality.                     1677

The desire of the human being is uncontrollable plus the behavior can be controlled. For Luiz
Roberto Mott (2003), homosexuality means "equal sex" And can be applied both to the man
who relates to a man and to a woman who relates to women.
       History shows for centuries and for decades a transformation in the understanding of
homosexuality in the Middle Ages was clear the prejudice found in religions for the church
was a sin, that bizarre sin is this if between two people of the same sex there is only love.
       It is necessary and I am interested to explain the theme by which I chose about
homosexuality where i aroused in me the curiosity about the behavior of the human being in
questioning about the external aspect, evaluating his attitude, his way, way of sitting,
speaking, walking and looking. They are aspects visible to human eyes, where the deepest
question comes from the interior that is not always respected and valued every human being
is worthy of respect, is unique and has its peculiarity, its honor, truth, dignity and loyalty are
intrinsic virtues that are no longer visible, are revealed through their acts and attitudes that
are also ignored because of their external.




             Revista Ibero-Americana de Humanidades, Ciências e Educação. São Paulo, v.8.n.03. mar. 2022.
                                               ISSN - 2675 – 3375

                 Revista Ibero- Americana de Humanidades, Ciências e Educação- REASE




This theme covers a whole such as: family, school, community, society, politics and religion.
So is his own story that was generated since the dawn of civilization.
       The main objective of this research is to help identify the relationship of parents,
students, teachers, managers, as well as the community and society through lectures, forums
and debates in questioning concepts about people who act prejudiced against homosexuals.
This objective allowed further studies around this problem in identifying the relationship of
prejudiced people acting in a stupid to arbitrary way. Specifically along this trajectory, the
understanding of this subject is developed not only in school, community and society, where
it generates several debates highlighting the family as its main agent.
       Its methodology is rich and has a complex and at the same time inspiring theme of
awareness that the human being can not be restricted from your desire, limiting himself to a
greater desire to be bullied because of his sexual orientation, tracing himself inside the closet
so that he is not the target of discrimination, violence and evil prejudice. This reality affects
thousands of thoughtful beings with their own exclusivity and identity whether female or
male, hence the importance of understanding and supporting the family protecting and                             1678
assisting in every stage of life, child, adolescent and adults. The discussions are based on the
family, school, community and society, and everyone is responsible and respected for the
other and their sexual orientation.
       Being the family our first civilization has a very deep context in relation to support,
the school as hurry as it is in its traditional form, wanting or not suffered and undergoes
transformations in relation to a view on homosexuality. Is the school prepared for open
dialogues on sexual orientation, which is a cross-cutting topic, where debates and discussions
are fundamental and urgent in social life. The reality is that the school lives with sexual
manifestations day by day, in fact the school is a gateway to sex life without labels.
                       Homosexuality at school is like a devious, amoral practice, outside the acceptable
                       standards for an educational process, or it is simply silenced, perceived, but ignored.
                       (ABRAMOVAY,2004).

2. METHODOLOGY

   It is of paramount importance to understand the students' view of this theme, because it
is observed today that the school environment is predominantly female and there is a great
scarcity of men in the teaching profession, especially in Early Childhood Education, since,


             Revista Ibero-Americana de Humanidades, Ciências e Educação. São Paulo, v.8.n.03. mar. 2022.
                                               ISSN - 2675 – 3375

                 Revista Ibero- Americana de Humanidades, Ciências e Educação- REASE




according to data from the School Census (INEP, 2020), in Early Childhood Education,
593,000 teachers work, 96.4% female and 3.6% male.
   Early Childhood Education is not just about educating, because it is necessary that care
and education be integrated in this stage of Basic Education so that students have a full full
development considering that caring and educating are extremely important for the whole
development of the child respecting space/time and thus contributing to the full education of
the child. According to LDBnº 9394/96 Early Childhood Education is:

3. THEORETICAL BASIS

3.1 HISTORICAL SCENARIO ON HOMOSEXUALITY

   In this chapter it is of paramount importance to list his trajectory seeking to expand the
knowledge about this research in the universe of homosexuality, for which he was chosen.
Such research leads us to a conception of conjugal age in contemporary times
       This work initially aims at the history of homosexuality bringing its history into the
school universe. according to the Etymological Dictionary: Homosexuality and its                            1679

etymological definition of the word homosexual, from the Greek Homo meaning "the same"
with the classical Latin sexes which literally means "sex". So the literal translation for this
term would be "the same sex". And other terms originated from this word as homosexuality
and homosexuality only that the latter is in disuse for relating sexual orientation as if it were
a psychiatric disease
       According to the history of humanity, homosexuality is not a current subject and it
has been becoming eons after eons. for better understanding and understanding of the subject
addressed taking into account education, it is necessary to review a little of history seeking
knowledge about the famous island of Lesbos of Ancient Greece.
       As a main figure, we have to take into account the story of the Greek poet Safo who
was born on the island of Lisbon in the 7th century to.c, was one of the oldest writers of
mankind.
       Plato two centuries later, refers to her as "the muse decade" Safo Belonged to a society
called "Thiasos", where women were prepared home. She was a poetry teacher, founded a
school of literature, her disciples were in love with her. According to her poems (totally


             Revista Ibero-Americana de Humanidades, Ciências e Educação. São Paulo, v.8.n.03. mar. 2022.
                                               ISSN - 2675 – 3375

                 Revista Ibero- Americana de Humanidades, Ciências e Educação- REASE




autobiographical), the writer had relationships with her students, hence the expression
"lesbian" for homosexual women because of the place where the poetiza lived.
The poetiza de safo proves that homosexuality is really very old and that it was accepted in
antiquity. Taking into account this research for the school universe it is important to read
and appropriate knowledge for several reasons: 1° show the timelessness of poetry, that of
safo is more than 2,600 years old; 2° its undeniable historical value; 3rd use and customs of
the time; 4° know the basis of literary doing.
       A priori sexuality is not something abnormal and dark is a biological, psychological
and social stimulus, which must be understood with various perspectives, with the evolution
of time Sexuality today has a social and cultural notion, as well as heterosexuality that is a
sexual orientation of attracting people of the opposite sex to homosexuality has attraction to
people of the same sex, while bisexuality attraction to be given to people of the same sex and
the opposite sex, example of this is that it has men who are in the likes of men, women who
are in order to women, women in order to men and women and men in order to men and
women.                                                                                                          1680
       Today it is common for gay couples to go hand in hand walking in the streets, bars,
parties, cinemas and every day that passes this freedom becomes greater. Every day we learn
to live in society, we learn to socialize inside and outside the school is where students know
their rights and duties to which they express their opinions, respecting the differences, in this
case being the teacher a mediator of knowledge Where it is being discussed it is necessary to
work to change certain adverse opinions, knowing that it is not an easy task because the child
as the adolescent already has his idea formed inherited by the children's education and
education.
                         Only the human spirit invents categories and strives to make the facts correspond to
                         separate Bins, (...) the sooner we understand that this principle governs the sexual
                         behavior of man, the sooner reaching a wholesome understanding of the realities of
                         sex.

       Knowing and being aware of the difficulties that are many to work in the classroom,
because of this some debates about sexual orientation can cause embarrassment for some
students because it is a sensitive subject and repressed by society causing conflicts between
school and parents who are most often totally uninformed.



             Revista Ibero-Americana de Humanidades, Ciências e Educação. São Paulo, v.8.n.03. mar. 2022.
                                               ISSN - 2675 – 3375

                 Revista Ibero- Americana de Humanidades, Ciências e Educação- REASE




       It is important to highlight that educational actions in schools begin in childhood, pre-
adolescence and adolescence because it will strengthen and strengthen knowledge about sex
education, demystifying issues related to Homosexuality and lesbianism. These are issues
that are linked to the understanding of interrelation as social, political, economic and
cultural. Thus, the school is a space of social relations, where there the root of friendship is
fruitful. In this case both the family and the school must act together to combat
discrimination that causes much suffering and psychological injuries such as verbal and
bodily aggression, where thousands of gays are victims. According to GIDDENS (1993 p.23),
[...] Homosexuals still face a deeply rooted prejudice and, very commonly, open violence[...].
       According to the theme homosexuality is quite complex to evaluate such a subject to
be addressed in a society that is not only heterosexual, but markedly heteronormative (RIOS,
2007), heterosexuality is instituted as standard, and naturally presents itself as identity and
sexual expression.
       Thus, this research aims to understand the issues of homophobia, it is necessary an in-
depth reflection on the various dimensions of human sexuality. Certainly, the family and the                1681
school live with this complexity, which is undoubtedly a challenge. The approach to the
subject at school makes some parents and educators anxious and fearful. It is important to
understand that respect for differences should be present in the school curriculum, and
establishes a set of three things parents, students and school to inform and guide is the first
step towards breaking prejudice.
       The national curricular parameters (PCNs) are proposed by the Ministry of
Education to contribute to the teacher the best form of teaching i.e. it is an instrument for the
teacher in the support of pedagogical discussions in the preparation of educational projects, in
the planning of classes, in the reflection on educational practice and also in the analysis of
didactic material enabling the teacher to update himself professionally (BRASIL, 2000). The
school plays an important role in the process of awareness of the child's body and the
subject's education, the school institution, by Tradition, by classifying the subjects by social
class, ethnicity and Sex, have historically contributed to reproduce and hierarchize
differences. Thus puts the margins those who do not comply with the norm of power and
certainly does not contemplate the inclusion of the sexual diversity proposed today. This



             Revista Ibero-Americana de Humanidades, Ciências e Educação. São Paulo, v.8.n.03. mar. 2022.
                                               ISSN - 2675 – 3375

                 Revista Ibero- Americana de Humanidades, Ciências e Educação- REASE




scenario opens a reflection on the role of education in combating homophobia, in the
implementation of the actions that are mentioned in the National curriculum parameters
(1997) for sexual orientation, which seeks to promote the construction of a fair and impartial
society that guarantees human rights.
       The school because it is an institution where knowledge is sheltered should not be left
with arms crossed since the issues related to Sexuality are not restricted only in the
individual sphere. Therefore it is extremely important that the school, within its curriculum
seek so much time to discuss this subject. The PCNs were conceived as an answer and
solutions to most educational problems in Brazil, and the insertion in the Federal
Constitution of 1988, of themes derived from social movements, such as ethnic-racial, the
environment, sexuality and gender, forgotten since the projects of the 19770s (CÉSAR, 2004).
       Inspired by the Spanish reform organized by the popular party, ultraconservative, in
the early 90's, Brazilian education took to itself the conception of transversal themes and
instituted sex education as a theme to be worked on us PCNs. According to OLIVEIRA
(2007), considers that Sexuality involves beyond our body, our history, our customs, our                         1682
affective relations, our culture. To talk about sexuality is to talk about one's own life.
        The conclusion is that the school brings the knowledge that helps to understand and
face the challenges of life, has a fundamental role in the development of the sexuality of
young people, in school studying sexuality means ending taboos and crendices, ensuring
greater equality in relations between women and men, improving the quality of life. Source:
Teachers' articles/ sexual orientation: A reflection on PCNs.

THE TEACHER IN THE CONSTRUCTION OF KNOWLEDGE

       In this Chapter, we will conceptualize the problematization of homosexuality in the
construction of knowledge, mainly addressing the early stages of sexuality during childhood
and adolescence, emphasizing the development of the human being and how homosexuality
is seen in school, community and society.

                        A schooled body is able to sit for many years and probably has the freedom to express
                        gestures and behaviors indicative of interests and attention, even if false. A body
                        disciplined by the school is trained in silence and in a certain model of speech,
                        conceives and uses time and space in a particular way hands, eyes and ears are trained
                        for intellectual tasks, but possibly inattentive or clumsy for many others.



             Revista Ibero-Americana de Humanidades, Ciências e Educação. São Paulo, v.8.n.03. mar. 2022.
                                               ISSN - 2675 – 3375

                 Revista Ibero- Americana de Humanidades, Ciências e Educação- REASE




       Thus, we can say that the school is a consecrated space for such a discussion where
the difference and its diversity in the school environment stand out. the purpose of the public
school as well, as the private school is to identify in an expressive way its relationship and its
social, economic and cultural characteristics of the students. We can say that the school is a
outer space, obstinate in the production and reproduction of the school universe where
prejudices, discrimination, racism, homophobic, lesbian and straight circulate, it is in this
interaction that constitutes a policy of cultural production and multidiversity in order to
express diverse opinions, criticisms and ideas where an alternative space is created for
discussions of various topics such as politics and education.
        Prejudice, discrimination and violence that affects male and female homosexuals
restricting their basic rights of citizenship, is aggravated by everything in relation to
transgender people.
                       These people, when building their bodies, their ways of being, expressing themselves
                       and acting, cannot pass unknown, because they tend to be unwilling to conform to the
                       pedagogy of the closet, situated at the lower levels of "sexual stratification".

DEBATES AND DISCUSSIONS IN THE CLASSROOM ON HOMOSEXUALITY                                                       1683


           In order to have a greater and more clear understanding of homosexuality inside
   and outside the school universe, it is necessary to association Sex and Sexuality, sex is an
   organ of the human body that serves to differentiate the male from the feminine, and
   Sexuality is everything that relates to sex, in other words Sexuality is a sexual
   orientation be straight, homosexual, bisexual and trans... For the school what would then
   be the most appropriate way to discuss about Sexuality which is:

                         Second, Carol Rutz, there needs to be a bond between education professionals and
                         students, so that both of them feel comfortable when dealing with the theme and to
                         express that the orientations are assimilated." You have to listen to both sides and
                         know how to balance the situation, there is no ready formula.
       Thus, the school is far from being a harmonious and homogenous place is a place of
disputes and rivalries associating with different groups of people and different cultures and
etc. (WARNER, 1993) says: that the school is a stubborn space in the production,
reproduction and updating of the parameters of heteronormativity a set of disposition
(discourse values and practices).




             Revista Ibero-Americana de Humanidades, Ciências e Educação. São Paulo, v.8.n.03. mar. 2022.
                                               ISSN - 2675 – 3375

                  Revista Ibero- Americana de Humanidades, Ciências e Educação- REASE




       Through which heterosexuality is instituted and experienced as a natural and
legitimate possibility of expression. (Pedagogical closet heterosexism and gender surveillance
in school daily life, p. 66) Second, a report by a teacher, at preschool parties we used to
distribute colorful balloons. This year, a 5-year-old boy got the last one, he didn't want to
because it was pink. He was tense and did not play, to those who passed by him he explained:

                          I didn't choose this balloon, I'm a man." Then I realized I was afraid dad would see
                          him with that balloon, so I took the case to the coordination, and she told us not to
                          make pink balloons in the classes where we have boys.
       In the social world of school, daily life and curriculum are interlinked and mutually
and inextricably involved, throughout a vast production of discourse, utterances, gestures
and occurrences in the wake of situations in which knowledge is constructed, subjects,
identities, differences, hierarchies. CAMARGO AND MARIGUELA, 2007, p.64). Rogério
Diniz Junqueira, says: in this article seeks to reflect on the dimensions of heteronormativity
present in the school routine that permeate the curriculum, compose networks of powers,
control and Surveillance, promote the management of the Borders of (Straight) normality,
produce classifications, hierarchies, privileges, stigmatization, marginalization, compromise                     1684

the right to quality education and mediate the exercise of a mutilated citizenship. (The
pedagogy of the closet: heterosexism and gender surveillance in school daily life, p. 64). It is
clear the teacher's account with her 5-year-old student, her concern in this house was more
with the reaction of the student's father to see holding a pink balloon, hence, to feel that
prejudice, discrimination comes from the family because the tall child defends himself. In the
second report a teacher says: in my school had a very feminine student, everyone made
debauchery of him saying that he was a little woman. He was showing up more and more
with women's things, he said he was a transvestite, wanted to be treated with a female name
and go to the ladies' room. People said they didn't want a man in the women's bathroom,
everybody said to quit this life, he left school.

AWARENESS THAT DISCRIMINATION GENERATES VIOLENCE

       In the report of a school principal, a "problem" arose. A six-year-old student who,
being considered feminine, concludes to be homosexual. She advised him to "stop
mismuning so as not to attract the wrath of others", ignoring the processes of reification,


              Revista Ibero-Americana de Humanidades, Ciências e Educação. São Paulo, v.8.n.03. mar. 2022.
                                                ISSN - 2675 – 3375

                 Revista Ibero- Americana de Humanidades, Ciências e Educação- REASE




marginalization and dehumanization conducted by the institution, as well as all physical
violence to which it is routinely subjected. However, only a heteroregulatory disciplinary
fury can make someone identify/anticipate and contribute (as a damning sensation)
homosexuality to a child and not be concerned about the violence to which it is subjected,
collectively and institutionally. The child from an early age is taught to stop desecration
through denials, interdictions, limitations we are taught to be captured by numerous devices.
That is why it is so easy to reproduce prejudices and reproduce the discriminatory activities
of culture. Unfortunately, as much as we perceive media discourses in defense of diversity
both in the media and in the teacher training and training manuals, the school has so far not
done well with human diversity.
       Perhaps a new school still dirty to silence such a statement. It is precisely in the
school that we are trained, to behave, to speak, to silence, to listen, to opine, to learn, are
lessons that we learn in daily life to live with differences. According to the author of this
article Fabrício de Souza Sampaio. He comes to the conclusion that the great villain of
prejudices and discrimination is the dictatorship of the genre where they were created                      1685
precisely to reproduce and maintain the things that enclose their can. In addition, you can
comment perhaps on a reflection on the cultural arbitrariness of exclusionary and inhuman
practices based on social markers: gender sex and sexuality.

THE SCHOOL STILL THE MOST SUITABLE FOR OPEN DIALOGUE?

          Yes, school is a space where we live to learn by learning, it is precisely within this
   universe where the different discussions are tied.According to Dawson the school
   Probably you didn't learn much about what it's like to be lesbian, gay, bisexual, trans or
   questioned. Maybe you've heard of famous gay people or seen same-sex couples on TV,
   you sure know an LGBT person, even if you don't know that.
          As if it were an "alien invasion", we are already among you; Serving you at the
   post office, we teach math, fry potatoes in the cafeteria.
       So why don't we teach about same-sex couples in sex education class? Why don't we
teach that many people choose their gender?




             Revista Ibero-Americana de Humanidades, Ciências e Educação. São Paulo, v.8.n.03. mar. 2022.
                                               ISSN - 2675 – 3375

                 Revista Ibero- Americana de Humanidades, Ciências e Educação- REASE




                         Well, I've been a PSHCE teacher for a long time and i've always taught my students
                         these things, but not all schools do that and not all teachers know how to do it -
                         there's No training for that unfortunately. The biggest bonus of coming out of the
                         closet is that you can be who you want to be without hiding or apologizing.
       What's most annoying is that homophobia is a cultural thing in antiquity, people had
overopened minds about these gay moves, see safo on her island; look at the homosexual
culture of the Greeks and romans. unfortunately the tide turned when Christian missionaries
put it in their heads that they needed to travel the world telling everyone how marriage
should be done. From there, it was only downhill with regard to the acceptance of
homosexuality.

CHALLENGE AND ACHIEVEMENTS AGAINST DISCRIMINATION

       This Chapter has as fullness more humanized divisions that, through debates that
took place in the classroom where the teacher is the mediator of discussions. Taking into
account social, cultural and political movements reaching a consensus between the challenges
and achievements raised against discrimination, prejudice, bullying and violence against
                                                                                                              1686
homosexuals, both male and female.

RESPECT AND EQUALITY WITHIN THE SCHOOL ON SEXUAL ORIENTATION

       Brazil has achieved important results in the expansion of access and the exercise of
rights by its citizens. However, there are still immense challenges to be overcome, which
from the point of objective, such as the expansion of access to basic and middle-level
education, as well as from the subjective point of view, such as respect and appreciation of
diversity.
       Discrimination between gender, ethnic-racial and sexual orientation, as well as
homophobic violence, is produced and reproduced all the spaces of Brazilian social life.
        The school, unfortunately, is one of them. The school is, therefore, influenced by the
ways of thinking and relating in society and at the same time as the influence, contributed to
its transformation. The school for its mandatory purposes, by legal obligation and for
housing different diversities (of origin, gender, sexual, ethnic-racial cultural), becomes
responsible together with students, and families, community, governmental and non-




             Revista Ibero-Americana de Humanidades, Ciências e Educação. São Paulo, v.8.n.03. mar. 2022.
                                               ISSN - 2675 – 3375

                  Revista Ibero- Americana de Humanidades, Ciências e Educação- REASE




governmental organizations for building paths for the elimination of prejudices and
discriminatory practices.
Educating for the valorization of diversity is therefore not a task only of those who are part
of the daily life of the school; is the responsibility of society as a whole and the state.


       Thus, it is necessary to open dialogue about gender and show that equality and respect
in society and school is possible. School is a universe where one learns to form bonds of
social relations. Respect and equality is an act of recognising the complexity that the social,
cultural and ethnic problem must take the first step towards the recognition of diversity.

VALUE DIVERSITY

       The school is by Excellence, one of the main spaces of training for citizenship and
socialization of children, adolescents and young people.However, it is not always able to deal
with differences, mainly related to sexuality and sexual orientation issues, where it also
prevents the school from properly performing one of its most important functions nowadays:                   1687
contributing to the strengthening in society of a culture that knows how to respect and value
diversity.
       Bullying and discrimination in the school environment of principals who saw or
knew what happened in the student school have been humiliated for being: 40% homosexual;
29% black; 21% poor; 17% deficient; 16% resident of the Periphery or favela; 15% older; 13%
physically disabled; 11% woman. The main victims of bullying and discrimination in the
school environment are homosexuals, blacks and the poor. (source: project study on
discriminatory actions in the school environment, 2009, FIPE/MEC).

                          UNESCO emphasizes that safety in the classroom should be strengthened by anti-
                          homophobic and gender-discriminatory policies, becoming a space where students
                          can express themselves without the worry of being humiliated, rejected or
                          mistreated. The Entity also emphasizes in the document that it is necessary to
                          consider that diversity is a fundamental characteristic of sexuality.

ACHIEVEMENT CHALLENGE IN THE FIGHT FOR EQUALITY

       Training and continuing education of education professionals related to sexual
diversity and GLBT diversity. Effectively implement the approach of these topics in schools



              Revista Ibero-Americana de Humanidades, Ciências e Educação. São Paulo, v.8.n.03. mar. 2022.
                                                ISSN - 2675 – 3375

                   Revista Ibero- Americana de Humanidades, Ciências e Educação- REASE




together with students. "we have the right to be equal when differences inferiorize us, we
have the right to be different when equality we mischaracterize." B. de Souza santos (P.
65/64). portal. mec.gov.br

DIVERSITY IN HISTORICAL, CULTURAL AND SOCIAL CONSTRUCTION

       Gender is culture and history. (11p._ portal.esporte.gov.br.). Sexuality is an
understanding as a historical and social construction and not as something that is inherent to
the human being. It involves a series of beliefs, behaviors, relationships and practices that
allow men and women to live, in certain ways, their desires and their bodily pleasures.
       Each culture elects that is considered "normal" or not when related to sexual practices.
Example, pedophilia, for example, is now considered unwanted but a few times ago a 13-year-
old girl marrying a man in his 40s or 50s was considered "normal". (Portal. esporte.gov.br, p.
16).
       Sexual identity: It is a construction through which the subjects experience the
affections, desires and bodily pleasures, with partners of the same sex, of the opposite sex, of                     1688
both sexes or solitary.
        Sexual identity is also not fixed and immutable: the same person, throughout his life,
can present more than one sexual identity, that is, be heterosexual, homosexual or bisexual.
Gender identity:

                          It is a historical, cultural and social construction, which is made about the subjects
                          and is related to the distinctions that is based on sex. It refers to how the subjects
                          identify as male and female. This gender identity may or may not correspond to the
                          assigned gender at birth, for example, a person may be born a male and present a
                          female gender identity. Sexuality is culture. It is in culture that one learns to relate
                          sexually and affectively.
       They are diverse subjects who bring with them cultural marks, knowledge, life hisds
permeated by different forms of violence, suffering, victories, overcoming, wills, desires,
dreams.

CCN'S, SEXUAL ORIENTATION

                          The school, being able to include the discussion of sexuality in its pedagogical
                          project, will be enabling itself to interact with young people from the language and
                          focus of interest that marks this stage of their lives and that is so important for the
                          construction of their identity.



             Revista Ibero-Americana de Humanidades, Ciências e Educação. São Paulo, v.8.n.03. mar. 2022.
                                               ISSN - 2675 – 3375

                   Revista Ibero- Americana de Humanidades, Ciências e Educação- REASE




       Considerations: Discussing sexuality in school life is configured as a process of
building a multicultural education. Only a multicultural curriculum, which considers the
sociocultural diversity in the construction of school culture and the production of scientific
knowledge in the teaching and learning process will enable the deconstruction of the
homogenizing, fragmented and reductionist character of school practice, favoring an anti-
discriminatory education, therefore liberating or emancipatory, in Freire's parameters.

RESULTS AND DISCUSSION

       In the results, the author will expose the DATA obtained in his research. The results
may be expressed in tables, graphs, tables, photographs or other means that demonstrate
what the work allowed to verify. The expressed data should not be repeated in more than one
type of illustration.
       The discussion constitutes a section with greater freedom. In this phase, the author, at
the time that justifies the means he used to obtain the results, can contrast these with those
in the pertinent literature.                                                                                  1689
       The titles of the figures and frames should come below them and the titles of the
tables should come above them. For better visualization of objects, a simple space between
the object text and the title should be provided. These objects and their titles should be
centered on the page (see, for example, Figure 1). For titles, you must use a size 10 Arial font,
centralized.

                                          Figure 1- Letter of Credit (sight or term)




                                    Source: (BIZELLI; BARBOSA, 2001, p. 69).

       In tables and tables, the Arial font, size 10, should preferably be used. The style used



               Revista Ibero-Americana de Humanidades, Ciências e Educação. São Paulo, v.8.n.03. mar. 2022.
                                                 ISSN - 2675 – 3375

                      Revista Ibero- Americana de Humanidades, Ciências e Educação- REASE




inside frames, tables, or text boxes should be the normal style, which can be edited
(alignment, spacing, font type) as needed.
          The use of objects "floating over text" should be avoided. Instead, use the option: ...
format object ... layout... square. Preferably in inserting objects and gluing (using "special
paste") the "float in text" option should be disabled.
          Table 1 presents the format indicated for the tables, while Table 1 presents the format
indicated for the tables.

                                                      Table 1- Title of the table

           Item                             Qualitative                         Quantitative
           Social theory                    Share                               Structure

           Method                           Observation, interview              Experimentation, research

           Question                         What is X? (classification)         How many Xs? (enumeration)

           Reasoning                        Inductive                           Deductive

           Sampling method                  Theoretical                         Statistical                          1690
           Strength                         Duration                            Reliability


                                        Source: (AUTOR1; AUTHOR2, year, p. xx).

                                    Table 1 - Exports of Timber Furniture for Office -2005-2006

Country                        1996                      1997                     1998                      1999

United States                 28.372                      –                      28.487                    133.167

Germany                     1.365.585                  1.149.101                 793.911                   514.932

Italy                           –                         –                      16.800                     8.865

United Kingdom               65.097                     56.175                      –                      31.986

Argentina                    69.374                     3.555                     4.830                      234

Uruguay                         –                         –                       1.782                     1.904

Paraguay                       219                        400                     5.042                    14.850

Chile                           –                         –                         –                            –

Bolivia                         –                         –                       5014                     32.096




                  Revista Ibero-Americana de Humanidades, Ciências e Educação. São Paulo, v.8.n.03. mar. 2022.
                                                    ISSN - 2675 – 3375

                 Revista Ibero- Americana de Humanidades, Ciências e Educação- REASE




                                              Source: Secex (2006).

FINAL CONSIDERATIONS
       From the research on Homosexuality and ''School Management'', we perceive some
difficulties in relation to the theme due to the fact of the various meanings reported here. In
this case it is necessary to emphasize that educational actions are resources offered as
reinforce and strengthen knowledge about sexual education, since appropriate conditions are
offered and used in the classroom which subject is tied to the understanding of the
interrelationship of the economic and cultural political Social.
       Moreover, the issues of homophobia fall into parallel and inadequate relationships, if
we navigate within history itself we realize that sexual orientation is as old as the history of
humanity. It is also observed that the school is not a harmonic place anymore, we can say
that it is a space to raise debates and discussions where the quality and knowledge of the
theme discussed mainly about discrimination and violence, because it is a transversal subject
it is necessary that from an early age it is inserted in the classroom not to reproduce such
prejudice.                                                                                                  1691

       It should be emphasized that the school is a space where we live to learn and learning
what is perceived is that the school has its obligations, embraces different diversity whether
gender, sexual, ethnic, racial and cultural to build certain concepts it is necessary to bring
students, families, communities, non-governmental governmental organizations together in
the construction of paths to eliminate prejudices and discriminatory practices.
REFERENCES

www.uel.br/revistas/.../vanessa%20SANTOS%20ORIENT. %20CESAR.pdf

https://psicologado.com>General psychology> kinsey

ww.recantodasletras.com.br/biografias/926790 cited by costa,1995:14-15

The Banalization of the Television Content 1 Franciele Cardoso Liscosky 2 Eliane Aparecida
Dutra 3 Interfaces Comunicational, from Iniciacom, a component event of the IX congress of
communication sciences in the Southern Region. Date Accessed: 2017-12-15

URLwww.intercom.org.br/papers/regionais/sul2008/resumos/R10-0675-1.pdf

Department of ElementarEducation:2017-1URL:mec.gov.br/seb/arquivos/pdf/introducao.pdf


             Revista Ibero-Americana de Humanidades, Ciências e Educação. São Paulo, v.8.n.03. mar. 2022.
                                               ISSN - 2675 – 3375

                Revista Ibero- Americana de Humanidades, Ciências e Educação- REASE




Date Accessed: 2017-12-15 URLSwww.scielo.br/pdf/ean/v13n4/v13n4a18

Learning            and            Freedom              in                                      Educationalractice:
a...www.periodicoshumanas.uff.br/ensaios/article/download/1761/1220

[PDF]heteronomative    curriculum       and    school routine.Maxwell- PUC-RIO
https://www.maxwell.vrac.puc-rio.br/.../20040.PDFXXvmi=xaqwjwnpQWs1flsT2vc...

HOMOPHOBIA IN THE CLASSROOM - Cotidiano.ufsc.br

Fabiane-Psychology       Bodies:        from        Modernity     to                                   contemporary
https://www.passeidireto.com/arquivo/24616071/corpos-fabiane/21closet                                      pedagogy:
heterosexism and gender surveillance in school daily life, p:76.

Pedagigia, SALVADOR, N.3 V1, May/Oct 2015. Journal of indisciplinary studies in gender
and sexuality. Periodic publication linked to the CUS research group of the Federal
University of Bahia-UFBA.

JamesDawson,author of the book:This book is gay, This book is gay,p.9/72

(Source: gender and diversity in teacher training school in gender, sexuality, sexual
orientation and étnica-racial.CNPq.br/portal/prêmios/2014/ig/pdf/gênero-diversidade-
escola-2009)                                                                                                           1692

www.institutounibanco.org.br/aprendizagem-em-foco/11/n°11.may.2016.

source:www.institutounibanco.org.br/aprendizagem-em-foco/11/n°11.mai.2006

Portal.esporte.gov.br/arquivo/snee/segundotempo/acompanhamento/gênero.Pdf.p.17
portal.esporte.gov.br,p.18

Portal.mec.gov.br/seb/arquivo/orientaãosexual,p.297.PCN's.

Portal.mec.gov.br/sib/arquivo/orientação sbcual,p.297,PCN's2011

VI haternacional colloquium"Education




            Revista Ibero-Americana de Humanidades, Ciências e Educação. São Paulo, v.8.n.03. mar. 2022.
                                              ISSN - 2675 – 3375