Chapter 4
Towards a Multi-form Professional
Development of Educational Leadership

Eija Hanhimäki, Janni Alho, Piia Nuora, Mika Risku, Elina Fonsén,
Alex Mäkiharju, Ann-Sofie Smeds-Nylund, Petra Autio, and Saana Korva



Abstract This chapter aims to investigate the professional development of educa-
tional leadership based on the need to define and develop leadership in educational
organisations that are in the middle of complex challenges and changing operational
environments. The data of this study were collected through interviews and project
descriptions of the key actors of the four key projects of the Ministry of Education
and Culture, Finland. The data were analysed using problem-driven qualitative con-
tent analysis with inductive reasoning. The main results included both the common
aspects, such as the development of education in educational leadership, and more
project-specific aspects, such as an emphasis on the specific context, in these proj-
ects. Furthermore, it was found that the professional development of educational
leadership could be supported when, for example, the need for flexibility and sup-
portive networks are recognised. In addition, when describing the holistic develop-
ment of the professional leadership in education, it is crucial to provide multi-form
and equal development opportunities to individuals and communities at every level
and in all leadership positions during their entire careers. The results of these devel-
opment experiments can help both national and international audiences in the pro-
fessional development of educational leadership in their educational systems.

Keywords Educational leadership · Education · Professional development ·
Competence




E. Hanhimäki (*)
Department of Education, University of Jyväskylä, Jyväskylä, Finland
e-mail: eija.h.hanhimaki@jyu.fi
J. Alho
Department of Teacher Education, University of Jyväskylä, Jyväskylä, Finland
e-mail: janni.e.alho@jyu.fi
P. Nuora · M. Risku
Institute of Educational Leadership, University of Jyväskylä, Jyväskylä, Finland
e-mail: piia.nuora@jyu.fi; mika.risku@jyu.fi

© The Author(s) 2024                                                                 61
R. Ahtiainen et al. (eds.), Leadership in Educational Contexts in Finland,
Educational Governance Research 23,
https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-031-37604-7_4

62                                                                        E. Hanhimäki et al.


Introduction

At present, educational organisations are faced with complex challenges at different
levels and from various directions – locally, nationally and internationally. For
example, top-down policies can increase competing pressure in educational contexts
without making real changes (Normand et al., 2021). In the face of these challenges,
both the expansion of learning, such as acting and learning as a collective effort to
build and achieve a common purpose, and goal and personal authority, such as
individual efforts in the process towards achieving the common goal, are needed (cf.
Jäppinen & Taajamo, 2022). The reciprocal influence of the aforementioned issues
is also significant. The diffusion of the educational leadership process in a natural
way throughout the organisation becomes possible when learning is expanded. With
this, the organisation has better opportunities to respond to unexpected and
continuous societal changes taking place in the twenty-first century, such as the
COVID-19 pandemic situation, increased use and development of technology and
the influence of various factors related to cultural diversity (Jäppinen &
Taajamo, 2022).
    In the process of educational organisations and actors pursuing learning and
development as described above, there is a crucial need of professional leadership
in these organisations. In the process of developing professional leadership, it is
important to ask and investigate what kind of leadership is professional in the
educational organisations of these days and to be able to respond to various
challenges that these organisations are currently facing within their rapidly and
constantly changing operational environments (e.g. Alava et al., 2012; Finnish
National Agency for Education, 2013; Kumpulainen, 2017; Risku & Tian, 2017,
2020). In this regard, how professional leadership could be developed and supported
nationally and internationally should be investigated.
    In response to this need to investigate and develop professional educational lead-
ership, four key projects of the Ministry of Education and Culture (2018–2022)
concentrated on developing educational leadership in Finland. They included


E. Fonsén
Department of Education, University of Jyväskylä, Jyväskylä, Finland
Department of Education, University of Helsinki, Helsinki, Finland
e-mail: elina.k.fonsen@jyu.fi
A. Mäkiharju · A.-S. Smeds-Nylund
Faculty of Education and Welfare Studies, Åbo Akademi University, Vaasa, Finland
e-mail: alex.makiharju@abo.fi; ann-sofie.smeds-nylund@abo.fi
P. Autio
Novia University of Applied Sciences, Vaasa, Finland
e-mail: petra.autio@novia.fi
S. Korva
Faculty of Education, University of Lapland, Rovaniemi, Finland
e-mail: saana.korva@ulapland.fi

4   Towards a Multi-form Professional Development of Educational Leadership            63


ArkTORI, EduLeaders, KOPETI JO and DAWN (Ministry of Education and
Culture, 2022a). These projects were part of a broader development entity initiated
by the Ministry of Education and Culture. In 2016, the Ministry of Education and
Culture appointed the Comprehensive School Forum. The aim of this forum was to
develop and reform the Finnish comprehensive school system. As part of the new
comprehensive education, pre- and in-service teacher education was renewed. In
cooperation with teachers and stakeholders, the Teacher Education Forum prepared
the Teacher Education Development Programme that strategically determined the
direction of teacher education and the development of competence during the
teaching career. One of the strategic guidelines of this programme emphasised
leadership development to create schools to fulfil the communities’ learning and
development needs. In practice, the ministry awarded nearly 28 million euros in
grants for projects to develop research-based teacher education (Ministry of
Education and Culture, 2022b). These projects included four projects for educational
leadership development coordinated by four Finnish universities and one university
of applied sciences.
   This chapter aims to investigate the professional development of educational
leadership in Finland with the help of the data gathered during these four projects.
The study contains an examination of the multi-form professional development of
educational leadership at organisational, regional and national levels. Furthermore,
this chapter provides an example of how research-based experiments develop
professional educational leadership implemented in the Finnish context. The
research questions were as follows:
1. What aspects of educational leadership have been developed?
2. How can the professional development of leadership in education be supported?
3. With what kind of holistic development can leadership in education be developed?



Professional Development of Educational Leadership

Educational leadership is a broad concept basically referring to any leadership in
education (Elo & Uljens, 2022; Risku & Alava, 2021) despite variance in its
conceptualisations (e.g. Adams et al., 2017). Educational leadership occurs in global
(e.g. comparative standardised assessment), national (e.g. governmental decisions
on national core curricula) and local contexts, such as in organisations and individual
classrooms (cf. Elo & Uljens, 2022). In an educational organisation, educational
leadership includes both management and administrative work (Nivala, 1998). The
goal of educational leadership is, either directly or indirectly, to ensure that education
fulfils its core mission and goal: student learning. However, if we try to reach this
goal, there is a real need for support, professional development, social recognition
and community engagement so that these bottom-up processes can be long-lasting
and connected to global developments crucial for student learning (Normand
et al., 2021).

64                                                                   E. Hanhimäki et al.


    During recent decades, theoretical and empirical approaches perceiving educa-
tional leadership as a socially constructed and contextual phenomenon have been
emerging (e.g. Jäppinen & Taajamo, 2022; Uhl-Bien, 2006). For example, Jäppinen
and Taajamo (2022) defined educational leadership as a multifaceted process (cf.
Jäppinen, 2020) where there is continuous co-growth. It involves motivating efforts
to achieve together something that individual members of a community or network
could not accomplish alone. The underlying idea here is to achieve the common
good jointly by individuals, groups and teams of educational organisations. In this
process, new ways of thinking are formed, thus leading to creative development in
the form of a common opinion and goal. This, in turn, becomes apparent as purpose-
ful and goal-oriented activities (Jäppinen & Taajamo, 2022). Bush (2007), on the
other hand, suggests that leadership is an influence process based on clear values
and beliefs, and this leads to the school’s vision. Even though principals and other
formal leaders in educational organisations have certain specific leadership respon-
sibilities tied to their positions (Catano & Stronge, 2007), perceiving educational
leadership as a shared, collective and socially constructed phenomenon recognises
the diverse members of the professional communities of an educational organisa-
tion, such as teachers, as leaders.
    One stream of change during recent decades has been that conceptions of educa-
tion and teaching have moved in a more professional than vocational direction
(Carr, 2000). There are, for example, legitimate concerns about educational
accountability to the practical needs and interests of parents, employers and the
wider community behind this development. Furthermore, teachers and educational
leaders have to think of the values that they are transmitting and their own neutrality
in a multicultural and pluralistic world. Professionality and professionalism describe
the requirements of a particular class or category of occupation, such as teachers
and educational leaders (Carr, 2000; Hanhimäki, 2011). For example, principals
enact their educational leadership by mediating between several societal praxises,
such as pedagogics, politics, ethics and law (Smeds-Nylund & Autio, 2021).
However, a rearranged labour division between state and local authorities with a lot
of space for ethical educational leadership in the Finnish context challenges every
educational professional’s agency and autonomy. In addition, this demands that our
educational system supports educators and educational leaders in their professional
development (Hanhimäki & Risku, 2021).
    At the core of educational leadership as a socially constructed, shared and collec-
tive process, there is a professional learning community (PLC) of an educational
organisation. There is no complete agreement on PLC’s definition, but it is usually
agreed that the primary purpose of these communities is to improve student learning
and teacher practices (Voelkel & Chrispeels, 2017). A PLC consists of the members
of a school’s work community with diverse expertise and competence (Sai & Siraj,
2015). It is central in a PLC that its members share together what they have learnt,
learn together as a collective and build shared understanding (Muijs & Harris, 2003;
Sai & Siraj, 2015). To effectively support these kinds of actions and to build collec-
tive competence, it is important that the leadership enacted in a PLC is shared, col-
lective and synergetic in nature (Morrissey, 2000, pp. 5–6). This kind of leadership

4   Towards a Multi-form Professional Development of Educational Leadership         65


and the related competence and capacity means, for example, understanding leader-
ship as a collective responsibility, promotion of de-privatised leadership practice
and competence in reflective dialogue (Vanblaere & Devos, 2016). These compe-
tencies are required and can be developed on both the individual and collective
levels of a PLC. In educational organisations, formal leaders, such as principals,
play a significant role in facilitating the kind of leadership and culture that support
a PLC to function in an ideal way (Johnson & Voelkel, 2021; Sai & Siraj, 2015). For
this reason, it is highly important that formal leaders of educational organisations
develop their competence to act as facilitators in their communities.
   In addition to leading a PLC, educational leaders act as part of broader multidis-
ciplinary networks consist of various professional sectors and actors, such as social
and healthcare services. According to (social) network theories, leaders, as repre-
sentatives of organisations, have an important role as builders and sustainers of
(inter)organisational linkages and relationships (Balkundi & Kilduff, 2006).
Furthermore, leaders of educational organisations are required to consider the char-
acteristics of the context in which they are functioning, such as local, cultural and
societal factors (e.g. Khalifa et al., 2016). In this regard, many competencies, such
as understanding diversity and seeing it as a strength (Barakat et al., 2021), as well
as being able to act in an inclusive way (cf. Roberson & Perry, 2022), are required.
   Furthermore, when we see the leadership of learning as a core duty, pedagogical
leadership is a significant part of educational leadership (Elo & Uljens, 2022).
There are various ways to approach and define the concept of pedagogical leader-
ship (e.g. Fonsén & Soukainen, 2020). A rather broad consensus exists that peda-
gogical leadership aims at leading learning by enhancing and developing
pedagogical practice (Heikka, 2014), a culture supporting continuous learning and
(professional) development (cf. Elo & Uljens, 2022) and the human capital of a
school, referring to both the teaching personnel and students (Sergiovanni, 1998).
According to the broad-based approach to pedagogical leadership (see Chap. 8), it
includes both direct and indirect pedagogical leadership, the former referring to the
process of learning and teaching and the latter to the context and environment in
which this process occurs. Central competencies related to pedagogical leadership
contain various kinds of professional knowledge, such as content knowledge, (con-
tent specific) pedagogical knowledge, curricular knowledge and knowledge of
learners, as well as competence in the related administrative decision-making
(Robinson, 2010).
   In this chapter, we investigate the professional development of educational lead-
ership in the Finnish context based on the definition of educational leadership as
studying, developing and educating the phenomenon of leadership in education
(Hanhimäki & Risku, 2021; Risku, 2020; Risku & Alava, 2021). Leadership can be
seen not just as a domain of an individual or role but also found everywhere in the
actions and interactions amongst all of an organisation’s actors (Spillane, 2012).
Leaders work in the ‘between’ space, and with the help of this point, they can
integrate and influence knowledge and ideas passing in all directions throughout
their educational ecosystems. For example, they are policy navigators between
policy as a more rational side of educational systems and practice as a more human

66                                                                  E. Hanhimäki et al.


side of schools (Supovitz, 2021). This special space and point demand continuous
professional development in educational leadership.
   When we develop education in educational leadership, we try to respond to the
needs of the professional development so that current and future educational leaders
can be flexible and able to cope with consistent challenges and continuous changes.
For example, one of the main learning theories used in education by the Institute of
Educational Leadership is integrative pedagogy as a model for expertise development
(Heikkinen et al., 2012). This model combines theoretical and conceptual
knowledge, practical and experiential knowledge, self-regulative knowledge and
socio-cultural knowledge in learning situations (Hanhimäki & Risku, 2021; cf.
Lyons & Bandura, 2020; Tynjälä, 2013). All four components mentioned above
should be present in the learning environment (Lyons & Bandura, 2020). The
purpose of the integrative pedagogy model is to provide tools for creating learning
environments that serve learning more systematically than informal learning. In
integrative pedagogy, it is important to focus not only on individual expertise but
also on collective and collaborative expertise (Tynjälä, 2013).



 hanges in Educational Policy Towards Educational
C
Leadership Development

In the Finnish education policy and governance system, the state steers education
and collaborates with other actors. Even if the legislation and other regulations
mandate education providers, such as municipalities and local authorities, via local
decision-making, they have a lot of autonomy to organise their provisions of
education. In the context of educational organisations, educational leaders and
teachers respond to education providers (Hanhimäki & Risku, 2021; Risku & Tian,
2020). Development and the system of Finnish educational policy, governance and
leadership are presented and considered in more detail in Chap. 2.
   During the 2010s and 2020s, educational leadership in Finland was in the middle
of many changes on all education fronts in the Finnish education system. The first
example of these educational policy changes has happened in Finnish Early
Childhood Education (ECE), which has undergone several structural and
fundamental changes in recent years. An administrative shift from the Ministry of
Social Affairs and Health to the Ministry of Education and Culture was implemented
in 2013. The ECE Act (2018) was also renewed in 2018, replacing the old Day Care
Act of 1973. Through these reforms, ECE has moved into the education and teaching
sector, constituting the first phase in children’s schooling path instead of providing
the earlier focus on the social services provided to parents (Finnish National Agency
for Education [FNAE], 2018, 2022; Fonsén & Vlasov, 2017). Because of these
reforms, the need to renew leadership and competence to lead ECE has been topical.
In particular, pedagogical leadership has been an essential approach to developing
leadership in ECE (Fonsén & Soukainen, 2020).

4   Towards a Multi-form Professional Development of Educational Leadership          67


    The second example of the remarkable educational changes was the reform in
vocational upper secondary education in 2018, which updated the entire Vocational
Education and Training (VET) and consolidated VET for young people and adults.
The core aim of this reform was to create competence-based and customer-oriented
education and to increase learning in the workplace (Ministry of Education and
Culture, 2022c). The third example of these changes was the extension of compulsory
education in 2021. This means that all students gain an upper secondary qualification,
as the minimum school-leaving age was raised to 18 years (Ministry of Education
and Culture, 2022d).
    At the same time, with these educational policy changes, there has been a con-
tinuous discussion about how to define educational leadership in the Finnish context
and practice. For example, school leadership can be understood in various ways and
according to different discourses. If one wants to improve a school according to the
Learning Outcomes Discourse, the focus has to be on the correct and effective
implementation goals set on a national level. National and transnational tests are
important. On the other hand, in the Democratic Bildung Discourse, the focus has
to be on empowering professionals and students to learn as much as possible and
develop non-affirmative, critical and creative interpretations and negotiating com-
petence (Moos et al., 2020). The Finnish school leadership discourse follows the
latter in a culture of trust in school professionals and without national accountability
measures (cf. Simola et al., 2017).
    One example of this culture of trust is that even if the Ministry of Education and
Culture has the power to use key policy instruments of legislation, financing and
information-based steering, the actors have been trusted and have an autonomous
status in Finland (Finnish Government, 2021). For example, the Ministry of
Education and Culture summoned the universities to self-activity to be part of the
development of principals’ educational leadership, recognising their ability to
answer the invitation (see Chap. 9). At the same time, autonomy and responsibility
in the dynamic and complex governance system challenge educational leaders, their
ethical leadership and their competence. Thus, there is a real need to develop
education in educational leadership so that it can better respond to the needs of the
professional development and help leaders cope with consistent challenges and
continuous changes (Hanhimäki & Risku, 2021).



Data and Methods

The data of this study were gathered from four focus group interviews and one indi-
vidual interview conducted to investigate and develop educational leadership. The
interviewees were the main actors of the four Ministry of Education and Culture key
projects described in detail in Table 4.1. In addition, the general project descriptions
made by the projects’ staff were utilised in the data analysis.
   Fifteen people, including three to five actors from each of these four projects,
participated in the interviews. The research assistant conducted the interviews with

68                                                                         E. Hanhimäki et al.

Table 4.1 Description of the four Ministry of Education and Culture key projects
Project names and Why was the project        What was the aim of     What was developed in
coordinators       implemented?              the project?            the project?
ArkTORI – School To support the              To plan an educational Planning and
Leadership in the professional               leadership education    development of many
Arctic             development and           for the University of   educational and the
University of      leadership skills of      Lapland, develop        training opportunities,
Lapland            principals in             practices and tools,    such as the launch of
                   comprehensive             such as a peer-­        the qualifying
                   education, with a special mentoring model and a educational leadership
                   emphasis on the regional digital tool for         study module for the
                   specificities of Northern principals to support   degree students at the
                   Finland                   their professional      University of Lapland
                                             development
EduLeaders –       The need for educational To develop basic         The basic studies
Development and leadership studies has       studies of Educational curriculum was
Research Project   been evident amongst      Leadership (25 credits) developed, and the
for Basic and      comprehensive             at the University of    advanced studies (35
Subject Studies in education and ECE         Helsinki, further       credits) were piloted
Educational        leaders in the capital    studies based on        and evaluated
Leadership         area. In addition, many evaluation and
University of      ECE centres suffer from research data collected
Helsinki           a lack of qualified       by the LeadEd
                   personnel, and the staff scholars, and develop
                   needs strong              and pilot the advanced
                   pedagogical leadership studies in Educational
                                             Leadership (35 credits)
KOPETI             Before this project,      To develop and pilot a Five separate courses
JO – School        qualifying studies to     principal education     were created, and a
Pedagogical        become qualified          programme, in           study programme called
Leadership         principals were offered particular, adapted for Educational Leadership
Åbo Akademi        as only continuing        teacher–students in     (25 credits) was formed
University         education for qualified   Swedish in Finland      for teacher–students
                   teachers. Thus, the       according to F986 /     within their studies to
                   formation of teacher–     1998 at Åbo Akademi become teachers
                   students as a target      University in Vasa
                   group of the project was
                   a new phenomenon, and
                   both the content and the
                   structure of the studies
                   needed constant
                   evaluation
                                                                                   (continued)

4   Towards a Multi-form Professional Development of Educational Leadership                69

Table 4.1 (continued)
Project names and Why was the project        What was the aim of      What was developed in
coordinators        implemented?             the project?             the project?
DAWN –              The project was based    To develop a             The main idea of the
Strengthening       on the need to develop   multi-form and           entity for education in
Leadership Skills leadership competence      coherent holistic        educational leadership
of Personnel in the in education in all      development for          was developed, which is
Field of Education education tiers in the    education in             need-based concerning
University of       Finnish education        educational leadership   the needs of many levels
Jyväskylä and       system                                            (individual,
Jamk University of                                                    organisation, region and
Applied Sciences                                                      society) and has
                                                                      individual paths in
                                                                      collaborative
                                                                      environments in a
                                                                      societally appropriate
                                                                      way


the web application Zoom in the spring of 2021. The permission to conduct the
research was sought from the interviewees. The interviews were semi-structured,
with open-ended questions. The themes of the questions concerned the participants’
views of the current state of educational leadership in Finland, its ideal development
and the nature of a potential multi-form nationally cohesive entity for its development.
The participants answered the questions in any order they wanted, and the nature of
the interviews was interactive. The interviews included features of an in-depth
interview because the topics were often pondered and discussed by the participants
in a highly profound manner. The interviews lasted from 38 minutes to 1 hour and
13 minutes, and they were transcribed literally.
   The main research questions that were investigated with the help of this data
were as follows: (1) What aspects of educational leadership have been developed?
(2) How can the professional development of leadership in education be supported?
(3) With what kind of holistic development can leadership in education be developed?
The data were analysed with problem-driven (e.g. Krippendorff, 2013) qualitative
content analysis with inductive reasoning (e.g. Elo & Kyngäs, 2008). The
transcriptions of the interviews and project descriptions were read many times to
identify the contents related to the research questions. First, the main aspects of
educational leadership development were listed. Second, the contents related to the
second research question on supporting the professional development of leadership
in education were gathered on a coding sheet. Third, the contents related to the third
research question on holistic development entity for developing leadership in
education were gathered on a coding sheet. In this chapter, the straight interview
quotations are marked with a code P, which means project, and numbers 1 to 4,
which indicate four projects (e.g. P1 indicates project one). However, these numbers
are not in the same order as they are in Table 4.1 because of the anonymity of the
projects’ staff.

70                                                                   E. Hanhimäki et al.


Results

Aspects of Educational Leadership Development

When we analysed the aspects of educational leadership development, it was found
that the common aspect for all four projects was to investigate and support the
educational leaders’ professional development, and thus the leaders’ skills and
competence. In addition, they all wanted to investigate the state of education and
start their first or new education processes and studies in educational leadership.
Furthermore, they all conducted mixed-method research and included various
datasets, such as surveys, interviews and learning materials, in their studies. The
target groups represented all education tiers of the Finnish education system, such
as principals and educational leaders from early childhood education and care to
higher education. In addition, both faculty–student groups and continuing education
students participated in education and research.
    The projects mainly focused on developing (future) principals’ leadership com-
petence, but concurrently perceived educational leadership as a phenomenon
enacted by multiple and various actors. These actors included those working in
educational organisations, such as teachers, and those collaborating with educational
organisations, such as researchers and municipal actors.
    Moreover, education in educational leadership was developed in all four proj-
ects. For example, one of the projects created a programme worth 25 credits, even
if the resources were limited, with lower numbers of staff and teachers hired on an
hourly basis to cover all aspects of school leadership. All courses were created
together with the field, with experts from education, such as superintendents and
juridical experts. The exchange with the field was deemed particularly important.
As for the development work in another project, this project could use a broad net-
work and a long history of education in educational leadership and pilot new ways
to enhance educational leadership with various groups.
    In addition to the common aspects, we identified other aspects of educational
leadership that were developed and investigated in more than one of these projects.
In three of the four projects, the development of educational leadership emphasised
a specific context that consisted of, for example, regional and cultural specificities
of the community and the educational organisation, with its specific purpose and
goals. It was recognised in the development work conducted through the projects
that educational leaders need competence to identify the special features and
conditions of the context in which they work and lead, as well as to navigate and act
successfully in their specific contexts. For example, it was emphasised as the starting
point in one of these projects that the principal has the overall responsibility for
administration, leadership and development work in the educational institutions in
all school forms. Thus, principals need to understand the specific conditions of their
own units concerning the diversity of local, cultural and societal circumstances,
traditions, school cultures, student and child groups, staff and guardians.

4   Towards a Multi-form Professional Development of Educational Leadership          71


    In two of the four projects, the activity of the educational leader as a part of wide
and multi-professional networks was emphasised. Educational leaders often work in
multifaceted cooperation to promote the overall growth, development and well-­
being of pupils and students. This competence to successfully act and lead various
regional and professional networks, actors and sectors was recognised in all projects.
In one project, the research results showed that the role of schools should be
strengthened at the municipal level and made more visible, for example, in welfare
strategies. Principals were seen as key players in how schools participate in building
and maintaining networks to promote well-being (see Chap. 15).
    In two of the four projects, educational leaders’ competence development in
pedagogical leadership was underlined. For example, one project included sub-­
studies on educational leaders’ understanding and enactment of pedagogical leader-
ship at different levels of education. The researchers of this project investigated
early childhood education leaders’ perceptions of pedagogical leadership and their
capacity to lead the implementation of the curriculum. The results indicated that
leaders are highly capable of leading implementation, but more coherent guidance
and instruments for assessment are needed (Ahtiainen et al., 2021). Furthermore,
the researchers of this project employed the framework of broad-based pedagogical
leadership to investigate principals’ and teachers’ understandings of the elements of
leadership that will promote the implementation of the national core curriculum in
schools. According to the principals, strategic leadership, interaction and compe-
tence management contributed to the implementation of the curriculum. The teach-
ers emphasised interaction, being goal-oriented and a general understanding of
everyday schooling (Lahtero et al., 2021).
    Another project approached the development of pedagogical leadership by
developing its framework. The main idea was that because of understanding and
developing pedagogical leadership, a theory of the object is needed, such as
objectives, tasks and activities in an educational institution and its pedagogical
work, as well as an idea of the pedagogical aspects found in pedagogical leadership.
Principals were seen as actors in a multilevel system, with leadership and
responsibilities distributed across levels and actors. The theoretical framework can
be viewed as a foundation from which an understanding of school leadership
programmes can be developed continuously. In framing their approach, the project
actors considered Nordic models for principal education and current pedagogical
development lines in educational institutions.
    In three of the four projects, it was emphasised that educational leaders should be
competent of leading a PLC. This may include such areas as involving teachers in
school development work (Eisenschmidt et al., 2021) and principals leading a
multilevel system by distributing leadership, as well as building the education
system’s multidisciplinary pedagogical culture. One central area of PLC leadership
is human resource leadership. In one project, it was found that educational leaders’
competence in human resource leadership was strong, but the area concurrently
caused challenges for them.
    There were also project-specific aspects in these four projects. For example, one
project aimed at the themes and development work of well-being, welfare work, a

72                                                                              E. Hanhimäki et al.


broad network of municipalities, a multidisciplinary approach, a mobile application,
a service design process, peer-mentoring and cooperation practices. Another project
had a national and broad aim of establishing a multi-form and coherent holistic
development for education in educational leadership. When building this entity,
cooperation with three other key projects was essential and remarkable. Furthermore,
a large network outside of the projects’ staff was invited to discuss and create a
holistic entity for education in educational leadership. For example, other
universities, universities of applied sciences, trade unions, the Association of
Finnish Municipalities, the Finnish National Agency for Education, and the Ministry
of Education and Culture were members of this network, which will continue the
discussion and development work in the future.



 upport for the Professional Development
S
of Educational Leadership

With the help of the second research question, it was analysed how to support the
professional development of leadership in education. The key findings from the data
included emphasising the importance of flexibility in supporting and acquiring
leadership competence: It should be possible to develop one’s leadership through
both education and learning through work. The competence acquired in either of
these ways should be acknowledged and supported:
     Education must, of course, be highly adaptable and, in a way, always stick to those current
     themes and contents. Everyone would also have an opportunity to develop and strengthen
     their skills during their careers. (P2)
     Every university that offers teacher education should also have leadership education. (P4)

   In addition to flexibility, the interviewees emphasised that education should be
diverse, context-based, continuous and research-based. Other central elements that
support leadership development were networks, mentoring and peer support:
     It should be based on needs considering organisations and the national level, but also indi-
     vidual needs to develop one’s competence. We must have a very flexible model or system
     that pays attention to diversity. (P3)
     Education should be carried out in continuous collaboration with the development work of
     one's own organisation or school at the local level. Individuals should not be taken out of
     their contexts. (P1)
     It has to be done with the help of research broad enough so that we can get a more holistic
     picture of where we are going and to what direction. (P4)
     Mentoring and peer support would be entrenched and seen as goal-oriented and work-­
     related. (P2)

   Thus, the interviewees saw that the professional development of educational
leadership should be needs-oriented and consider the needs of different levels,
including individual, organisation, region and society levels:

4   Towards a Multi-form Professional Development of Educational Leadership                        73

    When we talk about this school development and management as a shared activity, it also
    means that teachers are closely involved in it. And that, in turn, means that we need to ask
    how teacher education needs to be organised in order to prepare for such shared leadership
    and school development. (P1)
    We would like to have a continuum from basic studies to on-the-job learning. Also, regional
    specificities would be strongly involved in this. (P2)
    All kinds of leadership skills and the development of leadership skills are needed. Then it
    is essential to be able to identify the needs of people, organisations and society. And then
    the structures, processes and practices of development support should be created for it;
    whatever the situations of the organisation and the person are, then the support would be
    appropriately offered to the precise situation where we are. (P3)

   Thus, it was considered important to hear teachers and leaders who are working
at these levels every day so that the professional development of educational
leadership can support them as well as possible during their careers.



 owards a Multi-form Professional Development of Leadership
T
in Education

Based on the analysis with the help of the third research question (with what kind of
holistic development leadership in education could be developed), Fig. 4.1 was
compiled. Figure 4.1 presents what kind of entity and what elements were identified
as crucial for leadership development in education by the actors in four key projects.
The figure illustrates how the actors in the four key projects perceived the
professional development of educational leadership.
    In the middle of the figure, there is an educational leader pursuing to develop his/
her leadership competence. However, it is important to note that leadership should
not be developed solely on the individual level but also, for example, on the level of
a professional community or an organisation. The three partly overlapping circles in
the middle of the figure (formal education in educational leadership, learning
through work and flexible identification and acknowledgement of competence)
illustrate the importance of building flexible bridges between formal education and
informal competence development.
    The arrows on the left side of the figure illustrate that formal education in educa-
tional leadership should be diverse and flexible, context-based, continuous and
research-based. Three circles on the right side of the figure (peer support, mentoring
and networks) illustrate three central supportive elements for leadership develop-
ment. These elements can be, although not necessarily, related to learning through
work. For example, an opportunity to be part of networks beyond one’s own organ-
isation is important for the professional development of an individual or a broader
community: participating in networks and collaborating with them offers insights
into differing practices, solutions, cultures and contexts of leadership.
    Moreover, legislation and alignments (at the bottom) concerning competence
and qualification requirements for educational leaders and financing made on

74                                                                   E. Hanhimäki et al.




Fig. 4.1 Professional development of educational leadership

national and governmental levels regulate the structures, practices and opportunities
for developing professional educational leadership. The aim is to create equal
opportunities for leadership development at every level and in all leadership
positions. Finally, the support for leadership development on both the individual
and organisational levels should be continuous (at the top). In an individual
educational leader’s case, this means that support should begin in the initial (teacher)
education and continue when he/she is starting to work in the organisation or in a
new position and during working in position.



Discussion and Conclusions

In this chapter, we investigated the professional development of educational leader-
ship. The data of this chapter consisted of interviews with the main actors in the four
Ministry of Education and Culture key projects and the general project descriptions
made by the projects’ staff. First, we analysed aspects of educational leadership
development. It was found that the common aspects of these projects were to inves-
tigate and support the educational leaders’ professional development, perceive edu-
cational leadership as a phenomenon enacted by various actors and develop
education in educational leadership. However, there were other aspects that occurred
in more than one of these projects: emphasis on the specific context, the activity of

4   Towards a Multi-form Professional Development of Educational Leadership          75


the educational leader in multi-professional networks, competence development
and development of the framework in pedagogical leadership, competence in lead-
ing PLC and project-specific aspects.
    Second, we investigated how the professional development of leadership in edu-
cation could be supported. We found that the professional development of leader-
ship in education could be supported with the help of certain characteristics and
components. First, it was considered important to take into account the need for
flexibility in support. Second, it was recognised that education should be diverse,
context-based, continuous and research-based. Third, it was realised that we need
networks, mentoring and peer support in professional leadership development.
Fourth, it was understood that the professional development of educational
leadership could be supported best when it is needs-oriented, considering and
hearing the needs of various actors working on different levels in the education system.
    Third, we considered with what kind of holistic development leadership in edu-
cation could be developed. Here, the importance of building flexible bridges between
formal education and informal competence development was recognised.
Furthermore, formal education should be diverse, context-based, continuous and
research-based, and leadership development could be supported, for example, with
the help of peer support, mentoring and networks. However, the actors on the
national and governmental levels regulate the structures, practices and opportunities
for developing professional educational leadership. Nevertheless, the aim is to
provide equal opportunities for individuals and communities at every level and in all
leadership positions during the entire career, from initial (teacher) education to
working in different positions. Furthermore, the holistic development entity should
consider the synergy between various levels (e.g. governmental, local, organisational
and individual) regarding the relationship of connectedness and autonomy between
these levels as well as the various needs for leadership (development) occurring on
these levels.
    In summary, the development achievements of education in educational leader-
ship and empirical results of these projects have responded in various ways to the
needs of both educational research (e.g. Fonsén & Soukainen, 2020; Hanhimäki &
Risku, 2021) and national educational governance (e.g. Alava et al., 2012; Finnish
National Agency for Education, 2013; Kumpulainen, 2017). For example, the
research results and development work of these projects have provided both
theoretical frameworks and practical examples for the need to define and develop
professional leadership in educational organisations confronting complex challenges
and constantly changing operational environments. Furthermore, this kind of
national and local research-based development work has modelled an experimental
culture that is supported by national educational governance. However, this work is
also regulated and guided from there, which also challenges the longevity and
efficiency of the development work.
    In this chapter, educational leadership was perceived as a phenomenon involving
multiple and various actors (cf. Elo & Uljens, 2022; Spillane, 2012; Supovitz,
2021). Although the projects mainly focused on developing the leadership
competence of the educational leaders, it was recognised that leadership is enacted

76                                                                   E. Hanhimäki et al.


in cooperation and collaboration with PLC members, such as teachers, and the
actors and sectors of the networks of educational organisations, such as various
municipal actors. Thus, it was recognised that (formal) educational leaders need
competence in leading in a PLC (e.g. Johnson & Voelkel, 2021) and broader
communities and networks, for example, to build a multidisciplinary pedagogical
culture together. Here, leadership occurs as a shared process and aims at expanding
learning in educational organisations (Jäppinen & Taajamo, 2022), which, on its
behalf, helps to achieve the improvement in collective leadership and the collective
as the enactor of leadership (cf. Morrissey, 2000, pp. 5–6). Collective leadership can
help educational organisations to function effectively and successfully conduct their
core task in the middle of the changes and development of their operational
environments (cf. Jäppinen & Taajamo, 2022; Risku & Tian, 2017, 2020). Thus,
work for enhancing the development of leadership in education, conducted in the
projects aimed at responding to the current (leadership) development needs of
educational organisations (cf. Hanhimäki & Risku, 2021), including the need for
supporting shared meaning-making, flexibility, resilience and innovativeness.
    The area of pedagogical leadership, which was one of the aims to develop in the
projects, is also topical. Competent pedagogical leadership supports educational
organisations in fulfilling their core task, which is student learning (Elo & Uljens,
2022), by helping them to respond to the challenges and transitions of society, such
as the digitalisation-related changes in (teaching and learning) practices and the
recent increase in learning differences between students and weaker students’
performance. Additionally, the emphasis on pedagogical leadership development in
the projects is associated with the recent and current educational policy changes in
education in Finland (e.g. in ECE and VET sectors) that have resulted in the need
for improving educational leaders’ pedagogical leadership competence (Fonsén &
Soukainen, 2020).
    One central aspect of the projects was to pursue developing educational leader-
ship based on considering the needs of the context (cf. Khalifa et al., 2016). For
example, regional and organisational specificities were seen as an important part of
the contextuality of leadership. When developed in alignment with its context, lead-
ership increases its capacity to respond to the needs of this specific context, result-
ing in higher effectiveness and success (e.g. Khalifa et al., 2016). The fact that the
perspective of contextuality was highlighted in the projects was associated with the
high autonomy of Finnish educational organisations (cf. Simola et al., 2017). This
autonomy concerns both the leaders’ organisations and training conducted in the
projects, as well as the universities as the conductors of this education and training.
As a whole, the fact that the support for leadership development in the projects was
designed and conducted based on the needs of the local educational organisations
speaks about the Democratic Bildung Discourse and the related culture of trust
(Moos et al., 2020) characteristic for education in Finland.
    When we think about what we have learnt in practice during these project pro-
cesses, we emphasise the meaning of our cooperation. The limited resources in
Finland have been gathered through the cooperation of these key projects, which is
a tradition worth developing continuously. In the future, we aim to deepen this

4   Towards a Multi-form Professional Development of Educational Leadership                        77


cooperation and widen it with the networks involved in educational leadership. This
is like the common supervision of postgraduate students between universities and
the development and start of education in educational leadership in collaboration. In
addition, this cooperation helps us to ensure that there is a continuum and possibilities
to provide enough resources for developing education in educational leadership. In
the future, it will be important to further develop education in educational leadership,
for example, for the heads of local education and culture departments.
    Through this kind of cooperation and community, it is possible to strengthen the
development of educational leadership, nationally and internationally. This kind of
cooperation was not amongst the initial aims of the projects, but it has added
remarkable value to the process in terms of the future development of educational
leadership in Finland. Furthermore, we hope that the descriptions of our processes
and results can help both national and international audiences in the corresponding
professional development projects and experiments taking place in their countries
and educational systems.
    The following analyses were conducted to determine the quality and credibility
of the present study. In the content analysis, the two researchers conducted
independent analyses. Subsequently, common conclusions were drawn from
discussions. This adds reliability to the analysis. In a consensus-based theory of
truth, people can create truth by arriving at a consensus (Patton, 2015). In addition,
the use of multiple coders in the analysis phase can be seen as a form of triangulation.
The interview method is repeatable because it is described in as much detail as
possible, so it also increases the reliability of the study.
    The limitation of this study is the small target group of interviewees. On the other
hand, the interviews brought out a deeper picture of the studied phenomenon in
relation to the professional development of leadership in education, and the
interviewees were specialists in educational leadership. The interviews were mainly
carried out as focus group interviews. The challenges of group interviews are
adaptive answers, but they can also elicit deeper answers than individual interviews.
The theoretical framework of the study reflects the studied phenomenon and thus
supports the research findings. Despite the limitations of generalisability, this study
provides important and remarkable aspects and views on the professional
development of educational leadership.



References

Adams, D., Kutty, G. R., & Zabidi, Z. M. (2017). Educational leadership for the 21st century.
   International Online Journal of Educational Leadership, 1(1), 1–4. https://doi.org/10.22452//
   iojel.vol1no1.1â€‹
Ahtiainen, R., Fonsén, E., & Kiuru, L. (2021). Finnish early childhood education directors’ percep-
   tions of leadership and assessment of the national core curriculum in times of change. Australasian
   Journal of Early Childhood, 46(2), 126–138. https://doi.org/10.1177/18369391211010971
Alava, J., Halttunen, L., & Risku, M. (2012). Muuttuva oppilaitosjohtaminen. Tilannekatsaus –
   toukokuu 2012. Opetushallitus. Opetushallituksen muistiot, 3.

78                                                                           E. Hanhimäki et al.

Balkundi, P., & Kilduff, M. (2006). The ties that lead: A social network approach to leadership.
   The Leadership Quarterly, 17(4), 419–439. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.leaqua.2006.01.001
Barakat, M., Lakin, J. M., Reames, E., & Kochan, F. (2021). The cultural competence of educa-
   tional leaders: Developing a conceptual framework and assessment tool for leadership develop-
   ment. Journal of School Leadership, 31(6), 483–501.
Bush, T. (2007). Educational leadership and management: Theory, policy and practice. South
   African Journal of Education, 27(3), 391–406.
Carr, D. (2000). Professionalism and ethics in teaching. Routledge.
Catano, N., & Stronge, J. H. (2007). What do we expect of school principals? Congruence
   between principal evaluation and performance standards. International Journal of Leadership
   in Education, 10(4), 379–399.
Early Childhood Education Act. (2018). https://www.finlex.fi/fi/laki/ajantasa/2018/20180540
Eisenschmidt, E., Ahtiainen, R., Kondratjev, B. S., & Sillavee, R. (2021). A study of Finnish and
   Estonian principals’ perceptions of strategies that foster teacher involvement in school devel-
   opment. International Journal of Leadership in Education. https://doi.org/10.1080/1360312
   4.2021.2000033
Elo, S., & Kyngäs, H. (2008). The qualitative content analysis process. Journal of Advanced
   Nursing, 62(1), 107–115. https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1365-­2648.2007.04569.x
Elo, J., & Uljens, M. (2022). Theorising pedagogical dimensions of higher education leader-
   ship: A non-affirmative approach. Higher Education, 85, 1281. https://doi.org/10.1007/
   s10734-­022-­00890-­0
Finnish Government. (2021). Education policy report of the Finnish government. Publications
   of the Finnish Government, 2021, 64. Retrieved from: https://julkaisut.valtioneuvosto.fi/bit-
   stream/handle/10024/163273/VN_2021_64.pdf?sequence=1&isAllowed=y
Finnish National Agency for Education [FNAE]. (2013). Rehtorien työnkuvan ja koulutuksen
   määrittämistä sekä kelpoisuusvaatimusten uudistamista valmistelevan työryhmän raportti.
   https://www.oph.fi/sites/default/files/documents/153672_rehtorien_tyonkuvan_ja_koulutuk-
   sen_maarittamista_seka_kelpoisuusvaatimuste_0.pdf
Finnish National Agency for Education [FNAE]. (2018). Varhaiskasvatussuunnitelman perusteet
   [National core curriculum for early childhood education and care]. https://www.oph.fi/sites/
   default/files/documents/varhaiskasvatussuunnitelman_perusteet.pdf
Finnish National Agency for Education [FNAE]. (2022). Varhaiskasvatussuunnitelman perusteet
   [National core curriculum for early childhood education and care]. https://www.oph.fi/fi/
   tilastot-­ja-­julkaisut/julkaisut/varhaiskasvatussuunnitelman-­perusteet-­2022
Fonsén, E., & Soukainen, U. (2020). Sustainable pedagogical leadership in Finnish early child-
   hood education (ECE): An evaluation by ECE professionals. Early Childhood Education
   Journal, 48(2), 213–222.
Fonsén, E., & Vlasov, J. (2017). Leading pedagogical quality in the context of Finnish child care.
   In C. Ringsmose & G. Kragh-Müller (Eds.), The Nordic social pedagogical approach to early
   years. Series: International perspectives on early childhood (pp. 253–265). Springer.
Hanhimäki, E. (2011). Moral professionalism in interaction. Educators’ relational moral voices in
   urban schools (Doctoral dissertation). University of Helsinki, Waxmann.
Hanhimäki, E., & Risku, M. (2021). The cultural and social foundations of ethical educational
   leadership in Finland. In R. Normand, L. Moos, M. Liu, & P. Tulowitzki (Eds.), The cultural
   and social foundations on educational leadership. An international comparison (pp. 83–99).
   Springer.
Heikka, J. (2014). Distributed pedagogical leadership in early childhood education (Doctoral dis-
   sertation). University of Tampere, Tampere University Press, Tampere.
Heikkinen, H., Jokinen, H., & Tynjälä, P. (2012). Teacher education and development as lifelong
   and lifewide learning. In H. L. T. Heikkinen, H. Jokinen, & P. Tynjälä (Eds.), Peer-group men-
   toring for teacher development (pp. 19–46). Routledge.

4   Towards a Multi-form Professional Development of Educational Leadership                      79

Jäppinen, A.-K. (2020). Toward a process paradigm of educational leadership. In V. Wang (Ed.),
    Educational leadership: Perspectives, management and challenges (pp. 233–252). Nova
    Science Publishers.
Jäppinen, A.-K., & Taajamo, M. (2022). Educational leadership as a process in today’s changing
    society. In V. Wang (Ed.), Handbook of research on educational leadership and research meth-
    odology (pp. 16–35). IGI Global.
Johnson, C. W., & Voelkel, R. H. (2021). Developing increased leader capacity to support effective
    professional learning community teams. International Journal of Leadership in Education,
    24(3), 313–332.
Khalifa, M. A., Gooden, M. A., & Davis, J. E. (2016). Culturally responsive school leadership: A
    synthesis of the literature. Review of Educational Research, 86(4), 1272–1311.
Krippendorff, K. (2013). Content analysis: An introduction to its methodology (3rd ed.). Sage.
Kumpulainen, T. (Ed.). (2017). Teachers and principals in Finland 2016. Finnish National
    Agency for Education. https://www.oph.fi/sites/default/files/documents/opettajat_ja_rehto-
    rit_suomessa_2016_0.pdf
Lahtero, T., Ahtiainen, R., Fonsén, E., & Kallioniemi, A. (2021). Rehtoreiden ja opettajien käsityk-
    siä perusopetuksen opetussuunnitelman toteutumista edistävistä tekijöistä laajan pedagogisen
    johtamisen viitekehyksessä [Examination of the implementation of the basic education national
    core curriculum within the framework of broad-based pedagogical leadership]. Hallinnon tut-
    kimus [Administrative Studies], 40(5), 326–338.
Lyons, P., & Bandura, R. P. (2020). Skills needs, integrative pedagogy and case-based instruction.
    Journal of Workplace Learning, 32(7), 473–487.
Ministry of Education and Culture (2022a). Opettajankoulutusfoorumi uudistaa opettajan
    koulutusta. https://okm.fi/opettajankoulutusfoorumi
Ministry of Education and Culture (2022b). New comprehensive education. https://okm.fi/en/
    new-­comprehensive-­education
Ministry of Education and Culture (2022c). Reform of vocational upper secondary education.
    https://okm.fi/en/reform-­of-­vocational-­upper-­secondary-­education
Ministry of Education and Culture (2022d). Extension of compulsory education. https://okm.fi/en/
    extension-­of-­compulsory-­education
Moos, L., Nihlfors, E., & Merok Paulsen, J. (Eds.). (2020). Re-centering the critical potential of
    Nordic school leadership research. Springer.
Morrissey, M. S. (2000). Professional learning communities: An ongoing exploration. Southwest
    Educational Development Laboratory.
Muijs, D., & Harris, A. (2003). Teacher leadership – Improvement through empowerment? An
    overview of the literature. Educational Management, Administration & Leadership, 31(4),
    437–448. https://doi.org/10.1177/0263211X030314007
Nivala, V. (1998). Theoretical perspectives on educational leadership. Towards understanding
    leadership in early childhood context. Acta Universitatis Ouluensis E, 35, 49–61.
Normand, R., Moos, L., Liu, M., & Tulowitzki, P. (2021). An international comparison of cul-
    tural and social foundations of educational leadership. In R. Normand, L. Moos, M. Liu, &
    P. Tulowitzki (Eds.), The cultural and social foundations on educational leadership. An inter-
    national comparison (pp. 3–21). Springer.
Patton, M. Q. (2015). Qualitative research & evaluation methods (4th ed.). Sage Publications.
Risku, M. (2020). Pedagogical leadership. In Course material for course EDLS350 pedagogical
    leadership in international masters’ degree programme in Faculty of Education and Psychology
    at University of Jyväskylä. Institute of Educational Leadership.
Risku, M. & Alava, J. (2021). Koulunpidosta koulutusjohtamiseen [From school keeping into
    educational leadership]. In A-S. Holappa, A. Hyyryläinen, P. Kola-Torvinen, S. Korva, &
    A-S. Smeds-Nylund (Eds.). Kasvatus- ja koulutusalan johtaminen [Leadership in the field of
    education], (pp. 10–27). PS-kustannus.

80                                                                             E. Hanhimäki et al.

Risku, M., & Tian, M. (2017). Adult education as a tool for the changing world. In Publication for
    the 1st international scientific conference “challenges for high quality of adult education” by
    the Ministry of Education and Science. Republic of Latvia.
Risku, M., & Tian, M. (2020). Changing operational environment changing Finnish educational
    governance. In O. Johansson & H. Ärlestig (Eds.), Educational authorities and the schools -
    organization and impact in 25 states (pp. 37–54). Springer International Publishing.
Roberson, Q., & Perry, J. L. (2022). Inclusive leadership in thought and action: A thematic analy-
    sis. Group & Organization Management, 47(4), 755–778.
Robinson, V. M. J. (2010). From instructional leadership to leadership capabilities: Empirical find-
    ings and methodological challenges. Leadership and Policy in Schools, 9(1), 1–26. https://doi.
    org/10.1080/15700760903026748
Sai, X., & Siraj, S. (2015). Professional learning community in education: Literature review. The
    Online Journal of Quality in Higher Education, 2(2), 65–78.
Sergiovanni, T. J. (1998). Leadership as pedagogy, capital development and school effec-
    tiveness. International Journal of Leadership in Education, 1(1), 37–46. https://doi.
    org/10.1080/1360312980010104
Simola, H., Kauko, J., Varjo, J., Kalalahti, M., & Sahlstrom, F. (2017). Dynamics in education
    politics: Understanding and explaining the Finnish case. Routledge.
Smeds-Nylund, A-S & Autio, P. (2021). Utbildningsledarskap som ett flernivåfenomen. In
    A-S. Holappa, A. Hyyryläinen, P. Kola-Torvinen, S. Korva, & A-S. Smeds-Nylund (Eds.).
    Kasvatus- ja koulutusalan johtaminen [Leadership in the field of education] (pp. 28–45).
    PS-kustannus.
Spillane, J. P. (2012). Distributed leadership (Vol. 4). Wiley.
Supovitz, J. A. (2021). Foreword: The betweenness of school leaders. In R. Normand, L. Moos,
    M. Liu, & P. Tulowitzki (Eds.), The cultural and social foundations on educational leadership.
    An international comparison (pp. xv–xviii). Springer.
Tynjälä, P. (2013). Toward a 3-P model of workplace learning: A literature review. Vocation and
    Learning, 6(1), 11–36.
Uhl-Bien, M. (2006). Relational leadership theory: Exploring the social processes of leader-
    ship and organizing. The Leadership Quarterly, 17(6), 654–676. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
    leaqua.2006.10.007
Vanblaere, B., & Devos, G. (2016). Relating school leadership to perceived professional learning
    community characteristics: A multilevel analysis. Teaching and Teacher Education, 57, 26–38.
Voelkel, R. H., & Chrispeels, J. H. (2017). Within-school differences in professional learning
    community effectiveness: Implications for leadership. Journal of School Leadership, 27(3),
    424–451. https://doi.org/10.1177/105268461702700305




Open Access This chapter is licensed under the terms of the Creative Commons Attribution 4.0
International License (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/), which permits use, sharing,
adaptation, distribution and reproduction in any medium or format, as long as you give appropriate
credit to the original author(s) and the source, provide a link to the Creative Commons license and
indicate if changes were made.
    The images or other third party material in this chapter are included in the chapter’s Creative
Commons license, unless indicated otherwise in a credit line to the material. If material is not
included in the chapter’s Creative Commons license and your intended use is not permitted by
statutory regulation or exceeds the permitted use, you will need to obtain permission directly from
the copyright holder.