International Education Studies; Vol. 14, No. 1; 2021
                                                                                   ISSN 1913-9020 E-ISSN 1913-9039
                                                                Published by Canadian Center of Science and Education


    The Competences of Teaching Staff and Principals in the Context of
           Educational Innovation and School Development
                                       Phạm Minh Gian1 & Dặng Quoc Bao2
1
    Dong Thap University, Vietnam
2
    The Institute of Vietnamese Intelligence (Vietnam’s Union of Science and Technology Association), Vietnam
Correspondence: Phạm Minh Gian, Dong Thap University, Vietnam. E-mail: pmgian@dthu.edu.vn


Received: February 20, 2020           Accepted: September 11, 2020           Online Published: December 26, 2020
doi:10.5539/ies.v14n1p65                          URL: https://doi.org/10.5539/ies.v14n1p65


Abstract
Since the beginning of 21st century, Vietnam has achieved significant educational achievements, especially in the
improvement of general education network and teaching quality. The reality has showed that working
effectiveness of a school totally depend on the competence of its principal and of the entire teaching staff. Once
these two entities meet the required capacities in the context of innovation in education, leadership and
management, they will surely make an important contribution to the development of the school, fulfilling the
long-term national goal of comprehensive innovation of Vietnamese education in the current period. In the article,
the authors give first an overview on the concept of competence and then the necessity for “competence” of the
principal and teachers in view of their roles in school development with an aim to further improving the quality of
school management and that of teaching and learning in response to the motional cause of education innovation.
Keywords: competence, Vietnamese school, teacher, principal
1. Introduction
1.1 Legal Background of Improving the Competence of Teaching Staff and School Management
The broad tendency of globalization, international integrity, knowledge-based economy, boom of information
technology development... have affected all nations in term of their overall aspects of life, including education. It
is, therefore, demanded that education should be innovated by the involved education leaders and managers to
effectively respond to these changes through their strategies and policies.
In June 2012, the Prime Minister issued Decision No. 711/QD-TTg, approving the “Education Development
Strategy, period 2011-2020”, pointing out in Section V - Educational Development Solutions for the 2011-2020
period - that it is necessary to successfully implement eight solutions, of which solutions 1 being a breakthrough
solution and solution 2 being a key one: developing the teaching staff and school administrators respectively so as
for the Strategic goals to be reached.
In November 2013, in the 8th Plenum Meeting of the Central Party Committee, term XI a Resolution No.
29-NQ/TW on “radical and comprehensive renovation of education and training, meeting the requirements of
industrialization and modernization in the context of socialist-oriented market and international integration” was
passed. Hereby, at Point 6, Section III, Duties and Solutions of Part B. Radical and Comprehensive Innovation of
Education and Training, it is clearly affirmed: developing the teaching staff and school managers, meeting the
requirements of education and training innovation.
The two above matters share a common denominator: Establishing master plans, projecting plans to train, retrain
teachers and foster educational management staff according to the requirements of improving their quality,
responsibility, ethical standards, and professional competence. In a more explicit expression, in the context of the
era of Industrial Revolution 4.0, one of the essential requirements of modern education is to urgently, continuously
and regularly provide the teachers and school managers with training and fostering courses for the improvement of
their capacities. In the light of this sense, in this article, the authors present: Awareness of the “concept of
competence”; Discussion on the competence issue of teachers, school managers; Recommendations on the policies
for training and re- training the needed competencies for teachers and principals toward meeting the roles and
responsibilities of leadership, management and teaching work in the context of innovating and developing
Vietnamese schools.

                                                         65

ies.ccsenet.org                            International Education Studies                       Vol. 14, No. 1; 2021


1.2 The Rationale of Improving the Competence of Teaching Staff and School Managers
Competence is the universal characteristics of one’s personalities. It is clearly defined in the Dictionary of
Vietnamese that: “Competence is a personal ability, his subjective or natural conditions to perform a certain
activity ...” (Hoang Phe et al., 2009)
In a normal sense, competence refers to the aspect “talent” in one’s personality while quality implies the aspect of
“virtue”. However, in today's expression, quality is an aspect of competence. For example, concerning to a person's
leadership competence, it is refered to both his “talent” and “virtue” in social conditions.
In a Dictionary of Education, competence is defined as the unborn or learned ability that allows a person to
succeed in a physical, mental, or professional activity. One’s competence is usually expressed in his ability to
perform an activity or a task. Competence is only effective when it is proven in activity performance, in the
opposite case, it is only assumed or not real. Competence can be born or established as the process of practice is
developed by experiencing or by learning in accordance with individual's unique characteristics.
Competence is seen as the ability of a person to face new problems and situations in which he can recall the
information and techniques that he used in previous experiments.
In corresponsive to pedagogical and educational actions, competence is divided: the motor-type competence is
manifested by the nature and quality of motion; intellectual competence is manifested by intellectual approaches
with the latter demonstrating one’s sensitivity, similarly to emotional competence.
The ability of a person is measured by completing complex tasks, which requires the execution of many operations
on the tasks that people often encounter while practicing a profession. (Bui Hien et al., 2013)
Nowadays, in a deriving process as talking about the concept of competence, it may point to the concept of
“performing competence”. The Vietnamese Encyclopedia of Psychology and Education has it in an entry that:
Competency is an ability needed to be able to complete one or a number of professional work. Performance
competence is not the common potentiality of every person, but is the ability to carry out a specific job of the
profession, including the knowledge, skill and attitude that are applied in an integrated manner to accomplish a
certain task prescribed in set of job’s standardized duties under necessary conditions. To be able to work in a job
position/title of an occupation, the employees must be able to complete all tasks of this profession. Therefore, in
modern vocational training, performance-based training is being increasingly and popularly applied (Phạm, 2013)
The competence mentioned in this article is based on the professional demands for functions, responsibilities and
roles of the teaching staff and principals in the current educational context.
2. Method
In this article, the research methods include theoretical analysis, modeling and synthetics of educational
experience and by reviewing educational accomplishments during personal professional work for useful
conclusions.
In the article, in addition to the authors’ educational experience, we have taken reference on other researchers’
works.
- Ho Chi Minh, a Vietnamese national revolutionary hero, an outstanding man of culture and a great teacher.
- Chu Van An, a model teacher of Vietnam in all times
- Teacher, Professor Nguyen Canh Toan, the holder of immense research projects, also known as a talented
mathematician and as a model teacher who devoted his whole life to the cause of national education innovation and
creativeness.
- Professor Klaus Schwab, Chef Executive of World Economic Forum
- John Vu, former Technical Fellow and Chief Engineer at the Boeing Company, who has taken important positions
in several US’ universities and corporations, who wrote the valuable nomograph of “Education in the Era of
Knowledge”
- Carl Rogers, Johm Home, Maria Montessori, John Dewey, Ernest Melby,…are also the authors whose ideas were
in our reference.
3. Results and Discussions
3.1 Teacher’s Competence in the Context of Education Innovation
In order to effectively respond to the cause of educational innovation, teachers are required to constantly improve
their competence and qualification. School managers must promulgate guidelines and policies so that their

                                                         66

ies.ccsenet.org                                 International Education Studies                                Vol. 14, No. 1; 2021


teachers/teaching staffs are all included in these renovation policies, which helps them constantly improve their
personalities. The following discussions focus its concentration on the management of teachers and teaching staff,
helping them fulfill their sacred mission in educational innovation.
3.1.1 Four Roles of a Teacher
No matter how teaching techniques and teaching technologies have been changed and developed towards the
society’s increasingly developed direction, in many countries, Vietnam included, four types of teaching styles are
intermingling conducted, thus leading to four roles of a teacher.
Traditional teaching: in this type of teaching, the teacher plays the role of a commander and his students obey his
commands. Students are required to “imitate” the knowledge disseminated by the teacher.
Eliciting teaching: in this type of teaching, the teacher is a designer and students execute his ideas. Students are
required to “reproduce” the knowledge provided by the teacher.
Active teaching: in this type of teaching, the teacher has a leading role while the student perceives his
communication. Students are required to “reproduce” the knowledge provided by the teacher.
Constructive teaching: in this type of teaching, the teacher has the role of a mentor, an inspiratory and students
must discover the objective reality that both teachers and students are interested in. The students “create” the
knowledge elicited by the teacher.


Table 1. Teaching styles and the requirement for the roles of teachers
                  Requirements for Teacher

                                                       Teacher                Student      Development of knowledge
            Teaching Style


            Traditional                           Giving commands             Obeying              Imitating
            Eliciting                        Designing Suggesting ideas     Implementing        Reconstructing
            Active                           Leading Proposing objectives    Perceiving          Reproducing
            Constructive                         Mentoring Inspiring        Discovering            Creating


In reality, students are not homogeneous in term of their characteristics. If two criteria of intellectual development
and learning attitude are considered, there are four types of students in every class: Smart - Hardworking;
Intelligence - Lazy; Slow - Hardworking; Slow - Lazy.
The teacher, following the working motto “Huu giao vo loai” (nobody is impossible to be taught) must be flexible,
successfully fulfills his work responsibilities in all 4 aspects: Commander; Designer; Mentor, Inspiror.
A dedicated teacher is a manager - a manager without a red stamp, who has teaching skills, teaching styles so that
every student can be able to keep up with the imposed “teaching-learning requirements”.
Professor Nguyen Canh Toan, also a teacher used to suggest teaching students in a spirit of dividing 4 powers:
competence, attraction, permeability, and creativity.
Pedagogical labor of teachers, considered as “Su hinh” (The noble teacher – Ho Chi Minh’s teachings) is,
therefore, quite tiring. Economic - educational policies, therefore, must cover the above-mentioned characteristics
in order that their contents become “thau tinh dat ly” (comprehensible and plausible).
3.1.2 Teacher’s Ideal–Teacher’s Virtue and Teacher’s Art of Teaching
Teacher’s ideal – Teacher’s virtue and Teacher’s art of teaching must syndronously develop in a positive direction
so as to bring forth effective teaching. When only one of the factors develops in a negative orientation, teaching
becomes less effective immediately.
a. Teacher’s ideal: teacher’s professional ambition
A message of “All are for dear students” has been launched in Vietnamese schools in the 1960s and this message
remains a sense of urgency in today schools.
b. Teacher’s virtue
Over 650 years ago, teacher Chu Van An (1292 - 1370), who was honored as a model teacher of Vietnam, and who
petitioned to the King the Appeal of “Seven Deadly Sins”, gave his teachings to disciples via eight words: “Cùng

                                                                 67

ies.ccsenet.org                              International Education Studies                         Vol. 14, No. 1; 2021


lý – Chính tâm - Trừ tà - Cự bế”.
“Cung Ly”: Thoroughly grasp all the arguments of matters.
“Chinh Tam”: Train the righteous mind, stay away from the dull mind, the wrong mind.
“Tru Ta”: Being against nonsensical theories.
“Cu Be”: Having the energy to overcome adversities and difficulties.
The eight teachings that the teacher Chu Van An mentioned about teacher’s virtue still remain unchanged in term
of the meaning for the practice of professional virtue of the Vietnamese teachers in the current context.
c. Teacher’s art of teaching
This includes the teachers’ all arts of teaching as in a school teachers are supposed to take three job responsibilities:
“Providing students with knowledge, Teaching students to become mature individual and teaching students to
learn a profession”, which means the work of transmitting virtue, explanation and career pursuit to students.
The teachers’ art of teaching is expressed in sixteen words:
− Treatment towards the students: Dụ - Trợ - Khải - Phát
− Attitude with the lessons: Kế - Triển – Kiểm – Hồi.
− Pedagogical skills: Huấn – Luyện – Lượng – Bồi.
− Pedagogical manner: Ẩn - Uy – Đức - Pháp.
Dụ: Leading students into the learning process.
Trợ: Helping students overcome difficulties.
Khải: Awakening students to reach noble living values.
Phát: Developing students' personalities.
Kế: Planning the delivery of lesson contents.
Triển: Implementing a determined teaching plan.
Kiểm: Testing, assessment.
Hồi: Giving feedback.
Huấn: Coaching students to grasp new knowledge.
Luyện: Training practical skills for learners.
Lượng: Giving objective assessment to students’ studies.
Bồi: Fostering students of their knowledge and skill deficiencies.
Ân: Being tolerant to students.
Uy: Becoming serious in conducting pedagogical regulations so that students can fulfill their duties.
Đức: Being able to apply educational methods to motivate students.
Pháp: Showing students how to strictly observe the school’s regulations and rules.




                                                           68

ies.ccsenet.org                              Internationnal Education Stuudies                       Vol. 14, No. 1; 2021




                  Figure 1.
                         1 Teacher’s beehavior under tthe working m
                                                                  motto “All are ffor dear studennts”


3.1.3 Discuussions on Todday Teachers’ R
                                       Roles
Our predeecessor’s essennce must be uupdated with the value of the modern tiime. Let somee of the following
comments be mentioned so that a Vietnnamese teacherr must take intoo account in orrder for his “Sư  ư đạo – Sư đức – Sư
thuật” (Teaacher’s ideal, teacher’s
                          t         virtuue and teacher’s art of teachinng) to be develloped synchronnously.
In his talkk in early 20177, Professor K
                                       Klaus Schwab,, Executive Director of the World Econom        mic Forum (WWEF)
expressed his concern: “We are in a mooment of historical turning ppoint, in which we are facing with turbulenc ce on
economy, politics, migraation, terrorism
                                       m, and the craccks institutions, ethical standdards, leadershhip competenc
                                                                                                                ce...”.
He propossed the conceppt of “four Cs”” that any moodern persons, no matter whhat their professsion will be, need
regular praactice.
C1: Criticaal thinking
C2: Creatiiveness
C3: Comm
       munication
C4: Collabboration
(Schwas, 22018)
Applying tthe above com
                      mments to the sschools, the teaachers must paass that “4Cs” oon students. A
                                                                                                Again, to do this, the
teachers m
         must constantlyy accumulate vvalues of “4Cs””.
Carl Rogeers, an Americcan humanitarrian educationnal psychologist, gave the ffollowing adviice to teacherss: Be
regularly m mindful of the students' affecction; Regularlly take more advantage of sttudents' purposse in the interaction
activities oof the lesson tiime; Have morre talks with sttudents; Give rregular praisals to students; H
                                                                                                      Having approppriate
communiccation with stuudents; Constaantly associatee the learning contents withh the experiencce of each spe      ecific
student (thhe teacher’s leccture satisfyingg the students’ current needs) and smile moore to studentss”.
John Hom                             who talks long and talks a lott is students’ ennemy.”
       me stressed thatt: “A teacher w
Maria Monntessori (1870 - 1952): “Teacchers will havee to learn to keeep quiet insteaad of talking, oobserving instead of
instructingg, and putting on
                          o a cloak of hhumility and paassion instead of the proud loook of a personn who never makes
                                                                                                                   m
mistakes. “
John Deweey (1859-19522): “The teacheer is not a judge, nor a personn of authority iin the classroomm, but a memb  ber of
the classrooom so the teacching method will be somethhing natural, nnot hindering sstudents’ naturaal developmen   nt nor
turning young children innto old men. E Every teacher sshould be awarre of his or her professional ddignity that he (she)
is a sociall servant who is assigned too maintain thee proper sociall order and ennsure proper soocial developm    ment.
Accordinggly, the teacherr is a true prophhet of god andd a genuine tutoor in the kingddom of god.
Carl Jung (1875 - 1961)): “We show oour respect to the distinguishhed teachers, bbut we must eexpress our inffinite
gratitude too the teachers who have warm
                                       med our heartss. The warmth of the soul is a vital factor foor the young so
                                                                                                                 ouls.”
Ernest Meelby: “One of thhe most imporrtant things forr a teacher is too give his studdents comfort aand condolence
                                                                                                                  e and


                                                            69

ies.ccsenet.org                             International Education Studies                        Vol. 14, No. 1; 2021


take away their sad anxiety”.
(Dang & Pham, 2019)
3.2 Principals’ Competence in the Context of Educational Innovation
3.2.1 Principal: Three Roles and Three Functions
The principal, the head of the pedagogical team, has three roles: an orchestra conductor, a commander of a military
unit, a football coach for a competition. At the same time, the principal has the following three functions: a leader
who directs the overall work of the school, the specific manager of educating - teaching so that new personalities
are created, a meticulous administrator of capital sources assigned to the school by the society to transform
personalities into human resources.
a. Principal - “the orchestra conductor”
John Vu, Technical Fellow and Chief Engineer at The Boeing Company, who used to hold many important
positions in many universities and major economic groups in the US, wrote in a valuable monograph of “Education
in the age of knowledge” (T. V. Ngo, 2016).
John Vu remembered a lunch when he met with Benjamin Zander, the famous conductor of a symphony orchestra
in Boston, who gave a message in that interesting exchange: “The conductor is not the one who proves his
creativity through the musical instrument but is judged by their ability to create an environment in which
musicians’ talent can emerge and the quality of the performance can be experienced by the audience. His job is not
different from that of a school principal.”
John Vu went on with what he has learned from Benjamin Zander’s ideas by saying that: “For several following
days, the concept of the principal as the conductor had invaded my mind. In a school, when the teachers or the
learners are not doing well, how many principals will take this concern: “What is it that I personally do not
encourage my teachers or my students to do as well as they should?” Maybe I do something that doesn't boost the
performance that every teacher is capable of doing.”
John Vu emphasized: “In an orchestra, there is a conductor and many musicians, the conductor is the leader and the
musicians are the managers who manage their own instruments to play the music… Leadership and management
are not the same but they are linked and mutually complemented each other. The musicians’s job is to show off
their best artistic power. That means it is the job of a teacher/professor to organize classes according to their best
qualifications. The conductor's job is to inspire and motivate. The principal's job is also inspiring and encouraging.
I like such comparison”. (T. V. Ngo, 2016)
b. Principal - “A commander of a military unit”
The idea of comparing the Principal - Conductor was also mentioned by Peter Drucker–a famous practical
manager. More than that, Peter Drucker requires the principal to be the commander of a military unit. A principal is
aware of the ideas of Peter Drucker. “The broad audience that the principal affects is the students” (through the
school's pedagogical collective).
Principals by their mapped-out guidelines and plans, must make the collective of student - “the central subjects of
the teaching process” to possess a sense of discipline in learning and working, a desire to best develop their
personalities in accordance with the motto “Caring without indulging, respecting but persevering the principles
that require students to act in accordance with Politeness - Gratitude - Honesty - Self-respect”. Similarly, principals
must have the manner and attitude of the commander of a modern army unit to urge the students to practice “4Hs
and 3Ss”
4H: Học (Learning) – Hòi (Questioning) – Hiểu (Understanding) – Hành (Acting)
3S: Sống hẳn hoi (Living soundly) – Sống chừng mực (Living moderately) – Sống sáng tạo (Living creatively)
c. Principal - A coach of a football team in a competition
Today schools operate as factories - factories without chimneys but producing personality - manpower.
The principal, the head of the school, must always be sensitive to the law of value - the law of supply and demand
of the market - the law of competition, the law of time in term of economic angle. Peter Drucker himself had once
demanded: “The school must operate as an economic unit” and should not behave in such a way as “No matter
when long nights come and long days arrive, schools will be exempted with the economic concepts”. That means
with the help of specialized departments, the principal must know the cost of training for each school year.
The principal must control the activities of the school’s staff working in the departments Education & of

                                                          70

ies.ccsenet.org                             International Education Studies                      Vol. 14, No. 1; 2021


Administration, of Testing and Quality Assurance, of Marketing, … and also the faculties/academic departments...
like controlling the operation of a football team in a competition. A principal is supposed to have a “feeling of
directing a rough match” in view of the school's state under the condition of finance use being funded and required
provision of workforce being imposed by the society. Principals must, therefore, not be “in a perfunctory manner”
or “taking something for granted” in term of the category of “economic quota in teaching”, a standard to be applied
in teaching.”
3.2.2 Principal’s Three Capacities
Principals’ capacities must be harmoniously dedicated to: leadership, management and school management
competence. True leadership capacity requires the principal to run the school in such a way that every member
considers the sense of “Living in the spirit of love” as a key value of life, taking the “development goal” as a
priority, and codes of ethics as a motivation to work.
The management competence requires the principal of the school to ensure that the school members thoroughly
grasp the slogan of “Living and fulfilling the given duty” is the key value of life, and that clarifying the
“Development solution” is prioritized, and that justice as a working motivation.
The management competence requires the principal to run the school so that all members think that “Living to
create benefits” is a key life value, with a priority given to attaining “spiritual/material achievement” and with a
consideration of legal affairs as a working motivation.
3.2.3 Some Formulas Describing the Principals’ Work
a. Formula describing the principal’s overall leadership
                                                        L = 7S
L: Leadership
S1: Staff (number, quality, structure, synergy)
S2: Structure (internal structure–an emphasis on the school’s internal relationships)
S3: System (general system–an emphasis on the school’s internal and external relationships)
S4: Strategy (action strategy–defense, restrain, attack)
S5: Skill (required management skills)
S6: Style (manipulated managing styles)
S7: Super priorities (top priorities in urgent need of solution)




                                        Figure 2. The 7S management model


b. Formula describing the principal’s specific management
                                                       M = 5m
M: Management
m1: manpower
m2: money
m3: machine–equipment

                                                           71

ies.ccsenet.org                           International Education Studies             Vol. 14, No. 1; 2021


m4: material
m5: marketing




                                      Figure 3. The 5M management model


c. Formula for the principal’s meticulous administration
Three formulas describing the meticulous management of school’ development factors:
                                                    A1 = 4P
A1: Administration
P1: Product (the specification of using teaching program)
P2: Price (the cost offered for the implementation of the teaching program)
P3: Place (location for the application of teaching program)
P4: Promotion (measures of consumption promotion)




                                     Figure 4. The 4P administration model


                                                    A2 = 4C
A2: Administration
C1: Consumer (subjects to whom the teaching program is intended)
C2: Cost (the expenditure for the implementation of teaching program)
C3: Convenience (service offering convenience to the users of teaching program)
C4: Communication (communication with the customers)




                                                        72

ies.ccsenet.org                                 Internationnal Education Stuudies                            Vol. 14, No. 1; 2021




                                          F
                                          Figure 5. The 44C administratiion model


When a prrincipal is in thhe “feeling of ddirecting a rouugh football maatch”, he will ssurely be sensiitive in determining
whether hee will apply thhe model of A1 = 4P, or A2 = 4C or not.
A1 attachees the importannce to the offeered cost of im
                                                      mplementing a new teachingg program while A2 is conce
                                                                                                          erned
with the trraining cost of implementingg a new teachinng program.
                                                       A3 = 5W+H+2Q
In their general school management
                        m          work, principalss must grasp seeven questionss below
•     Whatt/Why?: What should I do annd why shouldd I do it?
•     Who//Why? : Who should I work with? Why shhould I work w
                                                             with these persoons?
•     Wherre/Why?: Wheere should I doo it? Why shouuld I do it theree?
•     Whenn/Why?: Whenn should I do iit? Why shouldd I do it at thatt time?
•     How//Why?: How should
                     s      I do it? Why should I do by that waay?
•     Quanntity/Why?: Too what extent sshould I do it aand why shouldd I do it to thatt equinity?
•     Qualiity/Why?: How
                       w much shouldd I do it and w
                                                  why should I doo it to that mucch quality?




                                     Figurre 6. The 5W+H
                                                       H+2Q adminisstration modell


3.2.4 The T
          Twelve Sets off “2” of a Principal
No matter what situationn he faces in opperating the schhool, a principaal needs the following three ggeneral capacitiess:
(i) ability tto think, especcially critical tthinking; (ii) aability to organnize work; (iii)) ability to estaablish relationships
with involvved persons.
A principaal is supposed to
                         t thoroughly ggrasp twelve ssets of “2” as ffollow:
Three sets of critical thinnking skills: hee has to know ((i) himself & oothers; (ii) his strength & thee times; (iii) wh
                                                                                                                        hat is
enough & when it is time to stop;
Four sets oof job capacitiies: Doing the right things & Doing the pllanned tasks coorrectly; (v) B      Being disciplined &
flexible; (vvi) Taking activve initiatives & taking farsigghted visions; ((vii) Paying atttention to the w
                                                                                                         work as as whoole &
paying atteention to the work
                         w       in specificc details;
Five sets oof establishingg relationshipss: (viii) Takingg abligation & Managing; ((ix) Competitiing & yielding
                                                                                                              g; (x)
Taking sucction & repulsiive force; (xi) Being authorittive & tolerantt; (xii) Being aassertive & dem
                                                                                                    mocratic.

                                                               73

ies.ccsenet.org                             International Education Studies                         Vol. 14, No. 1; 2021


In his managing the school, the principal needs to apply “Considerion - Contrivance - Choice” to realize the set
goals.
In general: F (Operating the school) = f (a, b, c)
a: Consideration: finding the balance of the subjectives and the objectives
e.g. When you are in Rome, do as the Romans do
Young aged persons will do small things, depending on his strength.
b: Contrivance: finding the compatibility between the objectives and personal ability, i.e. cut your coat according
to your cloth.
c: Choice: to find the convergence point of one’s internal and external strength, i.e. look before you leap.
3.2.5 Principal’s Wisdom-Based Management
Wisdom-based management is management of: “wise–smart”, “moderate” management, or “positively effective”
management.
Ngo Thi Nham (1746-1803), a culture researcher, had the message: “minh triết dĩ báo than, vô cứ vu lê, vô khốn vu
thạch,” firugatively meaning that a person of wisdom will know how to control himself under any circumstances
and will not stumble into rock on the street or get trapped in tree’s branches)
The knowledge of intelligent management today is named Phronesis and was proposed by a Japanese scholar
Nonaka, including:
(i) The ability to appreciate the good.
(ii) The ability to share common context with others so that a common knowledge space will be created and the
goals are reached.
(iii) The ability to grasp the nature of phenomena in close connection with the good.
(iv) The ability to use narrative language to refactor the particularity into generalization and vice versa.
(v) The ability to use the necessary political means to realize concepts and reacg the set goals.
(vi) The ability to encourage Phronesis of others to build up the organization flexibly.
Nonaka has commented: Ho Chi Minh is a wise leader. (T. L. Ngo, 2016)
4. Conclusions
In general, the competence of teachers and principals always plays an important role in the development of schools
under any eras. It is noticeable that in the current context of science and technology - the Revolution 4.0, teachers
and principals are more and more important in term of their capacities and these two parties need to be able to
respond quickly to the rapid changes of the times.
Leaders and educational managers of all levels should attach great importance to the training and retraining of
competencies as presented to the teachers and school principals via training, re-training courses and reality
experience programs. Each teacher and principal must personally take initiative in doing research, further study,
and train themselves in practice in order to attain the needed competences to meet the professional requirements,
functions, responsibilities, and finally successfully complete their work of leadership, management and teaching.
References
Bui Hien et al. (2013). Education Dictionary. Polytechnic Dictionary Publishing House, Hanoi.
Communist Party of Vietnam. (2013). Resolution of the 8th Plenium of the Central Party Committee, term XI.
   The Office of the Central Party Committee, Hanoi.
Dang, Q. B., & Pham, M. G. (2019). The Flow of Vietnamese Education. The Publishing House of Information
    and Communication, Ha Noi.
Hoang Phe et al. (2009). Dictionary of Vietnamese. Da Nang Publishing House.
Martin-Kniep, G. O. (2011). Eight reforms for a good teacher (Le Van Canh Trans.) Vietnam Education
    Publishing House, Hanoi.
Marzano, R. J. (2011). The art and science of teaching (Nguyen Huu Chau trans., Le Van Canh edited). Vietnam
    Education Publishing House, Hanoi.
Ngo, T. L. (2016). Professor Ikujiro Nonaka: “Ho Chi Minh is a wise leader. E-World Security. Retrieved from

                                                          74

ies.ccsenet.org                              International Education Studies                         Vol. 14, No. 1; 2021


     http://antgct.cand.com.vn/So-tay/Giao-suikujiro-Nonaka-Ho-Chi-Minh-la-mot-nha-Lanh-dao-minh-triet-37
     9283/
Ngo, T. V. (2016). Education in the age of knowledge (Vietnamese edition). Labor Publishing House, Hanoi.
Phạm, M. H. (2013). Vietnam Encyclopedia of Educational Psychology. Vietnam Education Publishing House,
    Hanoi.
Schwas, K. (2018). Industrial Revolution 4.0. The Publishing House of The World in collaboration with The
    Ministry of Foreign Affairs, 2018.
Stronge, J. H. (2011). The qualifications of an effective teacher (Le Van Canh trans.). Vietnam Education
     Publishing House, Hanoi.


Copyrights
Copyright for this article is retained by the author(s), with first publication rights granted to the journal.
This is an open-access article distributed under the terms and conditions of the Creative Commons Attribution
license (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/).




                                                           75