F UTURE S TUDIES R ESEARCH J OURNAL - F IA B USINESS SCHOOL
                                                            Scientifc Editor: Renata Giovinazzo Spers
                                                            Evaluation: Double Blind Review, pelo SEER/OJS
                                                            Review: Preliminary
                                                            Doi: https://doi.org/10.24023/FutureJournal/2175-5825/2020.v12i3.517




 S         TRATEGIC MANAGEMENT IN PUBLIC ADMINISTRATION: A BALANCED
           SCORECARD APPLICABILITY FRAMEWORK IN SCHOOL MANAGEMENT


                                                                             2
                                                                                         1
                                                                                            Pedro Henrique de Oliveira
                                                                                 Marco Antonio Catussi Paschoalotto
                                                                                 3
                                                                                   Diego Valério de Godoy Delmônico
                                                                                          4
                                                                                            Fernando de Souza Coelho
                                                                                     5
                                                                                       Fernando César Almada Santos
                                                                                             6
                                                                                               Edmundo Escrivão Filho



Abstract

Purpose - This study aims at developing a framework of the Balanced Scorecard (BSC) in public
educational organizations.
Theoretical framework – There are 3-sections: Strategic planning in public sector, Balanced
Scorecard and BSC in the public sector. Strategic management in public administration is an
important issue, with the BSC as one of the most widely used tools. Although, the application
of this technique in public schools is still unexplored and uncommon, it does possess the
potential to improve their effectiveness.
Methodology - A 3-stage qualitative approach: (i) 8 semi-structured interviews with the
principals of participating schools; (ii) 4 stages of focus groups with 3 of the principals from
different schools; and (iii) non-participant observation using a field diary. Also, the data were
analyzed through content analysis and cross-referencing the different forms of data collected.
Findings - The results do not indicate a vast knowledge concerning the BSC’s techniques and
tools, or an alignment between management planning posture, principles nor objectives of BSC
application. Also, school planning is realized through the expertise of the Principal, without
instruments of strategic management. Finally, adapted BSC models and strategic maps were
proposed in public schools to collaborate and facilitate the strategic management process.
Research, Practical & Social implications - The paper contributes towards developing new
research agendas for strategic management in Brazil, with the possibility of improving public
results and to appoint new practices in public schools.
Originality/value - We have collaborated with the creation of a tool to use in the strategic
planning of primary schools and pushing BSC studies into public sectors.
Keywords: Strategic management. Balanced scorecard. Strategic Map. Public administration.
Public school.

How to cite the article:

   Oliveira, P., Paschoalotto, M., Delmônico, D., Coelho, F., Santos, F., & Escrivão Filho, E. (2020).
Strategic Management in Public Administration: A Balanced Scorecard Applicability Framework in School
Management. Future Studies Research Journal: Trends and Strategies, 12(3), 458-482.
doi:https://doi.org/10.24023/FutureJournal/2175-5825/2020.v12i3.517



1 School of Engineering, University of São Paulo – EESC/USP, São Paulo, (Brasil). E-mail: oliveira.pedro@usp.br Orcid id:

https://orcid.org/0000-0002-1616-6465
2 University of West Paulista - UNOESTE, São Paulo, (Brasil). E-mail: marcocatussi@unoeste.br Orcid id:

https://orcid.org/0000-0003-2276-8531
3Bauru Engineering School, Paulista State University - FEB/UNESP, São Paulo, (Brasil). E-mail: diegodelmonico@gmail.com

Orcid id: https://orcid.org/0000-0001-5268-190X
4 School of Arts, Sciences and Humanities, University of São Paulo - EACH/USP, São Paulo, (Brasil). E-mail:

fernandocoelho@usp.br Orcid id: https://orcid.org/0000-0003-2803-0722
5 School of Engineering, University of São Paulo – EESC/USP, São Paulo, (Brasil). E-mail: almada@sc.usp.br Orcid id:

http://orcid.org/0000-0002-9317-088X
6 School of Engineering, University of São Paulo – EESC/USP, São Paulo, (Brasil). E-mail: edesfi@sc.usp.br Orcid id:

http://orcid.org/0000-0001-5181-5398

      F UTURE S TUDIES RESEARCH J OURNAL   ISSN 2175-5825   S ÃO PAULO, V.12, N .3, P. 458 – 482, SEP. / D EC . 2020
                                                                                                                       458

 Strategic Management in Public Administration: A Balanced Scorecard Applicability Framework in School
                                                                                         Management




G         ESTÃO ESTRATÉGICA NO SETOR PÚBLICO: A APLICAÇÃO DE UM ESBOÇO
          TEÓRICO DO BALANCED SCORECARD NA GESTÃO ESCOLAR



Resumo

Objetivo – O objetivo foi desenvolver um esboço teórico do Balanced Scorecard (BSC) em
organizações públicas escolares.

Quadro teórico – Há 3 seções: Planejamento estratégico no setor público, Balanced
Scorecard e BSC no setor público. A gestão estratégica na administração pública é um
tópico importante, com o BSC sendo muito utilizado. Entretanto, a aplicação desse
instrumento em escolas públicas ainda é pouco explorada e pode aumentar a sua
efetividade.

Metodologia – Houve 3 etapas utilizando-se a abordagem qualitativa. (i) 8 entrevistas
semiestruturadas com diretoras escolares; (ii) 4 dias de grupo focal com 3 diretoras e; e
(iii) observação não participante com diário de campo. Os dados também foram analisados
por meio da análise de conteúdo e triangulados pelas diversas coletas de dados.

Resultados – Os resultados indicam que não há conhecimento das técnicas e ferramentas
do BSC e que poderia haver um alinhamento do planejamento estratégico pela aplicação
do BSC. Observou-se também que o planejamento escolar é feito pela experiência da
diretora, sem uso de instrumentos de gestão estratégica. Por fim, foi proposto um esboço
teórico da adaptação do BSC e mapa estratégico, contribuindo para o processo da gestão
estratégica.

Contribuições práticas, sociais e de pesquisa – O artigo contribuiu para o
desenvolvimento de uma nova agenda de pesquisa na gestão estratégica brasileira, a
possibilidade de melhoria no setor público e o apontamento de novas práticas em escolas
públicas.

Originalidade/relevância – Foram criados instrumentos que podem ser usados na
gestão estratégica das escolas públicas. Também pelo avanço do uso do BSC no setor
público.

Palavras-chave: Gestão estratégica.                          Balanced            Scorecard.            Mapa            estratégico.
Administração pública. Escola pública.


Como Citar:

   Oliveira, P., Paschoalotto, M., Delmônico, D., Coelho, F., Santos, F., & Escrivão Filho, E. (2020). Gestão
Estratégica no Setor Público: A Aplicação de um Esboço Teórico do Balanced Scorecard na Gestão
Escolar. Future Studies Research Journal: Trends and Strategies [FSRJ], 12(3), 458-482.
doi:https://doi.org/10.24023/FutureJournal/2175-5825/2020.v12i3.517




      F UTURE S TUDIES RESEARCH J OURNAL   ISSN 2175-5825   S ÃO PAULO, V.12, N .3, P. 458 – 482, SEP. / D EC . 2020
                                                                                                                                459
                                                                                                                                 19

    Pedro Henrique de Oliveira, Marco Antonio Catussi Paschoalotto, Diego Valério de Godoy Delmônico,
                 Fernando de Souza Coelho, Fernando César Almada Santos & Edmundo Escrivão Filho




1 INTRODUCTION

     Although attention from the scientific community toward strategic planning has
dwindled since 1990, it is still one of the most widely used tools in contemporary
management (Wolf & Floyd, 2017). Also, articles on this subject are still being published
by relevant scientific journals (Najgebauer, Antkiewicz, Pierzchała & Rulka, 2017),
including journals outside the scope of management, in areas such biology (Ringma,
Wintle, Fuller, Fisher, Bode, 2017) and engineering (Purnawan & Sanjaya, 2017).
     This does not go without criticism, as the literature suggests that issues concerning
strategic planning in the public sector should be more dynamic and integrative (Mintzberg,
1994; Olsen, 2012). Despite such, recent literature has recognized the positive aspects of
strategic planning in the public sector (George, 2017).
     The Balanced Scorecard (BSC) is a system widely used for deploying strategic
management (Queiroz & Lobosco, 2015). One tool for the development of BSC is strategic
map, which also aids in the strategic management process by showing the visual
framework for the objectives of the cited perspectives (Kaplan & Norton, 2000).
     There are studies on the application of BSC in the public sector, which include a
variety of contexts - Italian (Bracci, Maran & Inglis, 2017), Czech Republic (Plaček, Půček
& Šilhánková, 2017), Ethiopia (Bobe, Mihret & Obo, 2017) and New Zealand (Northcott &
Taulapapa, 2012; Greatbanks & Tapp, 2007). However, few studies present Brazilian
cases, especially when it comes to observing education management.
     Critical studies based on the use of BSC for public sector organizations suggest the
need for community participation in strategic management and the proper understanding
of the internal-external environment (Maccarone, Filiciotto, Buffa, Mazzola & Buscaino,
2014; Rahiminia & Karzogar, 2016; Souza & Cordeiro, 2010; Younis & Knight, 2014).
Despite this criticism, BSC contributes toward improving the performance of public sector
organizations (Kaplan & Bower, 1999). The study by Northcott and Taulapapa (2012), for
example, shows the BSC being used for supporting performance management in public
sector organizations.
     On the other hand, the administration of school organizations is one management
activity of the public sector. This function is responsible for pedagogical organization of
school activities by aligning educational issues with strategic vision and intertwined actions
(Lück, 2009). In this process, the political perspectives of the principal and teachers (Paro,
2010) coexist alongside the management approach (Lunenberg, 2010).
     Despite the relevance concerning the matter, there are significant research gaps in
the public sector in terms of the BSC regarding strategic planning in educational
organizations. Additionally, no papers were found that aim at developing a theoretical
model for a better understanding into BSC, and this is also true when seen from the
Brazilian context.

     F UTURE S TUDIES RESEARCH J OURNAL   ISSN 2175-5825   S ÃO PAULO, V.12, N .3, P. 458 – 482, SEP. / D EC . 2020
                                                                                                                      460

 Strategic Management in Public Administration: A Balanced Scorecard Applicability Framework in School
                                                                                         Management




     In order to cover this gap, this study sought to answer the following question: what
is the theoretical structure that best integrates the perspectives of school administration
with strategic management, involving BSC and strategic mapping, in the public sector? To
answer this question, this paper shows the development of a framework that synthesizes
the application of the Balanced Scorecard in public educational organizations. This
framework was developed based on multiple case studies and multiple methods of data
collection such as interviews, questionnaires, focus group, non-participant observation and
field diary with public administration school organizations.
     The theoretical contributions of this paper include the development of a framework
for strategic management by using empirical data from public school organizations and a
theoretical model for BSC implementation in public sector educational organizations. This
study potentially contributes to researchers, where it allows for more confirmatory and
comparative approaches. In addition, this paper provides an empirical basis that will allow
for some anticipation of challenges concerning BSC implementation in public schools and
organizations.


2 THEROTICAL BACKGROUND

2.1 STRATEGIC PLANNING IN THE PUBLIC SECTOR

     Strategic management in the public sector has its emphasis placed on strategic
planning, as in other areas. However, other stages of the strategic cycle, such as execution
and evaluation, were neglected and these have an influence over possible strategy failures
(Mintzberg, Lampel & Ahlstrand, 1999; Thompson Jr. & Strickland III, 2000).
                Strategic planning in the public sector is essential not only in the present, but
also for the future (Poister, 2010). According to the study by George (2017), the effect of
strategic planning can be positive or negative, which depends on three variables, those
being stakeholder behavior, participatory nature, and the planning of group psychological
characteristics.
     In the literature, crucial strategic orientations are highlighted, and these are
successful in government planning (Mcmahon & Phillimore, 2013), and more recently,
when seen in public-sector characteristics (Favoreu, Carassus & Maurel, 2016). This
multiplicity approach aligns with Johnsen (2015), which indicates that strategic
management in the public sector draws heavily on strategic planning associated with
several other approaches.
     The literature shows a lack of leadership and fluidity in strategic planning hindering
an effective contribution to government reforms (Kayuni, 2017), also that there are
inadequacies between strategic plans and the approach concerning emergency situations
(Oloruntoba,      2013).       However,        strategic      planning         is    significant         for     development


     F UTURE S TUDIES RESEARCH J OURNAL   ISSN 2175-5825   S ÃO PAULO, V.12, N .3, P. 458 – 482, SEP. / D EC . 2020
                                                                                                                         461
                                                                                                                          19

    Pedro Henrique de Oliveira, Marco Antonio Catussi Paschoalotto, Diego Valério de Godoy Delmônico,
                 Fernando de Souza Coelho, Fernando César Almada Santos & Edmundo Escrivão Filho




transformation (Mawela, Twinomurinzi & Ochara, 2017), for the process of strategic
changes in the face of turbulent environments (Pasha & Poister, 2017) and in environments
of complex policy (Rinaldi, 2016). The recent literature on strategic planning and the public
sector also includes the evaluation of integration between hiring processes and strategic
planning (Staples & Dalrymple, 2016).
     BSC axis are commonly addressed by strategic planning studies in public
administration, these usually include strengths, weaknesses, opportunities, and threats
(Bryson, Edwards & Van Slyke, 2018). Moreover, the editorial article by Bryson, Edwards
and Van Slyke (2018) presents a special edition article and suggests as research agenda
studies on operationalization and the effects of strategy dimensions.
     2.2 BALANCED SCORECARD
     As addressed previously, strategic management in the public sector has a wider focus
on the planning phase. Execution and evaluation need to be included in this cycle, in order
that strategic objectives are achieved and no problems occur, as well as a diagnosis of the
actions taken as a means to deepen changes in the public sector (Bryson, 1988; Moore,
2002).
     Therefore, the concept of strategic management should be broad, with the inclusion
not only of the strategy, but also the implementation and evaluation of the strategy
(Mintzberg, Lampel & Ahlstrand, 1999). The BSC strategy tool is an alternative to this
problem, which allows for a better understanding of strategic objectives linked to
organizational perspectives, as well as inserting greater strategic control by measuring
through use of indicators, along with establishing cause and effect relationships (Kaplan &
Norton, 1992, 2000).
     Another advantage of the BSC is the inclusion of other perspectives that do not focus
on financial aspects. This aids in producing the holistic view of organizations and in
understanding other non-financial factors that may influence organizational performance
(Kaplan & Norton, 1992, 2000). A tool previously used for BSC was the Tableau de Bord,
which divided financial and non-financial data for information management and control in
industries. However, the BSC addresses new perceptions for the strategic management of
organizations (Epstein & Manzoni, 1997; Quesado, Rodrigues & Guzmán, 2012).
     In general, the BSC is an organizational strategy management control system that
allows the manager to approach businesses in four essential perspectives (Kaplan &
Norton, 1992) - customer, internal processes, learning and financial. Moreover, BSC
processes help to improve strategic control, facilitating communication and provide a more
integrated perspective (Norreklit, 2000, Queiroz & Lobosco, 2015).
     In the Brazilian context, the Fundação Getúlio Vargas (FGV, 2016) and the National
School of Public Administration (ENAP, 2014) highlight the potential contribution for BSC
by translating the strategy into operational objectives, structuring the measurement


     F UTURE S TUDIES RESEARCH J OURNAL   ISSN 2175-5825   S ÃO PAULO, V.12, N .3, P. 458 – 482, SEP. / D EC . 2020
                                                                                                                      462

 Strategic Management in Public Administration: A Balanced Scorecard Applicability Framework in School
                                                                                         Management




system of the organization, recognizing the indicators, communicating the strategy,
aligning the strategy with business and strategic learning.
     The strategic map as cited by Kaplan and Norton (2000) is a BSC support tool and
provides a visual framework for the organizational objectives regarding the four BSC
strategic perspectives (financial, customer, internal processes, learning and growth).
     The adoption of the strategic map helps to illustrate how the organization transforms
initiatives and resources (including intangible assets such as corporate culture and
employee knowledge) into tangible results (Maar, Schiuma & Neely, 2004). Another
contribution includes the representation of the cause and effect relationship of the strategic
objectives (Quezada, Cordova, Palominos, Godoy & Ross, 2009).
     Grouping information is one of the advantages of using the BSC, as it limits the
number of prospects to four, such information can be based on customer orientation,
reduced response time, increased quality, use of teamwork and focus on change with
identification (Kaplan & Norton, 1992, 1996).
     2.3     BSC IN THE PUBLIC SECTOR
     Some authors suggest that the adoption of BSC by public organizations is part of a
broad wave of ideological policy-driven reforms (Bobe, Mihret & Obo, 2017), which
establish the adoption of accountability and accountability tools in the private sector.
However, the literature also shows the BSC potential to address the multi-stakeholder
approach issue in the public sector (Mcadam, Hazlett & Casey, 2005).
     BSC changes have been developed to suit public sector issues, such as the public
sector scorecard (PPS), which is an integrated performance management framework that
incorporates strategic mapping, service improvement, measurement and evaluation
(Dimitropoulos, Kosmas & Douvis, 2017).
     The study by Bracci, Maran and Inglis (2017) focuses on performance, system design
and BSC implementation in two Italian public service organizations. The authors Plaček,
Půček and Šilhánková (2017) carry out the strategic management study of museums in
the Czech Republic, identifying weaknesses and best practices, as well as presenting
optimal performance indicators for the segment. Some studies focus on national level
organizations, such as in the case of the analysis of a large Ethiopian public health
organization (Bobe, Mihret & Obo, 2017). Only a few studies focus on robust quantitative
research techniques. In Grigoroudis, Orfanoudaki and Zopounidis (2012), for example, the
authors conducted a multicriteria decision-making (MCDM) study, using the BSC
framework to evaluate the strategic performance of health organizations.
     Other studies investigate performance management in the public sector, while
approaching the integration of BSC in performance management (Mcadam, Hazlett &
Casey, 2005). In this sense, when looking at organizations of higher education, the
literature shows that organizations whose financial strategies are better related to

     F UTURE S TUDIES RESEARCH J OURNAL   ISSN 2175-5825   S ÃO PAULO, V.12, N .3, P. 458 – 482, SEP. / D EC . 2020
                                                                                                                      463
                                                                                                                       19

    Pedro Henrique de Oliveira, Marco Antonio Catussi Paschoalotto, Diego Valério de Godoy Delmônico,
                 Fernando de Souza Coelho, Fernando César Almada Santos & Edmundo Escrivão Filho




educational returns are more likely to succeed, even with changes in their funding model
(Schobel & Scholey, 2012).
     Different governments have used the BSC to develop performance models for more
transparent, efficient and effective management (Sutheewasinnon, Hoque & Nyamori,
2016). Apart from the perspective of the BSC as a performance tool, other BSC approaches
focus on improvement of the strategic alignment through integrated planning (Bobe, Mihret
& Obo, 2017). In this way, part of the literature sees BSC as a performance measurement
tool (Northcott & Taulapapa, 2012).
     Although literature concerning BSC in the public sector proposes a framework, Yuen
and Ng (2012), for example, focuses on the development of a theoretical framework for
the application of BSC in a Chinese hospital organization. Few studies have been found
that focus on public educational organizations. In this sense, some authors have evaluated
the application of BSC to evaluate higher education schools (Schobel & Scholey, 2012).
     In Brazil, there are few studies that focus on the application of BSC in the public
sector. Existing studies are aimed at federal public agencies (Felix, Felix & Timóteo, 2011).
The number of studies pertinent to the application of the BSC in Brazilian public schools
are even lower, with these being focused on the efficiency of the educational system as a
whole and not on the specific reality of school strategic management (Mizrahi & Canen,
2012). However, no article proposes a theoretical framework for understanding their
applicability nor develop a model for public educational organizations.
     Finally, we positioned the theoretical framework in order to synthesize the
background of the bibliographic review. It should be noted here that this framework was
used as a support for the data discussion on the theoretical view (Frame 1):


           Topic                                  Definition                                           Authors
                                   Strategic planning in the public
                                   sector helps with implementation,                   Mintzberg,     Lampel    &
 Strategic planning in
                                   but it should include the stages of                 Ahlstrand, 1999; Staples &
 the public sector
                                   implementation and the strategic                    Dalrymple, 2016
                                   control
                                   The Balanced Scorecard tool helps
 The               Balanced        with integration of the strategic                   Kaplan & Norton, 1992; 2000,
 Scorecard                         cycle, adding new perspectives for                  Norreklit, 2000
                                   understanding organizational reality
                                   Internationally. There are more
                                   studies on the application of BSC in                Northcott & Taulapapa, 2012;
 BSC in        the     public      the public sector. In the Brazilian                 Felix, Felix & Timóteo, 2011;
 sector                            scenario, there are few studies and                 Mizrahi & Canen, 2012
                                   in the scenario of public-school
                                   lesser still.
Frame 1 – Schematic framework of the background theory
Source: Prepared by the authors.




     F UTURE S TUDIES RESEARCH J OURNAL   ISSN 2175-5825   S ÃO PAULO, V.12, N .3, P. 458 – 482, SEP. / D EC . 2020
                                                                                                                      464

 Strategic Management in Public Administration: A Balanced Scorecard Applicability Framework in School
                                                                                         Management




3 RESEARCH METHODS

      This research study was developed within a qualitative exploratory framework, from
an applied perspective, that generates knowledge for the practical application, addressing
the solution of specific problems (Silva & Menezes, 2005). The analysis has a descriptive
perspective, which directs the presentation of characteristics from a given population or
phenomenon (Cooper & Schindler, 2013). The technique used for data collection was the
case study, allowing the knowledge and information and analysis to be performed in a
broader and more detailed fashion (Silva & Menezes, 2005, Cooper & Schindler, 2013).
      For an improved understanding of the steps in this research study, a visual schedule
was created, as seen in Figure 1:



                                                 Focus Group -                           3rd Data
               Quantiative Data                     2nd data                        Collection - Non-
                  Colleciton                        collection                         participant
               (Input+Output)                     (Interview +                      observation and
                                                 Questionnaire)                        Field Diary


                  Sampling for                       1st Data
                                                                                    Content Anlysis -
                 convenience -                     Collection -
                                                                                    BSC + Strategic
                Ribeirão Preto /                   Preliminary
                                                                                          Map
                       SP                           Interview



                  Elementary                    Principal as focus
                                                                                        Results and
               schools definition                of study (school
                                                                                        discussions
                 (4+ and 4-)                      management)


Figure 1 – Schematic framework of the method
Source: Prepared by the authors.


3.1   PRELIMINAR ASSESSMENT


      The first step of the study involved the collection of quantitative data on school
performance with the annual municipal investment per student, the socioeconomic level
(NSE), with the infrastructure as input and the performance in the IDEB as output.
Municipalities and schools were divided according to socioeconomic level 2 and 3; 4; 5 and
6, with 2 and 3 representing the worst and 5 and six the best. Of these, the only
municipality that presents more than 20 schools, in the state of São Paulo (placed as a
necessity of the study in question, i.e., for a more extensive sample of schools), was track
5 and 6.




      F UTURE S TUDIES RESEARCH J OURNAL   ISSN 2175-5825   S ÃO PAULO, V.12, N .3, P. 458 – 482, SEP. / D EC . 2020
                                                                                                                       465
                                                                                                                        19

      Pedro Henrique de Oliveira, Marco Antonio Catussi Paschoalotto, Diego Valério de Godoy Delmônico,
                   Fernando de Souza Coelho, Fernando César Almada Santos & Edmundo Escrivão Filho




3.2    SAMPLE


       From the preliminary survey, the city of Ribeirão Preto, located in São Paulo state,
was chosen, through its size, as a municipality for the investigation of public schools.
Through its possessing 600.000 habitants, the city does not suffer from small town
financing issues, neither does it have the benefits of the state capital, which can represent
two major research bias. Consequently, contact was made with the Education Department
of the city to use some basic level public schools as an object of the research conducted
herein. Four schools with the best performance (School A, School B, School C and School
D) and four worst-performing schools (School E, School F, School G and School H) were
chosen from within the same socioeconomic range, as previously explained.
       In terms of school administration, the school principal is primarily responsible, as this
individual is in charge of creating a team for assisting in administrative and pedagogical
functions. The principal provides attributions to school management, coordinating human
effort and is responsible for the proper functioning of the school (Paro, 2010). In this way,
the principal determines a significant part of the school management, being responsible
for the integration coordination and results achieved by the school (Neto & Castro, 2011).
It is the principal who composes teams, coordinates human effort and assumes a high
responsibility for school management (Paro, 2010). Thus, data collection is focused on the
perspective of school principals.


3.3    DATA COLLECTION

       In this research study, the technique of data collection was performed through use
of the field diary, observation, questionnaire, focus group and interview. The semi-
structured interview (Silva & Menezes, 2005) was developed from two scripts, one during
the interviews and the other after the focal group. The scripts had opened, closed, and
multiple-choice questions to gather the information needed to conduct the study. A
questionnaire was also used to evaluate the perceptions of respondents after termination
of the focus group and training. Noteworthy here is that all interview scripts underwent a
pre-test before being applied. Eight semi-structured interviews were conducted with each
school principal.
       The focus group was used to obtain information on four subsequent encounters (Berg,
1998). Initially, all 08 principals were invited to perform this stage, but only three (School
B, School C, and School G) attended the meetings.
       The objectives of the interview scripts are to transform the desired information into
questions, to motivate the interviewee toward providing answers and complete the script
(Malhotra, 2012). The questionnaire was used in the focus group stage to identify the
perception and reaction of the school principals for the applied stage.


      F UTURE S TUDIES RESEARCH J OURNAL   ISSN 2175-5825   S ÃO PAULO, V.12, N .3, P. 458 – 482, SEP. / D EC . 2020
                                                                                                                       466

 Strategic Management in Public Administration: A Balanced Scorecard Applicability Framework in School
                                                                                         Management




      The non-participant observation that was used in the study consists of the effective
interaction of knowledge in the current situation of society, the group or a specific situation
(Cooper & Schindler, 2013). It can be understood as a peculiarity of observation. From the
two previous steps, interviews and focus group, two schools (one high school and one
lower school level) were identified in both stages for non-participant observation, and the
researcher spent two days in each school (School B and School G) to understand why there
existed a performance difference between them.
      The field diary, which works as the investigation of affective, cognitive and social
processes in greater detail, was used in the three stages of the research study, those being
interviews, focus group and non-participant observation, where notes were taken by the
researcher (Zaccarelli & Godoy, 2005).


3.4   CLASSES AND DATA ANALYSIS

      The categories used in this article were BSC and strategic map: a management
control system of organizational strategy in four perspectives (client, internal processes,
innovation & learning and financial) and the strategic map is a visual framework for the
organizational objectives of the four perspectives cited; and the specificities of public
management, understood by the particular characteristics of management, so that the
organization achieves its objectives, such as following laws, political environment and not
seeking profit, but rather the quality of services for society. The research questions used
in this study were the following: What is the adequacy of the possible use of the BSC and
strategic map? What are the characteristics of the BSC and strategic map in the strategic
management of public schools?
      The data analysis technique used was content analysis, which is organized into the
following steps of pre-analysis, material exploration and treatment of results obtained and
interpretation (Neuendorf, 2002).


4 DISCUSSION RESULTS AND RESULT ANALYSIS

      The interview phase described the schools and the school principals of the research
study, and also pointed out concepts about the public administration practiced, along with
the importance of the school plans, as for example, the Political Educational Project (PPP),
Teaching Plan and Classroom Plan. This phase highlighted that schools did not use the
School Development Plan (PDE) (Brazil, 2016). Some of the institutions included in the
study had already used an interview phase, when they were defined as priority schools
(schools with poor performance), as a project to improve educational levels and linked to
the transfer of financial resources from the federal government to carry out programme
activities.



      F UTURE S TUDIES RESEARCH J OURNAL   ISSN 2175-5825   S ÃO PAULO, V.12, N .3, P. 458 – 482, SEP. / D EC . 2020
                                                                                                                       467
                                                                                                                        19

     Pedro Henrique de Oliveira, Marco Antonio Catussi Paschoalotto, Diego Valério de Godoy Delmônico,
                  Fernando de Souza Coelho, Fernando César Almada Santos & Edmundo Escrivão Filho




      Schools received funding from the federal government through the Direct Money in
Schools Program (PDDE). The PDE was updated to Interactive PDDE, which is a
management tool for and of the public school. The schools from which principals were
interviewed received the PDDE from the federal government, the Interactive PDDE acted
much more as a criterion for receiving the resource than efficiently as strategic
management of the schools.
      For strategic management, the principals that participated in the interviews pointed
out that the schools had strategic planning, mainly linked to their Political Pedagogical
Project (PPP). Most schools had only the values formalized in their PPP. Another observation
made is based on the realization of the Pedagogical Political Project as a pedagogical tool
and not as an administrative tool. Thus, when used as a tool of strategic planning, it
becomes a failure. The establishment of a specific strategic management plan would be a
breakthrough in terms of the future performance of schools.
      All the principals interviewed stated that they did not know of the BSC tool and
strategic map for strategic management. Likewise, these also had never been trained in
strategic management. The conceptions of strategic management based on the viewpoint
of the principals were of the most diverse (Queiroz & Lobosco, 2015), with the following
being mentioned:
      • The manager must always be ready to analyze the strategy applied and together
with the school staff and parents adapt it and improve it when necessary;
      • The way that it is administered and is applied to the school needs to reach the
desired goal (good education provided for the students);
      • Take care of everything, always using the strategy to improve the educational and
administrative plan over the long term;
      • Flexibility to deal with diversities in every way;
      • Use different paths to achieve one main goal, understanding the school as a whole;
      • Set goals and prepare strategies, so that goals are achieved on a daily basis;
      • The need to draw up various plans, where it is essential these do not lead to
conflict situations;
      • Everything that should be done to make good progress within the school and
provide a better performance to the student;
      • One applies the understanding of how to think of goals and objectives in terms of
improvement in the life of the student while at school.
      The focus group presented the emergence of the BSC, its use, the theoretical content
of the BSC perspectives and their practical applications, an adaptation of perspectives and
as a tool for the public sector. Subsequently, authorization was questioned, as to how it
was granted and applied in research with the municipal schools of Ribeirão Preto/SP, while
explaining that the initial contact was through the Municipal Secretary of Education of


     F UTURE S TUDIES RESEARCH J OURNAL   ISSN 2175-5825   S ÃO PAULO, V.12, N .3, P. 458 – 482, SEP. / D EC . 2020
                                                                                                                      468

 Strategic Management in Public Administration: A Balanced Scorecard Applicability Framework in School
                                                                                         Management




Ribeirão Preto and after reading the qualification, authorization was granted through an
office for conducting the research study.
     The focus group explored the application of the BSC to specific sectors and discussed
two articles that deal with the application of BSC in public schools (Canan, 2005). The
principals have raised the possibility of the management team being composed of a general
principal, an administrative coordinator and a pedagogical coordinator. They also pointed
out that, in schools, the management team learns through practice, since the Pedagogy
course does not offer subsidies for school management. The discussion of the plans was
resumed, with the proposition of the BSC as the private administrative plan enacted in the
administrative part, which includes strategic management.
     The proposal of the application of the BSC to the reality of the school was presented,
respecting the particularities of each school unit. The principals pointed out that the schools
need mechanisms to strengthen the learning of the student body. Thus, the BSC would be
used as an evaluation of the organization as a whole, both in pedagogical and
administrative aspects.
     The evolution of the concept of the BSC was presented with the emergence of the
strategic map, its concept, elaboration, characteristics, exemplification of the map for a
fuel distributor and its advantages. Then, the use of the strategic map in the public sector
was shown, for such, change of the perspectives concerning the name and function is
necessary, besides the alteration of the order of presentation. The authors herein have
presented cases for the use of the strategic map in the public sector and the discussion of
the strategic map of the Federal Public Ministry. Discussed also were some of the phases
of the Brazilian public administration, Pluriannual Planning (PPA), Annual Budgetary Law
(LOA) and Budgetary Guidelines Law (LDO).
     A strategic map implementation case was presented in the Fulton County School
System (United States). Next, we discussed each of the strategic objectives of the
perspectives worked out for the case.
     Finally, the results of the case for the application of the strategic map in the
educational system of Fulton, in the United States, were presented. Next, a case was
worked out for the public sector of the UK Ministry of Defense and the results of this
application in terms of the case cited. Following this, the outline of the BSC was made for
a public school with the following perspectives and questions:
     • School community perspective (How does the school community see the school?)
(Customer perspective);
     • Innovation and learning perspective (Can the school improve and generate value
for its employees, infrastructure, and technology?) (Innovation and learning perspective);
     • Resource perspective (How does the school use its resources (staff, infrastructure,
and budget)? (Financial perspective);

     F UTURE S TUDIES RESEARCH J OURNAL   ISSN 2175-5825   S ÃO PAULO, V.12, N .3, P. 458 – 482, SEP. / D EC . 2020
                                                                                                                      469
                                                                                                                       19

    Pedro Henrique de Oliveira, Marco Antonio Catussi Paschoalotto, Diego Valério de Godoy Delmônico,
                 Fernando de Souza Coelho, Fernando César Almada Santos & Edmundo Escrivão Filho




     • Pedagogical and administrative processes perspective (What should the school do
to improve pedagogical and administrative aspects?) (Perspective of internal processes).
     With this general reference, the outline of a strategic map for public schools was
presented (Figure 2). Noteworthy here is that the strategic objectives were based on Canan
(2005) and Kaplan and Norton (2004). The perspectives were as follows school community
at the top (old customer perspective), followed by the perspective of pedagogical and
administrative processes (the old perspective of innovation processes), the perspective of
learning innovation (original name was maintained) and perspective of resources (the old
financial perspective). This was divided into the political dimension and instrumental
dimension, with the more significant objective being defined by improving the quality and
efficiency of public education. Also represented was the traditional strategic map, with an
alert concerning the order of traditional presentation for the perspectives.




Figure 2 – Balanced Scorecard Framework in School Management
Source: Prepared by the authors.


     Each perspective and strategic objective was discussed, Figure 3 shows the latter
draft model discussed. Each perspective is composed to the following strategic objectives:
     • School community perspective: improvement of learning and mastery of the
curriculum; active parental involvement in the school board and APM; safe and enriching
climate in school; attendance of the local community with vacancies in the school;
improvement in IDEB.




     F UTURE S TUDIES RESEARCH J OURNAL   ISSN 2175-5825   S ÃO PAULO, V.12, N .3, P. 458 – 482, SEP. / D EC . 2020
                                                                                                                      470

 Strategic Management in Public Administration: A Balanced Scorecard Applicability Framework in School
                                                                                         Management




     • Pedagogical and administrative processes perspective: attends to pedagogical and
political plan, attendance of the school plan and lesson plan, new didactic resources, and
library operation, quality school meals; action plan (administrative).
     • Innovation and learning perspective: trained and motivated teachers and staff;
information systems; knowledge management.
     • Resource          perspective:         availability     of     material        resources,           maintenance   of
infrastructure; retention of teachers and staff; compliance with the budget.




Figure 3 – Strategic Map Framework in School Management
Source: Prepared by the author.


     The BSC was drafted along with a strategic map for public schools. There exists a
need for the establishment of clear goals by the school. The necessary adaptation of each
tool was made with the adaptation of the perspectives and function of the BSC and
rearrangement of the layout of the perspectives concerning the strategic map (Kaplan &
Norton, 2000). All principals agreed on the BSC's presenting models and a strategic map.
They agreed on the grouping of the "community" perspective containing parents and
students. Principals cited some school cases where it is necessary to call the student's
parent to the school to discuss issues of student indiscipline, and that often parents do not
take responsibility for misbehavior and blame the school.
     In regards to the application of the BSC in the public sector, mention was given to it
as a possible means of producing more explicit ideas concerning the administrative part,
thus allowing the manager to take a general look at the organization in order to accomplish



     F UTURE S TUDIES RESEARCH J OURNAL   ISSN 2175-5825   S ÃO PAULO, V.12, N .3, P. 458 – 482, SEP. / D EC . 2020
                                                                                                                         471
                                                                                                                          19

    Pedro Henrique de Oliveira, Marco Antonio Catussi Paschoalotto, Diego Valério de Godoy Delmônico,
                 Fernando de Souza Coelho, Fernando César Almada Santos & Edmundo Escrivão Filho




the strategy (Maccarone et al., 2014; Rahiminia & Karzogar, 2016; Souza & Cordeiro,
2010, Younis & Knight, 2014). The principle also justified the search for the proposed
objectives and that, with the BSC, the official plan will not be left "in the drawer." On the
understanding of the application of the strategic map in the public sector, the principles
stated that the strategy is more transparent with the use of the strategic map because it
shows the cause and effect relationship of the objectives and draws the actions that will
be sought. They pointed out the importance of the strategic map in the implementation.
     In terms of the possible use of the BSC and strategic map in the school setting,
management stated that through the BSC, it will be possible to follow a long-term goal
planning, and not having to deal with every problem as an emergency issue Northcott and
Taulapapa (2012). The principles also cited the adequacy of the names and functions of
the BSC perspectives and the reordering of the presentation of the perspectives of the
strategic map. The constraints on the use of strategic management in the public sector
were lack of financial resources, political factors, wrong people in wrong positions,
legislation (old laws), lack of technical personnel, lack of professionalism and the issue of
indication through a political factor, without considering technical factors of knowledge
(Mcadam, Hazlett & Casey, 2005). The benefits of using strategic management in the public
sector have been the alignment in management, long-term look, which brings
improvements to strategic management (Kaplan & Bower, 1999). The benefit of the holistic
view of the school was also highlighted.
     The specificities of school management for the use of strategic management were
the focus on student satisfaction and learning, goals more oriented to the pedagogic, while
they should include both administrative and pedagogical aspects in strategic management
(Schobel & Scholey, 2012). A questionnaire was used to evaluate the reaction of the
principals in the focus group. Overall, the focus group was evaluated highly by the
participating school principals.
     During the non-participant observation phase, identification was made of the main
activities performed by the principal in their daily routine. The previous phase of the focus
group study was discussed. The principal said that this phase was positive. After applying
the phase, the focus group thought about how it could apply the strategic management in
the school. The two principals pointed out that they need strategic management to think
long-term and stop the "put out the fire" situation in which the school currently functioned,
with the proposal of more considerable planning, organization and laying out of
organizational routines and objectives.
     The principal of School B stated that he had not yet had time to study and reflect on
the focus group. He said he wanted to print all the material to ponder on it. He spoke about
the current situation of problem-solving (fire extinguisher) and also stated that it was a
tool that he did not know and that, if implemented, could bring improvements. The principal


     F UTURE S TUDIES RESEARCH J OURNAL   ISSN 2175-5825   S ÃO PAULO, V.12, N .3, P. 458 – 482, SEP. / D EC . 2020
                                                                                                                      472

 Strategic Management in Public Administration: A Balanced Scorecard Applicability Framework in School
                                                                                         Management




of School G pointed out that the training helped her to think of the school as a whole, as
well as produce more appropriate planning with the teachers and students and in fact bring
an end to the so-called “putting out fires” situation. She also mentioned the moment of
conversation with the other principal, in the sense of building collective knowledge and
learning new concepts, such as the strategic map, addressing both the administrative and
the pedagogical aspects, with a long-term vision.
     In general, the principals interviewed had little knowledge about strategic
management, although they did formulate some strategic actions intuitively or that were
contained within the political-pedagogical projects. Through the training and focus group,
the principals began to gain more significant knowledge on some topics within the strategic
literature. The restrictive factors of the use of strategic management in the public sector
and public school circulate around political factors. The potential factors are communication
and participation. The BSC and the strategic map appear as viable within the public sector
and public schools. However, both need to be adapted for the best use possible. These
adaptations would be changing the name of the perspectives, changing the function of the
perspective, rearranging the order of presentation of the strategic map perspectives. The
evidence found for the specificities were the goals principally directed toward the
pedagogical, lack of personnel, public school that aims at the satisfaction of society,
restriction of resources, participation of the school community in the decisions, influence
of the environment in which the school is inserted and influence of political factors, mainly
of the municipality.
     The interview step contributed to greater knowledge of the routines and peculiarities
of the schools and their respective principals. The focus group phase served to obtain the
data for the general outline of the BSC and strategic map. The non-participant observation
phase contributed to ascertain the way in which each principal deals, potentially and in
practice, with the management of the municipal public school. In this way, it was possible
through using due adaptations, to present the BSC and consequently, the strategic map
as tools that could be used to confront and plan the contingent environment in which the
schools are inserted.
     4.1 REVIEWING THE BACKGROUND THEORY AND SINTHETYZING THE FINDINGS
     This study helps to connect the strategic cycle, understanding the relationship of
planning steps, along with implementation and evaluation (Mintzberg, Lampel & Ahlstrand,
1999; Staples & Dalrymple, 2016). It is understood that strategic management is of real
assistance to the present and the future of public organizations, as well as having a positive
effect on the participation of educational players and the school community, as it increases
within the investigated scenario (George, 2017; Poister, 2010).
     The strategy may have a positive role in the plans of public schools, often marked by
the absence of developed administrative programs (Favoreu, Carassus & Maurel, 2016;

     F UTURE S TUDIES RESEARCH J OURNAL   ISSN 2175-5825   S ÃO PAULO, V.12, N .3, P. 458 – 482, SEP. / D EC . 2020
                                                                                                                      473
                                                                                                                       19

     Pedro Henrique de Oliveira, Marco Antonio Catussi Paschoalotto, Diego Valério de Godoy Delmônico,
                  Fernando de Souza Coelho, Fernando César Almada Santos & Edmundo Escrivão Filho




Johnsen, 2015; Mcmahon & Phillimore, 2013). The leadership role for the development of
strategic management in schools is a crucial point, marked by the predominant role of
school management decisions (Kayuni, 2017). Emerging strategies are also a difficulty in
public schools, which makes it harder to implement certain actions (Oloruntoba, 2013).
      As shown in the literature, the adoption of strategic planning can really improve the
relationship of the public school with its environment, understanding new situations that
can change the established course of action. Furthermore, the setting of participatory
strategic plans can alter the development of changes in the school scenario and in the
improvement of administrative and pedagogical performance (Mawela, Twinomurinzi &
Ochara, 2017; Pasha & Poister, 2017; Rinaldi, 2016).
      The operationalization of the BSC in the school reality, through the understanding of
new dimensions and perspectives, is another topic for study in the research agenda of the
strategy (Bryson, Edwards & Van Slyke, 2018). The BSC also helps to layout the strategic
objectives and evaluate the results achieved, thus constituting the tool that is able to
incorporate the relationship between areas and in the holistic view of the organization
(Mintzberg, Lampel & Ahlstrand, 1999; Staples & Dalrymple, 2016).
      The financial part of public schools is still heavily tied up, depending on the guidance
of the municipal secretaries of education. So, the inclusion of new perspectives for strategic
management are particularly important, since it can be a tool that suits the reality of the
school. Another point is that the tool attests to the flexibility in model adaptations, which
is in line with literature and established by Kaplan and Norton, 1992, 2000, Maccarone et
al., 2014, Rahiminia and Karzogar, 2016, Souza and Cordeiro, 2010 and Younis and Knight,
2014.
      Another consistent point in line with the literature was the importance of BSC in the
management of the organization itself (ENAP, 2014; FGV, 2016), understanding the
development of new organizational routines, new communication channels, relationship of
the cause and effect concerning strategic objectives and the importance of participatory
strategic processes (Kaplan & Norton, 2000; Maar, Schiuma & Neely, 2004; Norreklit,
2000; Queiroz & Lobosco, 2015; Quezada et al., 2009). At this point, it was important
to elaborate not only the BSC, but also the strategic map together with the school
principals.
      Once again, the research carried out brings a new topic to the discussion (Bryson,
Edwards & Van Slyke, 2018), this is noted through the reality of the Brazilian public sector
and Brazilian public schools, which is a differential to be analyses. Most studies are
international, for this reason the importance of studies addressing the reality of Brazil exist.
      For example, there are different approaches to the use of BSC in the international
public sector, such as accountability system (Bobe, Mihret & Obo, 2017), stakeholder
management         (Mcadam,         Hazlett     &    Casey,       2005),        strategic         management          system


     F UTURE S TUDIES RESEARCH J OURNAL   ISSN 2175-5825   S ÃO PAULO, V.12, N .3, P. 458 – 482, SEP. / D EC . 2020
                                                                                                                         474

 Strategic Management in Public Administration: A Balanced Scorecard Applicability Framework in School
                                                                                         Management




(Dimitropoulos, Kosmas & Douvis, 2017), performance management (Grigoroudis,
Orfanoudaki & Zopounidis, 2012), evaluation of indicators (Bracci, Maran & Inglis, 2017)
and financial management of educational organizations (Schobel & Scholey, 2012).
     In Brazil, studies are aimed at federal public agencies (Felix, Felix & Timothy, 2011)
or with more general approaches to strategy and BSC (Mizrahi & Canen, 2012). This study
has the importance of focusing on the specific reality of public school, developing of the
BSC and the strategic map from the reading of the directors that are participating in the
research.
     In addition, the advantages brought forth in the literature on BSC and the strategic
map were identified from the design of the frameworks (Bobe, Mihret & Obo, 2017,
Northcott & Taulapapa, 2012, Sutheewasinnon, Hoque & Nyamori, 2016) as a tool for
participatory management, strategic alignment and performance management.
     Finally, some of the main findings of the study are summarized, relating to the
theoretical background performed (Frame 2).



 Topic                                                     Findings
                                                           There is plenty of room for the development
                                                           of strategic management in the public
 Strategic planning in public sector
                                                           sector. Implementation and evaluation
                                                           remain challenges in the area.

                                                           The Balanced Scorecard and the strategic
 The Balanced Scorecard                                    map are useful, flexible and integrative
                                                           tools for the management of organizations


                                                           There is a great space for the application of
                                                           the BSC and the strategic map in the
                                                           Brazilian public sector. The tools need to be
 BSC in public sector
                                                           aligned with the reality of each object, as in
                                                           the case of the elaboration of the
                                                           instruments by the school directors


Frame 2 – Schematic framework of the findings
Source: Prepared by the authors.


5 FINAL CONSIDERATIONS

     The paper developed herein may generate several views and new ideas for the use
of strategic planning in school management, i.e., it will provide new tools for public
managers for development in their work, especially in the management of public schools.
     The first lesson learned, in this case, is that all public-school managers were not
aware of the strategic planning tools, while using PPDE intuitively and without prior




     F UTURE S TUDIES RESEARCH J OURNAL   ISSN 2175-5825   S ÃO PAULO, V.12, N .3, P. 458 – 482, SEP. / D EC . 2020
                                                                                                                      475
                                                                                                                       19

     Pedro Henrique de Oliveira, Marco Antonio Catussi Paschoalotto, Diego Valério de Godoy Delmônico,
                  Fernando de Souza Coelho, Fernando César Almada Santos & Edmundo Escrivão Filho




knowledge of the tool, including the BSC which was later presented and developed through
their participation.
      Subsequently, using interviews, focus groups and other methods, it was noted that
the BSC is a fundamental and extremely important tool for school management, while
creating a model adapted for its use in 4 adapted perspectives of its reality: School
community perspective - How does the school community see the school? - (Customer
perspective); Innovation and learning perspective - Can the school improve and generate
value for its employees, infrastructure, and technology? - (Innovation and learning
perspective); Resource perspective How does the school use its resources with staff,
infrastructure, and budget? - (Financial perspective); Pedagogical and administrative
processes perspective - What should the school do to improve pedagogical and
administrative aspects? - (Perspective of internal processes). In this way, a strategic map
can be created for the management of public schools, a fundamental tool for the good
management of any organization (Figure 3).
      Finally, after the implementation of the research project, there was an observed need
for school managers to acquire more knowledge about strategic planning in school
management, to develop and adapt the more general strategic planning for their school.
In addition, one of the limiting factors pointed out for the use of the BSC as a tool of
strategic planning is the political factor, with its suffering of constant changes all the BSC
created can undergo drastic changes.
      Therefore, we have achieved our goal by developing a framework and identifying the
vision of the principal in strategic management with BSC and strategic mapping in the
public sector. The perspective of the strategic management for the principal was seen as
involving the definition of goals and objectives, predominantly to improve the life quality
of the student.
      The vision of the principal on the application of strategic management with BSC and
the strategic map in the public sector indicates the possibility of its application, provided
that the model is adapted to the reality of the public school. The framework involved the
idea of long-term planning using goals, from the elaboration of a tool for the administrative
part that seeks long-term goals, with structured planning by the BSC and a comprehensive
view of the school. Furthermore, this tool would complement the pedagogical part and from
the strategic map, a visual picture of the cause and effect relationship between the
proposed objectives would be indicated.
      From among the results, the authors highlight the appropriateness of the model for
the use of BSC and the strategic map for the specific approach of school organizations.
Among the necessary adaptations changes are made to the name of the perspectives; the
perspective of the strategic map, with the following proposal: school community at the top,
followed by the perspective of pedagogical and administrative processes, the perspective


     F UTURE S TUDIES RESEARCH J OURNAL   ISSN 2175-5825   S ÃO PAULO, V.12, N .3, P. 458 – 482, SEP. / D EC . 2020
                                                                                                                      476

 Strategic Management in Public Administration: A Balanced Scorecard Applicability Framework in School
                                                                                         Management




of innovation and learning and the perspective of resources at the bottom. Noteworthy
here is that the characteristics of the BSC and the strategic map in the strategic
management of public schools, before the research study, were unknown by the
participating school principals.
     The Principals understood the importance of strategic management and the use of a
tool such as the BSC and strategic map to improve school management activities, and the
move away from the current situations of only solving problems. Through the instituted
fieldwork, the characteristics of the BSC and the strategic map were understood as being
tools for the elaboration and implementation of the long-term strategy. Similarly, the
principals elaborated a visual framework that points out the relationship between the
strategic objectives
     This article is useful for the academic community, public managers, and public-school
principals by providing the design of BSC frameworks and the strategic map that can be
adapted to other public organizations and public schools. Thus, new instruments are
available for strategy designs, which can help improve the performance of school units,
both in pedagogical and administrative aspects.
     It is not yet understood how the adoption of the BSC and the strategic map would
happen in practice in terms of school organizations, as there are no studies in this sense.
From scientific studies, it is known that both tools have several benefits when used in the
public sector. Therefore, advantages in the application of BSC and the strategic map in
these organizations have been noted. This research study fits into this context, as it is the
first initiative of its kind provided for municipal public schools in using strategies that
improve participation and performance.
     One aspect that can be taken from this study is that there is a lot of room for the
development of strategic management in the public sector, especially in public schools. In
addition, the importance of knowing the reality of the object of study for the development
of valid options for organizational innovation is of the upmost importance. Consequently,
the frameworks developed are valid in the way they were developed. This research study
brought detailed exposure of BSC development and strategic map, as well as the
relationship with the relevant literature. Therefore, this advances knowledge of the area
by indicating how school organizations can improve their performance.
     The limitation of the study is found in the low participation of school principals in the
focus group phase, sampling was small for a broad perspective of the model, but it does,
however, provide a basis for understanding the variables involved in the strategic planning
process using BSC in educational public sector organizations, and the lack of quantitative
approach, when laying out the models proposed. Furthermore, we revealed two situations
that are still under explored by academics: the strategic planning approach in educational
organizations and the BSC approach in Brazilian organizations (theoretical).

     F UTURE S TUDIES RESEARCH J OURNAL   ISSN 2175-5825   S ÃO PAULO, V.12, N .3, P. 458 – 482, SEP. / D EC . 2020
                                                                                                                      477
                                                                                                                       19

    Pedro Henrique de Oliveira, Marco Antonio Catussi Paschoalotto, Diego Valério de Godoy Delmônico,
                 Fernando de Souza Coelho, Fernando César Almada Santos & Edmundo Escrivão Filho




     The propositions for future studies, including these contributions: development of a
specific BSC practical model for educational organizations, quantitative approach for
improvement of frameworks, new research studies applying the theme in other regions in
Brazil and in the other countries, application of an adaptive BSC model in other areas of
public administration, such as public health, city development and public security .


REFERENCES

     Berg, B. L. (1998). Qualitative research methods for the social sciences.
Boston: Pearson.

     Bobe, B. J., Mihret, D. G. & Obo, D. D. (2017). Public-sector reforms and
balanced scorecard adoption: an Ethiopian case study. Accounting, Auditing &
Accountability Journal, 30(6), 1230–1256.

     Bracci, E., Maran, L. & Inglis, R. (2017). Examining the process of performance
measurement system design and implementation in two Italian public service
organizations. Financial Accountability & Management, 33(4), 1–16.

      Brazil. (2016). Ministério da Educação. Apresentação do programa dinheiro
direto na escola. Brasília: FUNDESCOLA.

     Bryson, J. M. (1988). Strategic Planning for Public and Nonprofit Organizations:
A Guide to Strenghering and Sustaining Organizational Achievement. San Francisco:
Jossey-Bass Inc.

      Bryson, J. M., Edwards, L. H. & Van Slyke, D. M. (2018). Getting strategic about
strategic planning research. Public Management Review, 20(3), 317–339.

      Canan, I. (2005). Subsídios para o uso do balanced scorecard nas instituições
públicas de educação básica.       Anais Congresso Internacional de Custos, 9,
Florianópolis, SC, Brasil.

    Cooper, D. & Schindler, P. (2013). Business Research Methods. New York:
McGraw-Hill Education.

      Dimitropoulos, P., Kosmas, I. & Douvis, I. (2017). Implementing the balanced
scorecard in a local government sport organization Evidence from Greece.
International Journal of Productivity and Performance Management, 66(3), 362–379.

     ENAP. Escola Nacional de Administração Pública. (2014). Gestão da estratégia
com uso do BSC. Brasília: ENAP.

     Epstein, M. J. & Manzoni, J. F. (1997). The balanced scorecard and tableau de
bord: translating strategy into action. Strategic Finance, 79(2), 28-36.

      Favoreu, C., Carassus, D. & Maurel, C. (2016). Strategic management in the
public sector: a rational, political or collaborative approach? International Review of
Administrative Sciences, 82(3), 435–453.

     Felix, R., Prado Felix, P. & Timóteo, R. (2011). Balanced Scorecard: adequação
para a gestão estratégica nas organizações públicas. Revista do Serviço Público,
62(1), 51-74.



     F UTURE S TUDIES RESEARCH J OURNAL   ISSN 2175-5825   S ÃO PAULO, V.12, N .3, P. 458 – 482, SEP. / D EC . 2020
                                                                                                                      478

 Strategic Management in Public Administration: A Balanced Scorecard Applicability Framework in School
                                                                                         Management




     FGV. Fundação Getúlio Vargas. (2016). Curso auto instrucional Balanced Scorecard.
São Paulo: FGV.

     George, B. (2017). Does strategic planning ‘work’ in public organizations? Insights
from Flemish municipalities. Public Money & Management, 37(7), 527-530.

     Greatbanks, R. & Tapp, D. (2007). The impact of balanced scorecards in a public
sector environment. International Journal of Operations & Production Management, 27(8),
846–873.

     Grigoroudis, E., Orfanoudaki, E. & Zopounidis, C. (2012). Strategic performance
measurement in a healthcare organisation: A multiple criteria approach based on balanced
scorecard. Omega, 40(1), 104–119.

      Johnsen, A. (2015). Strategic management thinking and practice in the public sector:
A strategic planning for all seasons? Financial Accountability and Management, 31(3), 243–
268.

     Kaplan, R. S. & Bower, M. (1999). The Balanced scorecard for public sector
organizations. Boston: Harvard Business School.

      Kaplan, R. S. & Norton, D. P. (2000). Having trouble with your strategy? Then map
it. Harvard Business Review, 49(1), 167-176.

      Kaplan, R. S. & Norton, D. P. (1996). Linking the balanced scorecard to
strategy. California Management Review, 39(1), 53-79.

      Kaplan, R. S. & Norton, D. P. (2004). Organizações do setor público. In: ______.
Mapas estratégicos: como converter ativos intangíveis em resultados tangíveis. Rio de
Janeiro: Elsevier.

      Kaplan, R. S. & Norton, D. P. (1992). The Balanced scorecard: measures that drive
performance. Harvard Business Review, 70(1), 71-79.

      Kayuni, H. M. (2017). Strategic Planning in the Malawi Public Sector: Potential Tool
for Progress or Regression? Public Organization Review, 17(3), 373–391.

     Lück, H. (2009). Dimensões de gestão escolar e suas competências. Positivo.

     Lunenburg, F. (2010). The Principal and the school: what do principals do. National
Forum of Educational Administration and Supervision Journal, 27(4), 1-13.

      Marr, B., Schiuma, G. & Neely, A. (2004). The Dynamics of value creation: mapping
your intellectual performance drivers. Journal of Intellectual Capital, 5(2), 312-325.

     Maccarrone, V., Filiciotto, F., Buffa, G., Mazzola, S. & Buscaino, G. (2014). The ICZM
balanced scorecard: A tool for putting integrated coastal zone management into action,
Marine Policy, 44(1), 321-334.

     Malhotra, N. K. (2012). Pesquisa de marketing: uma orientação aplicada. Porto
Alegre: Bookman.

     Mawela, T., Twinomurinzi, H. & Ochara, N. M. (2017). Exploring public sector
planning for transformational government. Journal of Science and Technology Policy
Management, 8(3), 352–374.



     F UTURE S TUDIES RESEARCH J OURNAL   ISSN 2175-5825   S ÃO PAULO, V.12, N .3, P. 458 – 482, SEP. / D EC . 2020
                                                                                                                      479
                                                                                                                       19

    Pedro Henrique de Oliveira, Marco Antonio Catussi Paschoalotto, Diego Valério de Godoy Delmônico,
                 Fernando de Souza Coelho, Fernando César Almada Santos & Edmundo Escrivão Filho




     McAdam, R., Hazlett, S. A. & Casey, C. (2005). Performance management in
the UK public sector. International Journal of Public Sector Management, 18(3), 256–
273.

     Mcmahon, L. & Phillimore, J. (2013). State and Territory Government Strategic
Plans: Exercises in Managing, Monitoring and Marketing. Australian Journal of Public
Administration, 72(4), 404–418.

     Mintzberg, H. (1994). The Fall and rise of strategic planning. Harvard Business
Review, 72(1), 107-114.

    Mintzberg, H., Lampel, J. & Ahlstrand, B. (1999). Todas as partes do elefante.
HSM management, 2(12), 100–101.

      Mizrahi, S. E., & Canen, A. G. (2012). Gestão estratégica multicultural baseada
no Balanced Scorecard em instituições de ensino. Ensaio: Avaliação e Políticas
Públicas em Educação, 20(74), 27-49.

     Moore, M. H. (2002). Criando Valor Público: Gestão Estratégica no Governo.
Rio de Janeiro: Uniletras.

      Najgebauer, A., Antkiewicz, R., Pierzchała, D. & Rulka, J. (2017). Quantitative
Methods of Strategic Planning Support: Defending the Front Line in Europe. Advances
in Intelligent Systems and Computing, 656(1), 290-299.

     Cabral Neto, A. & Castro, A. M. D. A. (2011). Gestão escolar em instituições de
ensino médio: entre a gestão democrática e a gerencial. Educação e Sociedade,
32(116), 745-770.

     Neuendorf, K. A. (2002). The Content Analysis Guidebook. Thousand Oaks:
Sage.

    Norreklit, H. (2000). The Balance on balanced scorecard – a critical analysis of
some of its assumptions. Management Acoounting Research, 11 (1), 65-88.

     Northcott, D. & Taulapapa, T. M. (2012). Using the balanced scorecard to
manage performance in public sector organizations. International Journal of Public
Sector Management, 25(3), 166–191.

      Oloruntoba, R. (2013). Plans never go according to plan: An empirical analysis
of challenges to plans during the 2009 Victoria bushfires. Technological Forecasting
and Social Change, 80(9), 1674–1702.

     Olsen, E. (2012). Strategic Planning Kit for Dummies. New Jersey: John Wiley
& Sons.

      Paro, H. (2010). A Educação, a política e a administração: reflexões sobre a
prática do diretor escolar. Educação e Pesquisa, 36(3), 763-778.

     Pasha, O. & Poister, T. H. (2017). Exploring the Change in Strategy Formulation
and Performance Measurement Practices Under Turbulence. Public Performance and
Management Review, 40(3), 504–528.

     Plaček, M., Půček, M. J. & Šilhánková, V. (2017). New trends in the strategic
management of museums in the Czech Republic. Museum Management and
Curatorship, 32(4), 302–318.


     F UTURE S TUDIES RESEARCH J OURNAL   ISSN 2175-5825   S ÃO PAULO, V.12, N .3, P. 458 – 482, SEP. / D EC . 2020
                                                                                                                      480

 Strategic Management in Public Administration: A Balanced Scorecard Applicability Framework in School
                                                                                         Management




      Poister, T. H. (2010). The future of strategic planning in the public sector: Linking
strategic management and performance. Public Administration Review, 70(SUPPL. 1), p.
246–254.

     Purnawan & Sanjaya, F. (2017). Important performance analysis as a strategic
planning technique in bus rapid transit development program. International Journal of Civil
Engineering and Technology, 8(10), 805-813.

      Queiroz, R. T. & Lobosco, A. (2015). A Inserção da Ferramenta Balanced Scorecard
no Planejamento Estratégico de uma Empresa em Crescimento: Um Estudo de Caso na
Empresa Metadil Indústria e Comércio Metalúrgica Ltda. Future Studies Research Journal,
7 (1), 81–112.

     Quesado, P. R., Rodrigues, L. L. & Guzmán, B. A. (2012). O tableau de bord e o
balanced scorecard: uma análise comparativa. Revista Contabilidade e Controladoria, 4(2),
128-150.

      Quezada, L. E., Cordova, F. M., Palominos, P., Godoy, K. & Ross, J. (2009). Method
for identifying strategic objectives in strategy maps. International Journal of Production
Economics, 122(1), 492-500.

      Rahiminia, F. & Karzogar, N. (2016). Objectives priority in university strategy map
for resource allocation, Benchmarking, 23(2), 371-387.

     Rinaldi, F. M. (2016). From local development policies to strategic planning—
Assessing continuity in institutional coalitions. Evaluation and Program Planning, 56(1),
76-87.

      Ringma, J. L, Wintle, B., Fuller, R. A., Fisher, D. & Bode, M. (2017). Minimizing
species extinctions through strategic planning for conservation fencing. Conservation
Biology, 31(5), 1029-1038.

      Schobel, K. & Scholey, C. (2012). Balanced scorecards in education: focusing on
financial strategies. Measuring Business Excellence, 16(3), 17-28.

      Silva, E. L. & Menezes, E. M. (2005). Metodologia da pesquisa e elaboração de
dissertação. Florianópolis: UFSC.

     Souza, R. G. & Cordeiro, J. S. (2010). Mapeamento cognitivo e balanced scorecard
na gestão estratégica de resíduos sólidos urbanos, Gestão & Produção, 17(3), 483-496.

      Staples, W. & Dalrymple, J. (2016). Construction Procurement and State Government
Strategy: Aligned or Disconnected? Australian Journal of Public Administration, 75(2), 222–
235.

      Sutheewasinnon, P., Hoque, Z. & Nyamori, R. O. (2016). Development of a
performance management system in the Thailand public sector: Isomorphism and the role
and strategies of institutional entrepreneurs. Critical Perspectives on Accounting, 40(1),
26–44.

     Thompson Jr., A. & Strickland III, A. J. (2000). Planejamento estratégico elaboração,
implementação e execução. São Paulo: Pioneira.

    Wolf, C. & Floyd, S. W. (2017). Strategic Planning Research: Toward a Theory-Driven
Agenda. Journal of Management, 43(6), 1754-1788.



     F UTURE S TUDIES RESEARCH J OURNAL   ISSN 2175-5825   S ÃO PAULO, V.12, N .3, P. 458 – 482, SEP. / D EC . 2020
                                                                                                                      481
                                                                                                                       19

    Pedro Henrique de Oliveira, Marco Antonio Catussi Paschoalotto, Diego Valério de Godoy Delmônico,
                 Fernando de Souza Coelho, Fernando César Almada Santos & Edmundo Escrivão Filho




     Younis, R. & Knight, M. A. (2014). Development and implementation of an asset
management framework for wastewater collection networks, Tunneling and Underground
Space. Technology, 39(1), 130-143.

      Yuen, P. P. & Ng, A. W. (2012). Towards a balanced performance measurement
system in a public health care organization. International Journal of Health Care
Quality Assurance, 25, 421–430.




    F UTURE S TUDIES RESEARCH J OURNAL   ISSN 2175-5825   S ÃO PAULO, V.12, N .3, P. 458 – 482, SEP. / D EC . 2020
                                                                                                                     482