TEACHING AND LEARNING PROCESS
               SCHOOL MANAGEMENT AND EFFECTIVE
               USE OF SMART CLASSROOM IN TEACHING
                      AND LEARNING PROCESS
                                                                                  ISSN 2277-7733
Jean de Dieu Mushimiyimana                                                       Volume 9 Issue 4,
University of Kigali                                                                  March 2021
                                                Abstract
Many countries are improving education system as an instrument that can lead them to speed
development. This study was carried out to investigate the School management and effective use of smart
classroom in teaching and learning process. The study used 39 participants from Gicumbi District in
Rwanda. The results of study indicate that majority of respondents explained that leadership has great
effect on the effective use of smart classroom, contributing in ICT development in country and rising
country economy.. And teachers gave suggestion on how government help in improving use of smart
classroom.
Keyword: school management, smart classroom, teaching and learning process, Rwanda.
Nowadays, globalization and technology are affecting world at high speed, these are
totally different from the ancient world, the time that human being used traditional ways
of living. Rapid exchange of information and data has affected world. Traditional way
of teaching was basically on fixing information on wall, which is totally different from
introduction of smart classroom. It doesn’t mean that one is uprooting traditional
teaching methodology but integrating traditional methods with new (Hemant &
Sharma, 2016) .School management goes hands in hands with effective school leaders
who always make monitoring and evaluation by checking if how planned activities are
being progressed by subordinates. This helps to know if they are still working towards
set mission and vision of school (Leadership for Learning : A Headteacher ’ s Professional
Companion, 2019). According to Yusuf, (2005) indicated that education also has been
affected by (ICT) revolution. It means that since introduction of IT, teaching method
has been changed because teaching and learning methods adopted modern methods.
The world moved from traditional ways of teaching and learning and then adopt new
modern ways of delivering courses by using technology. Nowadays, it doesn’t require
much energy or spending much time relying on sitting in class or preparing lesson for
the students, facilitator can even teach and prepare contents while he/she is at home.
Smart class has changes traditional teaching and learning methods of considering
students as passive agents of teaching and learning but it lets them participate in
activities and develop their research. Smart class uses instructional materials that are
helpful to attract learners attention because it uses videos, audio, and other electronic
devices(Ganaie & Bano, 2016). School managers need training on how to manage
school and educational institutions correctly. School leadership has given priority at
international level by focusing or changing education policies. School management and
leadership staff are among the organs that should motivate as well as improving the
capacities of teaching staff (Khan et al., 2011). Many important researchers proved that
provision of training or having well trained man power is a strategy of increasing
industrial productivity(Reza & Umar, 2019).

                                       Voice of Research | Volume 9 Issue 4, March 2021 | 4

                                             TEACHING AND LEARNING PROCESS
ICT activate the world in terms of innovation, creativities and expose new generation
to market place and one who learns in this modern ways of education can adopt himself
or herself anywhere. ICT strength teaching and learning process and helps school
change its methodology (Bergin, 1992),(Davis & Tearle, 1999). Many countries are using
more effort to introduce smart classroom in education so that they cannot be left
behind in world of technology. There are continual provision of continuous
professional development in ICT as a strategy to enhance teachers adopting them in
technological arena and making smart class effective. Stakeholders have turned their
eyes to the Introduction of ICT in secondary schools by providing tools such
computers, furniture, network and training to the implementers.
Students around the world needs skills that they can globally use everywhere. According
to (Darojat, Ojat & Basuki, 2014) explained that technology has developed the flexibility
in teaching and learning because learners can have access to the materials anytime and
everywhere, because the content can be uploaded online by teachers or save it offline.
In addition to that duties of giving quality education and curriculum implementation,
cannot be responsibility of stakeholders or other actors of education but also requires
changing many philosophy and government policies. When student misses class, can
learn at home by browsing using internet and then access the content. ICT introduces
new methodology in teaching and learning process. Schools shift from using teachers
centered methods or lecturing to learners centered method as long as learner can access
materials anytime and wherever she/he can be, means that technology has developed
research system, self-teaching to the learners and learners become very creative and
innovative without waiting teachers intervention(Fang et al., 2012).
Many implementers were given training on how to adopt new teaching methods,
teachers were given in service training and in additional continuous professional
development support (Ndihokubwayo & Habiyaremye, 2018). In addition some
Rwandan school principals were trained about school management on how to manage
schools equipment and resources so that those school resources can provide
significance impact in education but there some gaps in management of those materials
that are provided in teaching and learning those training was given by VVOB1(Sandhya
et al., 2018)(Bennett, 2013). Researchers explained that principal should put computers
in computers lab where students and teachers can access them easily instead of keeping
them in store place of different school and this can help in implementing curriculum
activities and cross-cutting issues. ICT conducive environment encourage multimedia
tools. ICT has significance importance in developing quality of education and e-learning
programme2.
Government of Rwanda has introduced smart classroom in education and started
supplying materials such computers, internet, building infrastructures that would help
in developing teaching and learning by using ICT. Students should be prepared to 21 st
century. Some schools that has computer labs use them in computer lesson only not as
smart classroom that can be helpful in teaching all kind of subjects. Rwandan

1 VVOB: is a Belgian non-profit organization with more than 30 years’ experience in sustainably improving

the quality, efficiency and effectiveness of education.
2 E-Learning: Electronic Learning

                                           Voice of Research | Volume 9 Issue 4, March 2021 | 5

                                              TEACHING AND LEARNING PROCESS
government is moving from One Laptop per Child to the concept of Smart classroom
that will be an important programme in strengthening technology by reducing costs and
increase the materials accessibility and equity (Ministry of Education, 2016).
While government put more effort in availing materials and other equipment that can
help in using ICT3 in teaching and learning. Many schools leaders are not motivated to
let teachers use smart classroom as it was planned by the government of Rwanda but
computers can be in store without being in activity. REB4 and ministry of education do
not put make rules and regulation clear about effective use of smart classroom. Many
school principal deserve knowledge and skills related to school management, data
management, communication and making facilitation of her/his subordinates of
effective way (Sackney & Walker, 2006).
Rwanda is developing education as an aspect that can lead us to vision 2050
(Government of Rwanda, 2011) country is projecting to rise economic, political aspect
basing on introduction of technology in all sectors. This will enhance country to
produce human capital that will outcompete others at international market as job
creators instead of job seekers.
Research Questions
What is the role played by school leadership in use of ICT in education?; What are the
challenges that faced during the use of smart classroom in teaching and learning
activities?; What are the possible solution to the challenges that hinder the effective use
of smart classrooms in Rwandan secondary schools?
Methodology
This study use qualitative research design, because this method allow respondents to
express his/her opinions and ideas freely without limitation of time and other
circumstance that can prevent respondent to give all available information(Tang et al.,
2018; Duan et al., 2015).
According to (Mathis, 2016) indicated that qualitative research give chance to
interviewee to put out their ideas and feeling about the topic instead of dictating or
imposing them the types of things they should answer that was imposed by others.
Purposeful sampling technique were employed to the teachers and director in charge of
studies and head teacher. This techniques are very important in researches that are
qualitative in nature when researcher wants to collect the information that are rich and
relevant to the area of interest (Duan et al., 2015).
The researcher gather information from different respondents: teachers, about extent
to school management facilitate them to use smart classroom while delivering lesson to
the class and during the time teachers want to use technology in class, Headmasters and
Director in charge of studies were asked on how do they facilitate teachers in use of
smart classroom and their in empowering the program at school, Sector education
officers were asked about their role in motivating teachers in implementing use of smart
classroom and on how do their supervision. This research was conducted to the school
which locates in Gicumbi District, Northern Province, Rwanda. Selected school was


3 ICT: Information Communication Technology.
4 REB: Rwanda Education Board.

                                     Voice of Research | Volume 9 Issue 4, March 2021 | 6

                                               TEACHING AND LEARNING PROCESS
GS5 Kageyo because this school is among the school which was given the equipment
that could help them in introducing smart classroom. Therefore, the survey was
conducted to 36 Teachers, one head teacher, one DOS6 of secondary school in GS
Kageyo and one SEO7. Teachers were selected to be included in research because are
key users of smart classroom and they have all information, In addition, selected
teachers, were selected because they received training on ICT in education that enhance
them to be aware of using Smart classroom, simply, they were targeted because most
of them have basic skills and knowledge on technology that they received from training,
CPD8 and in University, as majority of them learned University, DOS were selected
because they kept records of marks before introducing smart classroom and after its
implementation. Head teacher and SEO were selected because they know background
and reason for implementation of smart classroom and hold key role in leadership and
management of school resources and Sector education officer were selected because is
the one who is in charge of all activities of education take place in sector level.
In this study, researcher use interview as an instrument for data collection. As study
aims at understanding School management and effective use of smart classroom in
teaching and learning process, interview was the best instrument to use. Researcher
asked respondents about the time he/she will avail to sit for interview question. Then
researcher recorded the conversation by using telephone audio recorder. According to
(Birt et al., 2016) explained that member checking” "is a technique for exploring the
credibility of results. Data or results are returned to participants to check for accuracy
and resonance with their experiences" (p.1802) and then later researcher sent Audio to
interviewee to listen to the conversation and he/she will be allowed to comment if there
is something missing to add or there unnecessary information that can be removed.
Documentation also were used to search for additional information that can be relevant
to what researcher was studying. Documentation will be use by reading records of the
past marks of students in different exams. Researcher analyzed different document that
are available at school. This obliged researcher to read books, essays, articles, reports
and magazines that related to the problem of study.
In the process of analyzing data, the researcher used thematic analyzes methodology
for data analysis. Thematic is the methods of analyzing, reporting, interpreting patterns
or themes (Braun & Clarke, 2006, p.79) since the topic is understanding School
management and effective use of smart classroom in teaching and learning process in
Gicumbi district. Using thematic as methodology is suitable for achieving the objective
of this study. In addition to that the results that are found used thematic method is very
understandable to everybody (Braun, 2006). for ethical risks, some participants declared
that they are not secure for sharing their information and researcher ensured them that
information provided by them will be kept and remain confidential.
In the process of data analyses researcher used six phases of thematic analysis processes
as described by (Braun & Clarke, 2006): first phase: familiarizing oneself with data: the

5 GS: Groupe Scolaire
6 DOS: Director in of Studies
7 SEO: Sector Education Officer
8 CPD: Continuous Professional Development

                                     Voice of Research | Volume 9 Issue 4, March 2021 | 7

                                               TEACHING AND LEARNING PROCESS
researcher transcribed data from media, interviews into written form. Read and re-read,
then transcripts, listen to the recording while writing down notes.
Second phase: generating initial code: the researcher coded most important features
systematically across the whole data set. Collate data each data to relevant code (Nowell
et al., 2017). Third phase: searching for themes: the researcher arrange codes with their
perspective themes, means that researcher gathers all data to their relevant themes.
Fourth phase: reviewing themes: researcher checked if all themes are matching or
working with extracted codes and entire data set. Then late generate thematic map. Fifth
phase: defining and naming themes: researcher refine the details of each themes, make
a clear definition and name of each theme. Sixth phase: producing reports: Research
analyze select the appropriate extracts and make final report. Discussion of analysis
should be related to research questions or literature
Findings
The researcher used pseudonyms in presenting the results to preserve the names of
participants and school confidential. For example the teachers were given (T1, T2,
T3…..) while authorities were given (A1, A2, A3…..). Remember that in Authorities,
there are SEO, Head teacher and DOS. The following part of this study is divided into
three sections: first is school leadership style in developing use of ICT in education.
Second is the challenges that faced during the use of smart classroom in teaching and
learning activities. Third is possible solutions to the challenges that hinder effective use
of smart classroom in Rwandan secondary schools.
School leadership style in developing use of ICT in education
Teachers and authorities who participated in this study were asked to describe
relationship between school leadership style and effective use of smart classroom.
During interview some respondents explained that” some leaders at school use
authoritative style that worsened communication between teachers and authorities and
this cause tension among both side. So teachers do their own tasks and authorities do
theirs because there is no collaboration” (T1, T5, T6, T10, T78, T11, T25).
Another interviewee also continued describing leadership style by explaining that
“among our leaders there are some who use bureaucratic style, means that they always
stay in the office, using computers and signing some officials’ documents, they do not
even make movement around compound observing how situation is, even asking them
help or to intervene in teaching and learning is not easy. They do not know if computers
are working or if they were stolen” T3, T7, T17, T25, T30, T31, T2, T7, T8.
Leadership style can be among the factors that can contribute in effective use of smart
classroom, other participant indicated that “another challenge is that there are leaders
who manifest kind of nepotism and despotism among the teachers, for example one
teacher can ask a computer to use but leader refuses to hand it to that teacher while
others have access to those electronic devices at school”. T20, T24, T26, T5, T9, T15,
34, 35 and A1
Among the participants one tried to explain that “leadership style as an important factor
that can enhance effective use of Smart classroom at school and explained that some
of leaders use dictatorship, others laissez faire, this become barrier to the teachers to
access school instructional materials and other equipment” (A1, A3).
                                   Voice of Research | Volume 9 Issue 4, March 2021 | 8

                                                         TEACHING AND LEARNING PROCESS
Challenges that faced during the use of smart classroom in teaching and
learning activities.
This section presented perspective of teachers and authorities while they are conducting
teaching and learning in smart classroom. They were both asked in interview the
challenges that they face. Extracted that was combine in one theme of challenges faced.
The data analysis based on the challenges that was given by teachers and authorities, are
grouped into four main challenges which are lack of extrinsic motivation, language
barrier, inadequate professional training, big number of leaners and insufficient
instructional materials.
Lack of extrinsic motivation.
One teacher explained that “challenge that she faces is that there is no motivation from government
and school leaders, because sometimes teachers are obliged to bring their computers or borrow projectors
to be used in classroom, because there is no computers at school or they are not sufficient. Some leaders
do not let teachers, use computer lab fairing that they can be stolen by students” T13.
Another respondent explained that “at school, many computers remain in store at school. No
one who is allowed to enter and use them frequently in teaching and learning activities. Because leaders
they do not put their time to welcome teachers in using of smart classroom” (T36).
For example one authority said “that they work under fair because when one is stolen a computer is
put in jail or be dismissed from job so they decide to keep them for the security and even ministry of education
and other organs demotivate them because of those strict punishment” T1
Language barrier
Among respondents one come up with challenge by saying that” Many devices and
electronic tools that we use in smart classroom are in English. Teachers and learners
are obliged to use English while they are in class. It became barrier to both side to
teachers and students. And this affect poor academic performance of learners” T19.
Inadequate professional training.
Use of smart classroom is also challenged by inadequate professional development, one
of the participant said that” there is a problem of insufficient training about use of technology in
teaching and learning process, trainings are few per example: there are teachers who are is in teaching
and learning process who did not go in training in his life time. Training are not sufficient to the teachers,
even new hired teachers do not get induction week which can give overview to the new teacher. (A3, T2,
T11, T27).
Big number of leaners
Many teachers and authorities claim that around the countries, there are problem of big
number of students but schools are few, teachers reported that “overcrowded classroom are
among the challenges that hinder effective use of smart classroom, for example you can find seventy students
are under one teacher while one classroom in some schools can host 80 learners. Computer lab that has 45
computers is expected to host all the students at school. This is a challenges for effective implementation of
smart class” (A3, A4, T36, T33, T31, T27, T23, T11).
Insufficient instructional materials
Instructional materials are insufficient from the past years, this was challenge in
education system in Rwanda, teachers explained that” in Rwanda we have problem of having
instructional materials like books, computer lab, and other materials. But accessing materials that are
saved on internet is not easy because poor internet connection, some schools have internet connection while
                                           Voice of Research | Volume 9 Issue 4, March 2021 | 9

                                                       TEACHING AND LEARNING PROCESS
other do not. Implementation of smart classroom is not possible while we still have the issues of internet
connection and even technological materials are scarce” T2, T14, T26, 23, T33, T21, 24.
Possible solutions to the challenges that hinder effective use of smart classroom
in Rwandan secondary schools.
This section presents perspective of teachers and authorities on possible solution to the
challenges that hinder effective use of smart classroom. Teachers, authorities during
interview were asked to share their opinions and ideas about the problem. This is
subdivided into four themes.
Provision of continuous professional development to both authorities and
teachers.
Twenty teachers explained that one of the challenge that hinder effective use of smart
classroom is insufficient training that are given to the teachers. Teachers need training about
technology and use of IT9. Many teachers did not get enough training about smart classroom, they do
not know how to use this devices such projectors, interactive whiteboard and computers. (T10).
Increase numbers of teachers and classrooms
Ten teachers and two authorities explained that government should increase number of
classes and teachers as solution to overcrowded classroom. One of teachers said that
“Many schools have problem of insufficient building that can host big number of students who are
enrolling studies. It is problem that become routine at schools for example you can fine three children
sitting on one chair. There is no space in class as one class host 50 students. Government should build
new classes and also increase number of teachers” T15.
Evaluating leadership and management of schools.
School leadership and management is crucial for enhancing effective use of smart
classroom as described above how leadership style can affect positively or negatively
use of smart classroom. Many respondents explain that “Leaders are also among the people
who can delay effective use of smart classroom. Government and RED have to make monitoring and
evaluation of school leadership and management. In addition they can even provide to the leaders
professional development about leadership and management”. A1 and T3, T5, T6, T7.
Strengthening use of technology
School authorities and teachers who participated in this study contributed to grant
possible solution to different challenges. One teacher explained that “the problem of scarcity
of instructional materials also affect ineffective use of smart classroom. It can be easy to for teachers to
get instructional materials from internet and other offline materials that can come to supplement
existence materials. For example Rwanda Education Board should put materials on internet not only
REB but also schools and teachers” (T28).
Discussion
This chapter explain the findings of study and the show the way they are relating with
research questions and existing literature.
Government and Rwanda Education Board should motivated teachers and authorities
in different means such providing rewards, increasing salaries and giving them
scholarship, sending teachers to the seminars that related to smart classroom. Sharing
information with other teachers where smart classroom is developed. Extrinsic

9 IT: Information Technology

                                        Voice of Research | Volume 9 Issue 4, March 2021 | 10

                                             TEACHING AND LEARNING PROCESS
motivation is motivation that one engage in by expecting income and physical
outcome(Linnenbrink et al., 2002)
Teacher and authorities reported that giving teachers professional development can be
strategy to increase teachers motivation and other employees(Gravani, 2012). Giving
professional development to the teaching and administrative staff can be the best
solution, to the challenges that hinder effective use of smart classroom.
Language barrier, in 2009, Rwanda education system was shifted from French to
English as an instructional language. From that time many teachers and authorities
faced language barriers till now, depending to finding from this study, majority of
teachers and authorities indicated that they are not able to express themselves in
English. This forced many teachers to start using local language in teaching and learning,
many teachers are struggling in learning English but it is still problem because they do
not know many vocabularies (Anyiendah, 2017). This was similar to majority
participants in this study who explained that it is not easy to shift from French to
English.
School management has to reformulate because some of head teachers accuse ministry
of education and Rwanda Education Board to use tough punishment to the leaders who
lost school materials especially computers and other technological tools. Some of
punishment there are sending them in jail, firing sacking from job and forced
resignation. Some leaders refuse to take this risks and decide to let those materials in
stores. Finally, they should be partnership among those administrative structure in
handling that problem of unfair collaboration between school management.
Conclusion
School management and effective use of smart classroom in learning and teaching
process. Study clarified that in education system of Rwanda has some of the challenges
as participants such as teachers, head teachers, director in charge of studies, sector
education officer explained a lot. Some of the challenges related to language barrier,
poor school leadership and management style, insufficient continuous professional
development. Study confirmed that effective use of smart classroom still has a long
journey which can take us to the achievement. Simply use of smart classroom is poor.
Teachers are advised to use improvisation in teaching and learning and improve
creativity and innovation that can be added to the training that Rwandan government
is giving them.
Rwanda education board and ministry of education should collaborate hands in hands
to make the programme clear and set rule and regulation that guide the use of smart
classroom. Instead of keeping the machines and others materials in store, because they
are afraid of losing them and face sanctions from higher authorities. Provision of
enough training about use of smart classroom is necessary to the teachers while
authorities should be given both training on school management and on smart
classroom.
References
Anyiendah, M. S. (2017). Challenges Faced by Teachers When Teaching English in
       Public Primary Schools in Kenya. Frontiers in Education, 2(May 2017), 3–6.
       https://doi.org/10.3389/feduc.2017.00013
                                  Voice of Research | Volume 9 Issue 4, March 2021 | 11

                                              TEACHING AND LEARNING PROCESS
Bennett, D. (2013). School Leadership. School Leadership, 1, 1–12.
      https://doi.org/10.4324/9781315042411
Bergin, D. A. (1992). Leisure Activity, Motivation, and Academic Achievement in High
      School Students. Journal of Leisure Research, 24(3), 225–239.
      https://doi.org/10.1080/00222216.1992.11969890
Birt, L., Scott, S., Cavers, D., Campbell, C., & Walter, F. (2016). Member Checking: A
      Tool to Enhance Trustworthiness or Merely a Nod to Validation? Qualitative
      Health                   Research,               26(13),               1802–1811.
      https://doi.org/10.1177/1049732316654870
Braun, V. (2006). Using thematic analysis in psychology. 3, 77–101.
Braun, V., & Clarke, V. (2006). Using thematic analysis in psychology. Qualitative
      Research               in           Psychology,            3(2),           77–101.
      https://doi.org/10.1191/1478088706qp063oa
Darojat, Ojat & Basuki, H. ardjojo. (2014). Improving Curriculum through the Systems
      Model for Distance Education. Teaching and Learning in 21st Century, 2012,
      251–262.
DAVIS, N., & TEARLE, P. (1999). the Research and Development of an International
      Core Curiculum for Infomation and Communications Technology in Teacher
      Training. 1, 1–32. papers3://publication/uuid/A0A266F4-18E4-41C4-B1F6-
      EDFB58C6E8CE
Duan, N., Bhaumik, D. K., Palinkas, L. A., & Hoagwood, K. (2015). Optimal Design
      and Purposeful Sampling: Complementary Methodologies for Implementation
      Research. Administration and Policy in Mental Health and Mental Health Services
      Research, 42(5), 524–532. https://doi.org/10.1007/s10488-014-0596-7
Fang, Z., Liu, Y., Liu, S., & Chen, H. (2012). Functional model for zero-sum game and
      its matrix solution concerning uncertain information. Conference Proceedings -
      IEEE International Conference on Systems, Man and Cybernetics, March, 17–23.
      https://doi.org/10.1109/ICSMC.2012.6377670
Ganaie & Bano, M. (2016). Smart Classroom Learning Environment And Performance
      of First Grade Students – A Study. 4(2), 4937–4941.
Government of Rwanda. (2011). National ICT Strategy and Plan NICI 2011- 2015. 85.
Gravani, M. N. (2012). Adult learning principles in designing learning activities for
      teacher development. International Journal of Lifelong Education, 31(4), 419–
      432. https://doi.org/10.1080/02601370.2012.663804
Hemant, P., & Sharma, L. (2016). Effectiveness of EDUCOMP smart classroom
      teaching on achievement in mathematics at elementary level. 2(6), 683–687.
Khan, M. F., Ahmad, S., & Ali, I. (2011). The impact of school management trainings
      and principals attitude on students learning outcomes. African Journal of Business
      Management, 5(7), 2668–2678. https://doi.org/10.5897/AJBM10.913
Leadership for learning : A headteacher ’ s professional companion. (2019). May.
Linnenbrink, Elizabeth, A., Pintrich, & Paul, R. (2002). Motivation as an enabler for
      academic success adaptive self-efficacy beliefs as enablers of success. School
      Psychology       Review,     31(3),    02796015.     http://prof.usb.ve/jjramirez/
      PREGRADO/CCP114/CCP114 Motivacion Linnenbrink y Pintrich.pdf
                                 Voice of Research | Volume 9 Issue 4, March 2021 | 12

                                            TEACHING AND LEARNING PROCESS
Mathis, W. J. (2016). R -b o f e p. 3–5.
Ndihokubwayo, K., & Habiyaremye, H. T. (2018). Why did Rwanda shift from
     knowledge to competence based curriculum? Syllabuses and textbooks point of
     view. African Research Review, 12(3), 38. https://doi.org/10.4314/afrrev.v12i3.4
Nowell, L. S., Norris, J. M., White, D. E., & Moules, N. J. (2017). Thematic Analysis:
     Striving to Meet the Trustworthiness Criteria. International Journal of Qualitative
     Methods, 16(1). https://doi.org/10.1177/1609406917733847
Reza, S., & Umar, S. (2019). Review Article of Ashley , C . and S . Maxwell ( 2001 ). “
     Rethinking rural development .” Development policy review 19 ( 4 ): 395-425 .
     19(August 2015).
Sackney, L., & Walker, K. (2006). Canadian perspectives on beginning principals: Their
     role in building capacity for learning communities. Journal of Educational
     Administration, 44(4), 341–358. https://doi.org/10.1108/09578230610676578
Sandhya, G., Singh, D. P., & Saini, S. (2018). IMPACT OF SMART CLASS ROOM
     LEARNING ENVIRONMENT ON ACADEMIC ACHIVEMENT OF THE
     STUDENTS. 05(47956), 119–
Yusuf, M. O. (2005). Information and communication technology and education:
     Analysing the Nigerian national policy for information technology. International
     Education Journal, 6(3), 316–321.




                                 Voice of Research | Volume 9 Issue 4, March 2021 | 13