E-ISSN: 2548-7892 & P-ISSN: 2527-4449

                                                                      Volume 7. Number 1. June 2022




Dimensional Analysis of School Based Pesantren Design Development

Muhammad Anggung Manumanoso Prasetyo 1, Khairul Anwar2, Nova Asvio3,
Zaharuddin M4
1 Institut Agama Islam Negeri Lhokseumawe, Indonesia
2,4 Institut Agama Islam Tebo, Indonesia
3 Universitas Islam Negeri Fatmawati Sukarno Bengkulu, Indonesia



   alkhair2505@gmail.com
                                                       ABSTRACT
                      The development dimension refers to managerial concept of education
                      strategies. Analysis on the implementation of strategic management at
                      school was conducted using SWOT analysis. This research aims to
  ARTICLE INFO        determine the education strategic management model applied at School
   Article history:   Based Pesantren in Aceh Province. This research used qualitative
      Received
                      approach with survey method and analytic study. The results show that
    July 01, 2021
      Revised         the organizational development begins with the high ideals of teachers
   September 12,      abilitty that supported by institutional independence in school
        2021          management. The finding revealed that the effectiveness of school
      Accepted        development refers to the instilling of the values of pesantren, namely the
  March 13, 2022      spirit of sincerity; hence the teachers did not depend on school for their
                      lives. As for the stabilization of the ubudiyyah of the students, it helps in
                      increasing academic achievement.

                      Keywords: Dimensional Analysis, Islamic Based-School, Design Development
                                Pesantren
How to cite                 Prasetyo, M., et al., (2022). Dimensional Analysis of School Based Pesantren
                            Design Development. Jurnal Iqra’ : Kajian Ilmu Pendidikan, 7(1). 1-13
                            https://doi.org/10.25217/ji.v7i1.1636
Journal Homepage            http://journal.iaimnumetrolampung.ac.id/index.php/ji/
This is an open access article under the CC BY SA license
                            https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-sa/4.0/



INTRODUCTION
       Education is a fundamental component of life that must be fulfilled, and it has
the power to mold the character of a nation's resources (Lian, et al, 2020; Asvio, et al.,
2019). Education is very vital for a nation, with human education being more capable
of adapting to the environment, and with human education being more capable of
anticipating numerous possibilities that would occur. Education can promote human
quality enhancement through increasing cognitive, emotional, and psychomotor
abilities (Othman, 2012).
       Organizational effectiveness is the widest realm of performance in strategic
management and organizational theory (Kortmann, 2012). The best structural
configuration for improving organizational performance, as well as the amount which
it is affected by the organizational development model used (Anderson, 2016). The
first is the change in strategy and environment that occurs with the passage of time,
which is crucial in the evolution of organizational design. Organizational design is a
second continuous process that involves modifications in structure as well as the




                       Jurnal Iqra’ : Kajian Ilmu Pendidikan 7(1): 1-13

Dimensional Analysis of School Based Pesantren Design Development




possibility of making mistakes in order to create an organizational design (Bock, et.,
2020).
       An institution's leader or management should consider organizational design to
be issue solving and goal-following with a situational or contingency style, i.e., the
present structure is built to meet the organizations or its sub-units' particular
conditions (Weiss, 2007).
       School-based administration is critical to ensuring high-quality education. The
services supplied are the fundamental manifestations of quality education. Improving
educational services in the millennial period relates to the concept of organizational
growth (Taute, 2012). School Reform, also known as School-Based Quality
Management, is a concept of organizational development aimed at quality
improvement in the framework of school-based quality management. School
structuring, which is characterized as a type of educational reform, is aimed at
restructuring and adapting the structure of government to schools using the concept of
school empowerment (Syar’i et al., 2020) (Hartin, 2020) .
       The position of this research is a study of the development of Islamic educational
institutions referring to the concept of strategic management such as the study that has
been carried out (Thoyib, 2005) (Mahmud & Suratman, 2020) which states that in
addition to leadership, the effectiveness of school strategies has an effect on improving
school performance. The strategy aspect itself refers to the internal and external
analysis of the organization. Internal and external dimensions are being discussed. The
internal dimension is the current state of the non-profit organization (education), in the
form of strengths, shortcomings, possibilities, and impediments, which must be clearly
identified; for this, self-evaluation activities utilizing evaluative analysis are required.
       Strategies need to be implemented systematically and continuously (Maskur,
2017) (Smith, 1997). This article is important because it offers the concept of school
development refering to the school based-pesantren concept. As a result, evaluation is
carried out through qualitative analysis with a variety of qualitative information or
partially quantitative and partially qualitative data (Kirkpatrick & Kirkpatrick, 2016).
SWOT analysis (strengths, weaknesses, opportunities, threats or strengths, weaknesses,
opportunities, and challenges) is a way of identifying the organization's internal and
external elements (Baráth, 2015).
       Internal elements include strengths and weaknesses, whereas external variables
include opportunities and challenges. The external environment dimension is
essentially an analysis of the environment surrounding the organization (school),
which includes the operational environment, the national environment, and the global
environment, and includes various aspects or conditions such as socio-political, social,
economic, and socio-cultural conditions, progress, and development. Science and
technology, culture, religion, and other topics.

METHODS
      The survey method was used in this study, which took a qualitative approach.
The study was conducted in Islamic-based schools in Sabang City, Gayo Lues District,
and Aceh Tenggara District. An Islamic-based school is a Junior High School that
implement the Pesantren-program, it is abbreviated as SMP-BP. Purposive sampling,
or samples that represent research data is used in sample selection (Clark & Creswell,
2008). The Junior High School based Pesantren studied was located in Sabang (SMPS
Al-Mujaddid), Gayo Lues Regency (SMPS Sholahuddin), and Southeast Aceh Regency
(SMPS Darul Amin). Each school's principal, teacher, and reporting coordinator serve


2

Dimensional Analysis of School Based Pesantren Design Development




as informants. Data were collected through interviews to 10 informants consisting of
the principals, vice-principals and pesantren leaders in each work unit. In addition,
data were also collected through participant observation and documentation studies.
The data triangulation approach is used to test the validity of the data since it has been
shown to eliminate bias and boost the credibility of the research. Triangulation,
according to Uwe Flick and Denkin, is a mixture or combination of several approaches
used to explore linked events from many angles and perspectives. In many domains,
triangulation involves four components: (1) method triangulation, (2) researcher
triangulation (if the research is conducted in groups), (3) data source triangulation, and
(4) theory triangulation (Flick, 2004) (Denkin, 2007) (Alasuutari et al., 2008).

RESULT AND DISCUSSION
       The construction of numerous kinds of educational institutions with
international names necessitates the use of strategic management, which was first
employed in the business sector. This is shown as an anticipatory move toward new
problems in establishing and preserving the Institute's existence in order to make it
more competitive in the midst of competition. Strategic management includes the
concept of quality improvement, so that later humans with quality human resources
can be generated in accordance with the needs of the times. As a result, the analysis of
organizational growth dimensions is based on strategic management theory as a
foundation for the study concept.
       As stated in the beginning, the analysis study is a sub-discussion of strategic
management, particularly the SWOT analysis. The use of information to identify the
organization's internal and external elements (strengths, weaknesses, opportunities,
and problems) is a method of analysis. Nawawi, (2012) and Gürel & Tat, (2017) agree
on a definition of strategic management as a process or series of fundamental and
comprehensive decision-making activities, accompanied by determining how to
implement them, made by top management and implemented at all levels within an
organization to achieve goals. In the context of education, four general strategies are
used to achieve long-term quality, namely (1) educational activities-as a long-term
investment-; (2) adaptation of vocational education models and technology
transformation of developed countries with the creation of highly skilled human
resources-mastering technology; (3) the higher education system as a support for
superior human resources; and (4) these efforts must be coordinated with autonomy
rights, duties, and a more expansive role for private, social, and communal institutions
(Hitt, 2007; Armstrong & Brown, 2019).
       The problem is analyzed using a SWOT analysis technique. The steps in the
SWOT analysis process for educational institutions are as follows: (1) understanding
the strength factors of educational organizations; (2) identifying the weaknesses in
educational organizations in comparison to external strengths; (3) predicting the
strength that the organization must have in order to compete to seize opportunities by
formulating strategies; and (4) by predicting the weaknesses in educational
organizations. If the threat is not imminent, policymakers do not need to exhibit
“defeatist” qualities that dominate their thinking.
       Policymakers must develop skills and forecast educational changes that will
occur in the external environment; policymakers must capitalize on opportunities by
selecting various critical variables and important sources of environmental
information; and understand and assess how forecasting approaches will be integrated.



3

Dimensional Analysis of School Based Pesantren Design Development




                     Figure 1. SWOT Matrix in SMP-BP Management.




       Farazmand, (2018) Fischer, et al., (2007) and Fattah, (2013) explain the SWOT
matrix idea, which includes: (a) competition strategy (S-O); (b) mobilization strategy
(S-T); (c) investment/divestment strategy (W-O); and (d) damage control strategy (W-
T).
       The study's findings provide analysis. To begin, a competitive strategy is a
strategy that employs strength to capitalize on possibilities. When the institution is in a
good position and there are numerous opportunities, this technique can be
implemented. In terms of opportunities, the SMP-BP program is a strategic program
that has the potential to increase the quality of scientific education in schools.
       The second mobilization strategy (S-T) is one that relies on strength to overcome
threats. This technique is used if the school has sufficient strength, but there are
numerous threats that must be dealt with outside. Increasingly fierce competition has
forced pesantren schools to clean up, including the reconstruction of the current
curriculum. The strength of SMP in the purview of pesantren is that learning time is
not restricted to formal hours but extends beyond the classroom. The system's benefits
can be leveraged to improve a variety of factors, particularly the quality of science
learning. It may be said that the BP SMP program was successful based on the research
results. In terms of research, SMP-BP in Sabang can demonstrate its capabilities
through achievements at city-level science competitions. Meanwhile, two other
locations are undergoing renovations.
       Third, the investment or investment (W-O) strategy is one that reduces
weaknesses in order to capitalize on opportunities. In other words, the school takes use
of available possibilities to strengthen itself. This technique is used when the school is
in poor condition yet there are numerous opportunities accessible. SMP-flaw BP's is in
the selection system, because it still promotes tolerance in student admittance, causing
the student selection system to run inefficiently. This has an impact on the educational
process. To prepare for this, the school management organized a series of programs to
aid in the execution of the SMP-BP program. Internal school investment activities
might be carried out. For example, routine evaluation and practice of microteaching
science professors. This program series is capable of identifying school deficiencies and
turning them into opportunities.
       The four-damage control (W-T) tactics minimize weaknesses while avoiding
threats. Schools must suppress both weaknesses and dangers as part of this strategy.


4

Dimensional Analysis of School Based Pesantren Design Development




This technique should be employed when the school is under attack and in poor
condition. The fear of competition cannot be avoided; in this situation, the school
administration interacts with parties in addition to implementing numerous
improvement initiatives established by SMP-BP. Some of them are working with other
organizations to implement curriculum, pedagogical, and educational workshops to
teach science teachings. Strategic Management must be implemented in order to
identify and capitalize on the organization's strengths and overcome its hurdles and
limitations (Zollo, 2009). The dimensions under consideration are grouped into four
categories:

Dimensions of Resource Utilization
      Strategic management cannot be separated from the ability to use diverse
available resources as a management activity. so that it is incorporated into the
management function and contributes to the attainment of the targets specified in each
Operational Plan (RENOP). Goals are achieved by a mission to realize the
organizational vision (of the school) (Armstrong, 2011).
      Existing resources are made up of material resources, most notably facilities and
infrastructure. Financial resources in the form of program-specific funding, human
resources, technological resources, and information resources (Mondy, 2008). All of
these resources are classified as internal resources, which must be identified with their
precise conditions in the framework of self-evaluation (internal analysis).

              Table 1: SMP-BP Utilization Components Comparison Matrix
                                  SMPS – BP           SMPS – BP        SMPS – BP
Component
                                  Sabang City         Gayo Lues Reg.   Southeast Aceh Reg.
Financial Resources               Good                Good             Prospective
Human Resources                   Prospective         Standard         Less

Technology Resources              Good                Good             Good
Information Resources             Good                Good             Good

       According to the table 1 above, each school is in a good category in terms of
financial resources; however, the SMP-BP Darul Amin, which is now developing, has
an economic edge due to the business unit it is establishing. This is inextricably linked
to the involvement of pesantren in supporting SMP, which is fundamentally under the
aegis of the pesantren, so that whatever the pesantren benefits are also SMP benefits
and vice versa.
       Darul Amin is found insufficient in terms of resource analysis based on the
criteria of the Constitution on teacher competency. The phenomena that arise is that,
despite having the biggest number of junior high school students in the district, the
teaching staff has not reached the standards for the field in which they are capable.
According to the provisions of the National Education System Constitution, human
resources as executors must be professional employees with comprehensive
knowledge and, most importantly, a strong commitment to morals and/or ethics not to
use strategic management for the advantage of themselves or groups (Soebahar, 2012).
       The advancement of science and technology has resulted in changes in nearly
every element of human life, with many challenges that can only be solved by
mastering and advancing science and technology. Aside from the benefits to human




5

Dimensional Analysis of School Based Pesantren Design Development




existence, these innovations have also ushered humanity into an era of increasingly
severe global rivalry.
       The analysis of the three Islamic boarding schools' technology resources is in a
strong condition. This statement is inextricably linked to the attention of the local
government, which gives aid in the form of material, operational, or physical help.
SMP-BP is an abbreviation for SMP-Based Darul Amin is overseen by the Aceh Dayah
Education Office, while Al Mujaddid is directly associated with the Sabang City
Government. The fulfillment of technological resources is followed by a linear analysis
of information sources.
       Strategic management in educational organizations necessitates the participation
of all individuals concerned, which has an impact on increasing a sense of belonging,
responsibility, and involvement (sense of participation).

Dimensions of Top Management Participation (Leadership)
       Strategic Management, which begins with the creation of a Strategic Plan, is in
charge of the organization's future in order for its existence to be achieved in
accordance with its vision. The strategic plan must be able to accommodate all parts of
organizational life that affect its future existence, which is top management's authority
and obligation. Strategic planning, as the primary decision, must not only be
determined by including, but must also be carried out proactively by top management,
as all activities to make it happen are their responsibility.

Table 2: Comparison of Junior High School Principal Leadership Style Matrix-BP
 Schools                      City / Regency     Characteristics of Leadership Style
 SMP-BP Al Mujaddid           Sabang             Participative and Democratic
 SMP-BP Shalahuddin           Gayo Lues          Charismatic and Participative
 SMP-BP Darul Amin            Aceh Tenggara      Transformative and Corporative

       The leadership style of each principal is identified in the table above, which is
impacted by numerous socio-cultural elements in the community and educational
background. The distinction between different leadership traits in each work unit adds
its own value. The implementation of a participatory and democratic leadership style
at SMP-BP Al Mujaddid is due to the fact that the leadership is still young, thus they
are actively participating in all operational actions in the field. Saladin, in contrast to
SMP-BP, is more charismatic. Meanwhile, when he observes the quick expansion of
business units and supporting facilities, Darul Amin is cooperatively transformational.
(Anwar, 2021) (Mukhtar, et al., 2019) He has been able to establish pesantren business
units in the domains of cooperatives, fisheries, and plantations over the last five years.
       Strategic management also works to combine the mentality that success is not
just for top management, but for the organization's integrity and even for the people it
serves (Pasaribu, 2016). Because human resources are a reality, increasing the quality of
leadership must be done in a planned, directed, intensive, effective, and efficient
manner in the development process (Anwar et al., 2021).
       Effective leadership fosters deep ties with the community. In addition to serving
as a religious leader (Ustadz), it assists school principals in recruiting pupils and
socializing school education programs. Educational program socialization can be
carried out aggressively and sustainably. This has a significant impact on influencing
and modifying the view of Acehnese society, which is still conservative (difficult to
accept reform). Although dejure leadership has the ability to formally declare


6

Dimensional Analysis of School Based Pesantren Design Development




boundaries, organizations have the ability to approve them. In a stable educational
institution, one person may belong to numerous groups, and for each group, transition
rules from out-of-entry must be established. It is different if the school has a state status
with rules outlined in the Constitution. (c) the process of managing the position of
power and sustaining the status of organizational members; (d) the development of
friendships, norms, and habits inside the organization; (e) the organization's current
reward and punishment system; (f) the organization's technique - employing religion,
ideology, belief, and myth to explain other variations, such as changes in
organizational conditions.

Dimensions of Multiple Fields
       Strategic management implementation is founded on a knowledge of the
company as a system. (Prasetyo, 2019) Being a subordinate (the school is a subordinate
of the P&K Office) implies that they do not have complete authority over the vision,
mission, goals, and strategies. Schools are exclusively responsible for compiling
RENOP and annual programs. It is evident from this description that the RENSTRA
and RENOP are multi-dimensional, especially since the RENSTRA formulation is only
carried out in a large number of non-profit organizations, including the highest
education. With so many dimensions, it's natural to think that not all of them can be
accommodated.
       This has been governed in the context of educational institutions, particularly in
the country, through the associated Education Office. It differs from private
educational institutions, such as schools utilized as research locations, which do
require an adaptation process in order to fulfill components of institutional
formalization. An educational organization's superiority must be tested and appraised
by employing certain tactics in carrying out management functions and completing
key duties. The benefits of strategic management for the organization are known as a
result of these measurements and the full implementation process.
       It is recognized that strategic management determination in educational
organizations is very important, because strategic management has many benefits. For
example, strategic management emphasizes the internal-external analysis of the
organization in formulating and implementing organizational plans. Second, strategic
management entails making strategic judgments and taking strategic activities in order
to attain organizational goals. As stated by Obal, Morgan, & Joseph, (2020) and Keupp
(2012), each unit and/or work unit will strive for excellence in its field in order to
strengthen organizational excellence.
       Strategic management in educational organizations is concerned with totality
management. Dimensional analysis offers the benefits of employing strategic
management, which can be measured using the following benchmarks: First, profit;
these benefits suggest that all labor is done successfully and efficiently, with the use of
an efficient and appropriate budget, in order to obtain profit in the form of no waste.
Second, a competitive advantage can be found in the existence of schools that are
accepted, respected, and required by the community. The product (mission: quality of
graduates) that satisfies the people it serves is the source of this competitive mentality.
       Third, ethics and social responsibility, which demonstrates the relevance of ethics
in work. Schools are community institutions that attempt to keep the community
stable. In order to achieve this, ethics and a high level of social responsibility must be
instilled in the education service process. by consistently putting societal interests
ahead of selfish interests. The benchmarks for excellence are defined by the school's


7

Dimensional Analysis of School Based Pesantren Design Development




community relationship-building strategy. The collaboration between the school and
the community in creating the organization and optimally implementing strategic
management demonstrates the success of the connection. In essence, the benefits listed
above can be realized, and the end result will help the community as well.
      Fourth, the working atmosphere; this criterion demonstrates that formal and
informal work interactions are formed as part of an organizational culture founded on
human values. Every human resource, as an individual and a member of the
educational organization, manifests a harmonious formal and informal relationship
between personnel in accordance with their respective positions, authorities, and
responsibilities within and outside of working hours in the educational organization's
culture.
      Fifth, technological excellence; all major activities are completed easily in the
manner of public services that are completed fast and on time. Quality is determined
by the originality and complexity of the activities that must be accomplished at a low
level, because it is capable of adapting to technological breakthroughs and
breakthroughs. The findings of Zain et al (2004) and Macharis, et al, (2004) studies back
up this formula.
      Sixth, human resource excellence; in an educational institution, an organizational
culture is formed those positions persons as a major factor, or determining resource,
for organizational success. As a result, the owned human resources are constantly
being developed and improved in terms of knowledge, skills, competence, and
attitudes toward their work as student service providers. Simultaneously, the ability to
solve problems encountered by schools in the present and foresee difficulties that may
come as a result of globalization in the future is established. Guy's (2010) Chan & Sam,
(2011) research led to the development of this recipe.
      The seventh indication is high productivity suggests that the number of jobs
(quantitative) that can be accomplished tends to increase. Errors or faults in work are
diminishing, and the quality of the outputs is improving, and most significantly, the
process and outcomes of providing public services (students and society) are meeting
their expectations. The development of these indicators is consistent with the findings
of Campos et al (2015) and Hopkins, Raymond, & Carlson, (2011).
      Strategies that will be executed, with or without affecting the benefits that the
organization will gain. Strategic management, as a new paradigm in educational
organizations, can stimulate proactive participation by all stakeholders in accordance
with their particular roles, powers, and responsibilities.
      Based on the preceding overview of the advantages and benefits of strategic
management, it is important to recognize that its adoption in an educational
organization is not a guarantee of success. According to the research of Seftiani et al,
(2018) and Sobhani, (2007), success is dependent on human resources or implementers
rather than Strategic Management as a means.
      This indication is consistent with the conceptual research of Armstrong & Brown,
(2019) and Hancock and Nuttman (2014). Due to the uncertain changing conditions
that push schools to continue to pursue sustainable and innovative development
efforts, the conditions for attaining these benefits are still confronting different
problems for SMP-BP.
      The current aggressive attitude of educational organizations is quick and
consumptive. Meanwhile, to conduct reasonably consistent strategic management with
the durability of funds and the system being constructed. In this situation, it is
necessary to be able to strike a balance between the organizing school's readiness and


8

Dimensional Analysis of School Based Pesantren Design Development




the government's willingness to provide adequate funds / budgets, as well as to
explore and regulate the use of other resources, such as parents, communities, loans,
and non-binding assistance.




                                Figure 1: Novelthy of the Research




      Figure 1 depicts the evaluation process using dimensional analysis and the
SWOT analysis theory. The study is separated into two parts: first, an internal analysis
covering human resource productivity and excellence; in this context, the institution's
attention is on profitability, competitive position, teacher competence, ethics, and social
responsibility. Second, the external study looks at the working environment and
technological systems. Evaluative studies are conducted in the areas of resource use,
participation of top management, and multi-sector management. It is envisaged that by
using dimensional analysis, it will be possible to build Islamic educational institutions
that are of high quality and competitive.
      It is envisaged that by using dimensional analysis, it will be possible to build
Islamic educational institutions that are of high quality and competitive. Through the
research findings, pesantren institutions are able to develop policies that are
implemented in the system in the hope that (1) teachers will continue to have high
ideals in carrying out education and teaching; (2) school administrators will be able to
be independent, not relying on other parties, particularly school organizations; (3)
teachers will be able to be independent and not rely on other parties, especially school


9

Dimensional Analysis of School Based Pesantren Design Development




organizations, and (4) in order for students to function maximally not only in the
scientific field, but also in the fields of morals, mental attitudes, and spiritual
ubudiyyah.
       The problems faced by Madrasah are managerial problems (Alawiyah, 2014) so
that an effective development strategy is needed referring to the output market
(Prasetyo, 2019). An effective madrasah development model is data-based using SWOT
analysis so that the resulting policies are relevant to the problems at hand, the urgency
is in line with research (Helms & Nixon, 2010) and Gürel & Tat, (2017). Referring to the
concept of pesantren, building the idealism of HR (teachers) based on Islamic values is
fundamental (Mukhtar, 2020). In order to be competitive, schools can optimize the role
of technology and a conducive work climate as the findings are strengthened by
research studies by Abdullah, (2019) Ismail Wardi, (2019).
         The scientific dichotomy that occurred in Indonesia shaped schools and
madrasah system. However, modernization carried out by religious institutions,
including madrasah and pesantren, is increasingly eroding this, this is proven by the
integration of the formal school system in pesantren education. On the other hand,
school administrators are open to collaborating with pesantren as proven by the
existence of a pesantren-based junior high school system. The spirit of collaboration
practiced by SMPS AlMujaddid, SMPS Darul Amin, and SMPS Sholahuddin has an
impact on improving the quality of education, especially in the province of Aceh. The
implication is that the SMP-BP development model can be expected as an example of
development in other schools, especially for managers who consider the pesantren
concept as the old and outdated concept.

CONCLUSION
      The research study refers to four dimensions: the parameters of employing four
sources, the dimensions of top management engagement (leadership), and the
dimensions of multi-sector participation. The findings revealed that teachers had high
ideals; that pesantren managers have independence in management; that the
independence of the teacher so as not to be independent and dependent on institutions,
even sacrificing for the benefit of the organization; and improving student
accomplishment not only in one scientific discipline, but also in morality and mental
attitudes, as well as spiritual ubudiyyah.

ACKNOWLEDGEMENT
      We would like to express our special thanks and gratitude to our Rector of
Institut Agama Islam Negeri Lhokseumawe, Institut Agama Islam Tebo, Universitas
Islam Negeri Fatmawati Sukarno Bengkulu and friends who gave us support to carry
out this extraordinary project.

AUTHOR CONTRIBUTION STATEMENT
      Muhammad Anggung Manumanoso Prasetyo (MAMP) was the main author in
this article. MAMP has designed research and collected the data. Then Khairul Anwar
(KA) and Nova Asvio (NA) conducted analysis of the data obtained. Furthermore, this
research can be completed properly. Khairul Anwar (KA) and Nova Asvio (NA) whose
help editing the manuscript.

REFERENCES
Alasuutari, P., Bickman, L., & Brannen, J. (2008). The SAGE Handbook of Social Research


10

Dimensional Analysis of School Based Pesantren Design Development




     Methods. Sage. Google Scholar
Amstrong, M., & Duncan Brown. (2019). Strategic Human Resource Management: Back to
     The Future. Google Scholar
Anderson, D. L. (2016). Organization Development: The Process of Leading Organizational
     Change Fourth Edition. Sage Publication. Google Scholar
Anwar, K., Novalina, S., Anwar, K., & Hasibuan, L. (2021). The Role of Education Politics
     as a Foundation in Developing Curriculum and Educational Techniques in Indonesia.
     13(1). https://doi.org/10.35445/alishlah.v13i1.410
Armstrong, M. (2011). Armstrong’s Handbook of Strategic Human Resource Management.
     Kogan Page Publishers. Google Scholar
Asvio, N., Yamin, M., & Risnita. (2019). Influence of Leadership Style, Emotional
     Intelligence and Job Satisfaction toward Organizational Commitment (Survey at
     SMA Muhammadiyah South Sumatera). International Journal of Scientific &
     Technology Research, 8(8), 70–88. Google Scholar
Ather, S. M., & Sobhani, F. A. (2007). Managerial Leadership: an Islamic Perspective.
     IIUC Central Library Repository. nfluence of Leadership Style, Emotional
     Intelligence and Job Satisfaction toward Organizational Commitment (Survey at
     SMA Muhammadiyah South Sumatera).
Baráth, T. (2015). Learning Organization as a Tool for Better and More Effective
     Schools.           Procedia         Manufacturing,         3(Ahfe),         1494–1502.
     https://doi.org/10.1016/j.promfg.2015.07.330
Bock, A. J., Warglien, M., & George, G. (2020). A Simulation-Based Approach to
     Business Model Design and Organizational Change. Innovation, 1–27.
     https://doi.org/10.1080/14479338.2020.1769482
Campos, H. M., Parellada, F. S., Atondo, G. H., & Quintero, M. R. (2015). Strategic
     Decision Making, Entrepreneurial Orientation and Performance: an
     Organizational Life Cycle Approach. Revista de Administração FACES Journal, 14(2).
     Google Scholar
Chan, S. M., & Sam, T. T. (2011). Analisis SWOT Kebijakan Pendidikan Era Otonomi
     Daerah (6th ed.). Raja Grafindo Persada.
Denkin, N. K. (2007). Metodelogi Penelitian Kualitatif Edisi Revisi. Remaja Rosdakarya.
Farazmand, A. (2018). Global Encyclopedia of Public Administration, Public Policy.
     Springer.
Fattah, N. (2013). Analisis Kebijakan Pendidikan (2nd ed.). Rosda Karya.
Fischer, F., Miller, G. J., & Sidney, M. S. (2007). Handbook of Public Policy Analysis:
     Theory, Politics, and Methods. Taylor & Francis Group Publisher. Google Scholar
Flick, U. (2004). Triangulation in Qualitative Research. A Companion to Qualitative
     Research, 3, 178–183.
Gürel, E., & Tat, M. (2017). SWOT Analysis: A Theoretical Review. Journal of
     International Social Research, 10(51).
Guy, S. (2010). Work after Globalization: Building Occupational Citizenship. Edward Elgar.
Hancock, L., & Nuttman, S. (2014). Engaging Higher Education Institutions in the
     Challenge of Sustainability: Sustainable Transport as a Catalyst for Action. Journal
     of Cleaner Production. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jclepro.2013.07.062
Hartin, H. (2020). Human Resources Oriented: Kerangka Strategis Pengembangan
     MAN       Insan      Cendekia      Kendari.    Shautut     Tarbiyah,    26(1),  50–68.
     https://doi.org/10.31332/str.v26i1.1921
Hitt, M. A. (2007). Manajemen Strategis Menyongsong Era Persaingan dan Globalisasi.
     Erlangga.


11

Dimensional Analysis of School Based Pesantren Design Development




Hopkins, C. D., Raymond, M. A., & Carlson, L. (2011). Educating Students to Give
     Them a Sustainable Competitive Advantage. Journal of Marketing Education, 33(3),
     337–347. https://doi.org/10.1177%2F0273475311420241
Keupp, M. M., Palmié, M., & Gassmann, O. (2012). The Strategic Management of
     Innovation: A Systematic Review and Paths for Future Research. International
     Journal of Management Reviews, 14(4), 367–390. https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1468-
     2370.2011.00321.x
Kortmann, S. (2012). The Relationship between Organizational Structure and Organizational
     Ambidexterity: A Comparison between Manufacturing and Service Firms. Springer
     Science & Business Media. Google Scholar
Lian, B., Kristiawan, M., Primasari, D. A. G., & Prasetyo, M. A. M. (2020). Teachers’
     Model in Building Students’ Character. Journal of Critical Reviews, 7(14), 927–932.
     Google Scholar
Macharis, C., Verbeke, A., & De Brucker, K. (2004). The Strategic Evaluation of New
     Technologies through Multicriteria Analysis: the ADVISORS case. Research in
     Transportation     Economics,     8,   443–462.     https://doi.org/10.1016/S0739-
     8859(04)08019-9
Mondy, R. W. (2008). Sumber Daya Manusia, Ed. 10, Jilid ke-1, Terj. Bayu Airlangga.
     Erlangga.
Mukhtar, Risnita, & Anwar, K. (2019). The Effect of Transformational Leadership,
     Management Information System, and Organizational Climate on Lecturers’ Job
     Satisfaction. International Journal of Scientific and Technology Research. Google
     Scholar
Nawawi, H. (2012). Manajemen Strategik, Organisasi Non Profit Bidang Pemerintahan (4th
     ed.). UGM Press.
Obal, M., Morgan, T., & Joseph, G. (2020). Integrating Sustainability into New Product
     Development: The Role of Organizational Leadership and Culture. Journal of Small
     Business Strategy, 30(1), 43–57.Google Scholar
Othman, M. (2012). Tahap Kompetensi Pelajar Melaksanakan Kerja Amamli Berpandukan
     Domain Psikomotor Simpson. Universiti Tun Hussein Onn Malaysia.
Pasaribu, M. (2016). From The Perspective of Strategic Management : Knowledge, Innovation
     & Entrepreneurship. KPG BP.
Prasetyo, M. A. M. (2019). Sistem Pasar Output Pendidikan Islam. At-Ta’dib: Jurnal
     Ilmiah Prodi Pendidikan Agama Islam, 10(2), 136–153. Google Scholar
Prasetyo, M. A. M., & Anwar, K. (2021). Assessing Organizational Culture : An Important
     Step      for     Enhancing      the     Implementation      of    Junior.     13(1).
     https://doi.org/10.35445/alishlah.v13i1.461
Seftiani, R. D., Hafshoh, S. D., & Irawan, I. (2018). Perencanaan Strategik Pendirian
     Ma’had Aly Pondok Quran Bandung. Manageria: Jurnal Manajemen Pendidikan
     Islam:      Jurnal     Manajemen       Pendidikan      Islam,     3(1),     173–193.
     https://doi.org/10.14421/manageria.2018.31-09
Soebahar, A. H. (2012). Kebijakan pendidikan Islam dari Ordonansi Guru Sampai UU
     Sisdiknas. Raja Grafindo Persada.
Syar’i, A., Hamdanah, H., & Akrim, A. (2020). The Development of Madrasa Education
     in Indonesia. Revista Argentina de Clínica Psicológica, 29(4), 513–523.
     https://doi.org/10.24042/terampil.v4i1.1807
Taute, W., & Taute, F. (2012). Organizational Development: A Supplement for the
     Effective Organization. Journal of Workplace Behavioral Health, 27(2), 63–78.
     https://doi.org/10.1080/15555240.2012.666461


12

Dimensional Analysis of School Based Pesantren Design Development




Weiss, M. (2007). Efficient Organizational Design: Balancing Incentives and Power.
     Springer.
Zain, M. Z. M., Atan, H., & Idrus, R. M. (2004). The Impact of Information and
     Communication Technology (ICT) on the Management Practices of Malaysian
     Smart Schools. International Journal of Educational Development, 24(2), 201–211.
     https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ijedudev.2003.10.010
Zollo, M. (2009). Superstitious Learning with Rare Strategic Decisions: Theory and
     Evidence from Corporate Acquisitions. Journal of Organization Science, 20(5).
     https://doi.org/10.1287/orsc.1090.0459




                                      Copyright Holder :
                                  © Prasetyo, M., et al., (2022).

                                   First Publication Right :
                            © Jurnal Iqra’ : Kajian Ilmu Pendidikan

                                      This article is under:




13