London Review of
Education
Special issue: International perspectives on signature pedagogies for school leaders

Research article


Examining educational leadership preparation and
development programmes in the Gulf region: a
comparative study of Bahrain, Kuwait and Qatar
Nidal Al Haj Sleiman,1, *    Amal Abdulwahab Alsaleh,2         Faten S.M Abdel-Hameed,3
Salman Yusuf Zayed3
1
  Middle East Centre, The London School of Economics and Political Science, London, UK
2
  College of Education, Kuwait University, Kuwait City, Kuwait
3
  Bahrain Teachers College, University of Bahrain, Zallaq, Bahrain
* Correspondence: n.al-haj-sleiman@lse.ac.uk


Submission date: 15 October 2024; Acceptance date: 28 May 2025; Publication date: 18 June 2025

How to cite
Al Haj Sleiman, N., Alsaleh, A.A., Abdel-Hameed, F.S.M. and Zayed, S.Y. (2025) ‘Examining
educational leadership preparation and development programmes in the Gulf region: a
comparative study of Bahrain, Kuwait and Qatar’. London Review of Education, 23 (1), 13.
DOI: https://doi.org/10.14324/LRE.23.1.13.

Peer review
This article has been peer-reviewed through the journal’s standard double-anonymous peer-review
process, where both the reviewers and authors are anonymised during review.

Copyright
2025, Nidal Al Haj Sleiman, Amal Abdulwahab Alsaleh, Faten S.M. Abdel-Hameed and Salman
Yusuf Zayed. This is an open-access article distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons
Attribution Licence (CC BY) 4.0 https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/, which permits
unrestricted use, distribution and reproduction in any medium, provided the original author and
source are credited • DOI: https://doi.org/10.14324/LRE.23.1.13.

Open access
London Review of Education is a peer-reviewed open-access journal.



     Abstract
     This article is based on a comparative study that addresses signature pedagogies in
     leadership preparation and development policies and programmes in Kuwait, Qatar and
     Bahrain. The three countries initiated an educational reform movement in the early
     2000s, which unfolded in several phases, and which included a significant focus on school
     improvement and leadership development. The development of current and aspiring
     school leaders, and the recognition of their crucial role in leading change and improving
     student learning, were some of the main pillars of the reform agendas. Studies conducted




                                                                                  London Review of Education
                                                                          https://doi.org/10.14324/LRE.23.1.13

                       Examining educational leadership preparation and development programmes in the Gulf region   2



     over the past 10 years provided multiple evidence that there still exist gaps in leadership
     preparation programmes, which impact their role in fulfilling the ambitious reforms. Using
     document analysis this study explores the potentials of significant signature pedagogies
     to enhance leadership professional learning programmes across the three countries.
     In 2013, Walker, Bryant and Lee studied the key features of educational leadership
     programmes in different countries by mainly addressing theoretical (research-based)
     foundation, coherence of content and programme profiles, including structure, methods
     and pedagogies. Their findings revealed major commonalities and differences between
     the three contexts and raised questions in relation to the limited prospects of signature
     pedagogies for the school leadership profession. Based on a critical examination of the
     findings and the limited prospects of signature pedagogies, the study offers insights
     and recommendations for an empirical study that sheds further light on the potential
     development of signature pedagogies for school leaders in the Gulf countries.

     Keywords educational leadership; development; preparation; signature pedagogies;
     Gulf countries


Introduction
The Gulf Cooperation Council (GCC) countries, encompassing Bahrain, Saudi Arabia, Kuwait, Oman,
Qatar and the United Arab Emirates (UAE), represent a collection of small yet wealthy nation states
situated along the western coast of the Gulf region, with a combined population of nearly 55.9
million (GCC-STAT, 2023). The emergence of oil and gas reserves within these nations has historically
underpinned socio-economic development, substantially enhancing public service provisions, including
education. Since the early 2000s, the Gulf states have undertaken a strategic reorientation focusing on
the diversification of their economies and the investment in human resources due to the recognition
of inherent risks associated with over-reliance on petrochemical industries (IMF, 2023). Central to this
economic diversification agenda is a comprehensive overhaul of local education systems to better
prepare citizens for competing in a knowledge-based global economy. The reform agenda aims to
transform education systems from a traditional knowledge transmission approach to pedagogies that
centralise critical thinking, problem solving and collaboration (Barber et al., 2007). To meet these
goals, major educational reform initiatives were set, often in collaboration with transnational consulting
organisations driven by the experiences of developed education systems worldwide (Hammad et al.,
2024; Kirk, 2015).
      The reform initiatives encompass a multifaceted approach that targets various aspects of
the educational ecosystem. Key interventions included the enhancement of teachers’ education,
governance structures and accountability mechanisms, adopting twenty-first-century curricular
frameworks, expanding higher, vocational education and early years education provisions (Alfadala,
2015; Alhouti, 2023). One major educational reform agenda has been the professional development of
current and aspiring school leaders, recognising their crucial role in driving systemic change and fostering
students’ overall achievement (Alfadala, 2015). Hence, the major emphasis of this study is to examine
leadership preparation and development programmes of educational leaders in public schools in three
Gulf states – Bahrain, Kuwait and Qatar. The study explores the key features of these programmes
and policy frameworks in line with Walker et al.’s (2013) findings, and it analyses the extent to which
these programmes respond to Shulman’s (2005) signature pedagogies framework, which recognises
the balance between the intellectual, technical and moral dimensions. The study also aims to unpack
commonalities and differences between the three countries, and to provide insights into this area, given
the limited research examining leadership preparation and development in the region (Hammad et al.,
2022) and the existing gaps in leadership skills and capacities (Alfadala, 2015; Romanowski et al., 2018).




                                                                                          London Review of Education
                                                                                  https://doi.org/10.14324/LRE.23.1.13

                       Examining educational leadership preparation and development programmes in the Gulf region   3



The importance of leadership preparation and development
Leadership development is essential for improving the processes and outcomes of schooling (Leithwood
and Seashore-Louis, 2012). Effective leadership contributes directly and indirectly to the improvement
of teaching, student learning and the overall improvement of school operations (Robinson, 2011).
According to Bush et al. (2007), to create long-standing impact in schools, leadership preparation and
development should incorporate knowledge-based content, skills and contextual relevance. There is
well-established evidence, globally, documenting the efforts of governments and educational bodies to
develop strategies and programmes aiming to advance the role of leadership (Darling-Hammond et al.,
2022; Hallinger and Heck, 1997). Nonetheless, research on leadership development conducted in the
Gulf region is still limited, especially if compared with the huge policy shift in education reform since the
2000s (Chaaban et al., 2023; Hammad et al., 2024).
      Despite efforts to raise the standards and quality of school leadership across the Gulf states,
evidence shows that there are significant gaps in leadership preparation programmes – and,
consequently, in leadership knowledge and skills – that might prevent these programmes from effectively
leading the ambitious education reform agenda (Alfadala, 2015; Alhouti and Male, 2017; Badri and Khaili,
2014). Hallinger and Chen (2015) have suggested that research on topics related to school leadership
and management in Asian countries remains in a relatively early stage of development. In addition, there
is growing evidence that more high-quality educational leadership and management studies need to be
conducted in the Arab region to inform policy and practice in this area (Karami-Akkary and El Sahib,
2019). In the context of the Arabian Gulf countries, several scholars have emphasised the importance
of widening the scope of educational leadership studies to tackle issues related to school leadership
impact on students’ academic outcomes and teachers’ professional development (Al-Mahdy et al., 2021;
Hammad et al., 2022). Accordingly, ineffective leadership development will continue to be a ‘contributor’
to ‘inadequate’ educational systems (Bush, 2009: 386). Reforming the system and improving learning
outcomes requires deliberate planning and strategies that blend global evidence with local system needs
and the individual professional learning needs of school leaders.


The knowledge and practice rift
According to Bush (2009), leadership development that focuses heavily on knowledge sources without
enhancing performance skills might not be sufficient. Similarly, programmes that prioritise skills to
research-informed knowledge might render leaders more focused on performance and habitual acts,
rather than on intellectual and purposeful considerations. As school leadership requires a combination
of knowledge, actions and a moral direction, programmes that focus on one of these directions might
not be fit for purpose. hooks (1994) argued that teaching is not only about the intellect, but also
requires the skill and know-how of teaching and interaction with students and adults in educational
settings. hooks (1994) also called for teaching to be driven by love for students and engaging with
their ideas and life experiences, which would allow educators to lead meaningful interactions that make
a difference. Similarly, Shulman (2005) called for signature pedagogies in the workplace and argued
against pedagogies that do not prepare professionals for real-life situations. ‘Signature pedagogies
are characteristic forms of teaching and learning that organise ways to prepare future practitioners
for their professional work’ (Black and Murtadha, 2007: 1). Shulman (2005) called for pedagogies that
incorporate a balance of the three dimensions: knowledge, performance and acting with integrity. In line
with Shulman’s (2005) theory, this study examines educational leadership preparation and development
frameworks represented by policy texts, training handbooks and relevant programme documents in the
three countries.


Context
Bahrain
Since 2005, a series of reform initiatives have been introduced to develop the educational system
in Bahrain. As such, improving teacher and leader education programmes has been a key pillar of
these developmental projects. The Bahrain Teachers College was established to provide high-quality




                                                                                          London Review of Education
                                                                                  https://doi.org/10.14324/LRE.23.1.13

                       Examining educational leadership preparation and development programmes in the Gulf region   4



programmes that would prepare pre-service and in-service teachers and leaders. Since 2008, the college
has offered an Educational Leadership Programme (ELP) that prepares potential assistant principals and
principals – nominated by the Ministry of Education – for leadership roles in Bahraini public schools.
This programme was adopted and developed in collaboration with the National Institute of Education
in Singapore. Singapore was chosen as it was one of the high-performing countries in the Trends in
International Mathematics and Science Study, which was one of the main aims of education reform in
Bahrain, and it was assumed to have a system that provides best practices which other nations should
borrow; Nóvoa (2018) described this as ‘prescribing to the other’.
      The ELP Programme comprises three tiers: Tier 1 – Certificate of Education Leadership; Tier 2
– Diploma of Education Leadership; and Tier 3 – Higher Diploma of Education Leadership. Assistant
principals and senior teachers are selected by the Ministry of Education to participate in the various
tiers of the programme. The programme aims to prepare government school leaders in several areas
that underpin their job responsibilities, namely, curriculum innovations, professional development,
educational research, strategic management, staff appraisal, communication with the community,
home–school relations, using information and communication technology, improving students’ learning,
and applying educational ethics. The programme requires completion of 420 hours of study divided into
three tiers leading to the University of Bahrain Higher Diploma of Education Leadership. The programme
can be completed within a minimum of two academic years to a maximum of six years (University of
Bahrain, 2015).
      In 2020, the leadership training for government school leaders in Bahrain was revisited to align
its requirements with the Education and Training Quality Authority requirements (Education and
Training Quality Authority, 2019). An improved School Leadership Programme and Teacher Leadership
Programme were implemented. The School Leadership Programme aims at preparing government
school leaders in the following six areas: human and financial resource management; educational law
and ethics; student support and achievement; strategic planning for school improvement; school, family
and community engagement; and practicum leading project in schools. The two-semester programme
requires completion of 270 hours of study leading to the University of Bahrain Higher Diploma of
School Leadership.
      The Teacher Leadership Programme, meanwhile, aims at preparing government school senior
teachers in the instructional strategies for productive learning, curriculum design and assessment,
teaching students with special educational needs, understanding teacher leadership, coaching and
evaluating teachers, and action research. This programme also requires the completion of 270 hours
of study leading to the University of Bahrain Diploma of Teacher Leadership.

Kuwait
Leadership development programmes in Kuwait are developed within the Ministry of Education’s centralised
structure. Training is provided to all staff members, including principals, by the Ministry of Education’s
training department. Leadership preparation is required, especially before assuming any formal leadership
position (head teacher, assistant principal or principal). During their in-service training, school leaders,
mainly principals, have the autonomy to choose which training courses they wish to attend.
      A principal preparation programme was designed and organised by the Ministry of Education. Each
year, the Ministry of Education presents a plan that contains independent workshops on leadership,
conflict resolution, empowerment, managing meetings and other educational, practice-based or
dialogic sessions. Although the Ministry of Education has a clear vision for the tasks and roles of
senior leaders, their preparation programmes are not structured according to the specific skills they
need (Hammad et al., 2024). Furthermore, there is no evidence that this content is based on research.
Generally, all workshops presented to school principals contain a combination of theoretical and practical
components. District supervision also organises workshops, lectures and training sessions that target
principals’ professional needs.
      Despite this, these programmes are still in the early stages of development, and they lack the
organisation and academic underpinnings. There is a lack of internship opportunities at Kuwait University
or other educational institutions. Some trainees are academics, others have postgraduate degrees
(master’s degrees or PhDs), and some have extensive experience in educational leadership positions.
Additionally, the training courses include a variety of workshops that principals may choose from
depending on their practical and professional needs. Leaders are empowered to take responsibility for




                                                                                          London Review of Education
                                                                                  https://doi.org/10.14324/LRE.23.1.13

                       Examining educational leadership preparation and development programmes in the Gulf region   5



their preparation and development; nevertheless, some still lack essential skills as a result of fragmented
preparation programmes that do not provide the necessary support following the workshops (Alenezi
and Alsaleh, 2021).
      Despite the fact that most training sessions focus on leadership qualities, studies conducted in
Kuwait, such as Alenezi and Alsaleh (2021), indicate that staff development programmes for leaders
have only a minimal impact on professional development and are insufficient in terms of time, content
and quality. The leaders indicated that they gained most of their leadership skills and experience
through their daily work activities, rather than through formal training. According to Joyce and Showers
(2002), training programmes should be linked to practice, consider educators’ opinions regarding the
necessary changes and provide support for all stakeholders. In Kuwait, a political decision needs to be
made regarding redesigning leadership programmes. According to Alajmi’s (2022) study, the Ministry of
Education should provide school leaders with more autonomy and adequate training to facilitate their
performance. Alhouti and Male (2017) studied the views of senior school leaders regarding leadership
preparation courses. His study showed that although some participants appeared to be prepared for
their positions based on the training they received, a greater emphasis was placed on the theoretical
part of the training rather than the practical components. Moreover, the study indicates the need for
more focused training and development opportunities to enhance the range of skills required for the role.
      Since preparation programmes in Kuwait are still in the process of development and are short in
their ability to gain accreditation or join an academically accredited programme, leaders rely on fostering
social informal organisations and networks. Support groups formed by the Teacher Union, as well as
informal mentoring groups, are growing in Kuwait. Through these voluntary informal networks, leaders
find support, exchange experiences and support teachers.

Qatar
Qatar initiated its educational reform process in 2004 based on a large-scale evaluation of its educational
system and outcomes, aided by foreign – transnational – consultants. The reform was aligned with
governmental directions and massive economic and structural development plans in the country.
The initial phase of educational reform centred school improvement, choice and accountability for
government schools and, consequently, highlighted these areas as foundational in the role of school
leaders. In 2015, choice and independence gradually lapsed, and centralisation reappeared. As a result,
school leaders’ preparation, development and key leadership activities became directly associated with
ministerial directions and programmes.
       The reform efforts, initially investing in the development of the National Professional Standards for
School Leaders and Teachers, remained intact. The standards continued to be paramount in the process
of licensure and professional learning for leaders and teachers. The standards – published in 2007 –
included key benchmarks for the role of senior and middle leaders, in addition to detailed guidance on
what each standard indicates.
       The standards offer a framework for action and evaluation, as well as a parameter for understanding
the scope of work and responsibilities. Nonetheless, they do not offer sufficient links with practical
activities in schools despite elaborations, which has been addressed by the training programmes offered
by the government over the years. The standards and the set of programmes aligned with them were
initially developed through international consultants contracted by the Supreme Education Council –
now the Ministry of Education and Higher Education. The standards are strongly aligned with mainstream
benchmarking systems implemented in various countries, and driven by Australian, British and New
Zealand educational systems, which widely guide school leaders’ work. Therefore, the educational
and pedagogical approaches underpinning the standards are, to a great extent, borrowed from these
contexts and systems.
       The Ministry of Education and Higher Education initiated collaborations with Qatar University
to develop a Master’s of Education programme in educational leadership, coupled with a series of
leadership development programmes offered by the university’s Centre for Educational Training. The
Centre for Educational Training’s offerings are strongly aligned with the standards and largely funded by
the government for Qatari school leaders; however, these offerings are still optional.
       Developed in 2016, the Ministry’s Centre for Educational Development offers a sequence of
leadership training programmes that support emerging, aspiring and experienced leaders, notably
principals, deputies, academic coordinators and other middle leaders. Those appointed for a




                                                                                          London Review of Education
                                                                                  https://doi.org/10.14324/LRE.23.1.13

                        Examining educational leadership preparation and development programmes in the Gulf region   6



principalship position are expected to take a 60-hour leadership preparation programme by the Centre
for Educational Development. In addition, leaders can only be appointed to a principalship position
if they have a minimum 10 years of school experience in teaching and administration and a bachelor’s
degree (Hammad et al., 2024).
      The findings from the literature highlight a critical gap in research on school leadership within the
Middle East, particularly in the context of the Gulf countries (Bailey et al., 2021). While the UAE has made
notable strides in exploring school leadership, other nations in the region continue to face challenges
stemming from the adoption of leadership frameworks and practices developed in other contexts. The
concept of policy borrowing has emerged as a central theme, underscoring the difficulties associated with
transferring models of leadership without adequate consideration of cultural and contextual differences.
Due to these challenges, several policy changes occurred. For example, the ELP in Bahrain encountered
significant hurdles in its implementation, necessitating adaptation and delivery in Arabic following its initial
collaboration with the National Institute of Education in Singapore. Similarly, Qatar’s initial emphasis on
school improvement, choice and accountability faltered due to insufficient training and contextualisation,
ultimately prompting a return to centralised governance (Al-Mahdy et al., 2021).


Methodology
This article uses document analysis as a key method to collect data and analyse content, knowledge
underpinnings, structure and values embedded in leadership development frameworks in Bahrain,
Kuwait and Qatar. Document analysis is a ‘systematic procedure for reviewing or evaluating documents’
to generate empirical knowledge (Bowen, 2009: 27). Document analysis can offer information about the
nature of institutional life and practices (Fitzgerald, 2012), and it can enable learning about institutional
frameworks and policies (Fisher, 2019). Although documents might not necessarily reflect the practical
aspects related to leadership development or other operational and political aspects, they present
the formal and institutional orientation towards certain areas versus others. For the goals of this
study, the most relevant documents are mainly policy documents, training handbooks, professional
development frameworks and local professional standards (see Table 1). Fitzgerald (2012) has suggested
that documents chosen for this method should be authentic, credible, representative and meaningful.
The documents chosen for this study are indeed authentic and credible, as they are developed and
issued by governmental educational authorities in each country. They are representative, as they reflect
the majority of official documents in this area, and they are directly relevant to the inquiries raised by this
study. To improve the validity of document analysis in this study, a structured analytical method is used
which includes a list of themes driven by two relevant frameworks (Davies et al., 2005; Walker et al., 2013)
that offer a coherent approach to data analysis.

Table 1. Types and details of reviewed documents

 Country     Document type                                       Document details
 Bahrain     School Leadership Programmes Document               Issued by Bahrain Teachers College in 2020
             Educational Leadership Programmes                   Issued by Bahrain Teachers College in 2015
             Handbook                                            Issued by the Ministry of Education in 2013
             Bahrain Educational Leadership Strategy             Issued by Bahrain Economic Development
             Bahrain’s school agenda: Expediting                 Board in 2011
             public school improvement
 Kuwait      Administrative Affairs and Administrative           Issued by the Ministry of Education in
             Development Sector yearly plan                      Kuwait, issued 2022, 2023, 2024
             2023–2024, 2022–2023                                National plan for Kuwait
 Qatar       National Professional Standards for School          Issued by the Supreme Educational
             Leaders                                             Council in May 2007
             The National Training Handbook for                  Issued by Qatar Educational Training
             School Leaders 2020–2021; 2021–2022;                Centre, Ministry of Education and Higher
             2022–2023; 2023–2024                                Education in August 2020




                                                                                           London Review of Education
                                                                                   https://doi.org/10.14324/LRE.23.1.13

                       Examining educational leadership preparation and development programmes in the Gulf region   7



Key findings
Design and delivery
The design and delivery of leadership development programmes are overseen by the Ministry of
Education and Ministry-affiliated centres and trainers in Kuwait and Qatar; however, in Bahrain,
leadership preparation is fully provided by Bahrain Teachers College. Bahrain has a well-established
programme of leadership qualifications for teacher leaders, assistant principals and principals. In Qatar,
the Ministry of Education established a centre for educational training that exclusively offers training for
government school leaders, both senior and middle leaders. In Kuwait, leadership development is fully
designed and provided by the Ministry of Education, with limited provision for the private sector. In
both Kuwait and Qatar, collaboration between the national university and the Ministry of Education is an
important source of professional development for educational practitioners, including school leaders,
but this is neither exclusive nor consistent. Bahrain’s programmes require completion of a full course
equivalent to a higher diploma and conditioned by a passing grade for a leader to qualify for the role,
while Qatar and Kuwait offer developmental programmes rather than formal qualifications.

Key focus areas
All three contexts had a significant focus on the leadership and management of teaching and learning
in schools, including instructional supervision. Leading change, innovation, accountability, monitoring
and evaluation, conflict management and skills development are also among the key areas addressed
by these programmes. In addition, whole-school administrative and managerial processes are also
prioritised across the three contexts. The Bahraini framework had an additional focus on ethics and
understanding legal aspects in educational practice, while Kuwaiti and Qatari frameworks highlighted
cultural and religious values and norms without explicitly addressing the notions of education laws
and ethics.

Knowledge frameworks (research-based content)
Programme content in the three countries reflected the incorporation of major educational leadership
theories developed in Western contexts, mainly North America, Australia and the UK. The most
common theories informing these frameworks are instructional leadership, leading teaching and
learning, learning-centred leadership, school effectiveness and improvement and innovative leadership,
as well as knowledge frameworks focusing on efficiency, performance improvement, skills-based and
data-informed approaches.

Selection
Access to most of these programmes requires prior appointment into a principalship role or deputy
principalship. The programmes focus on preparation for the leadership role and development while in
the role; however, the vast majority involve development for those already in leadership roles. Bahrain
had an additional focus on preparation for those aspiring for leadership due to the well-established
structure of leadership development programmes.

Key commonalities
(1)   Leadership preparation and development (LPD) programmes and strategies are governed by
      governmental entities, and they are largely aligned with governmental visions and strategies and
      public policies.
(2)   Planning and delivery of LPD programmes takes place via the Ministry of Education or
      government-affiliated educational providers.
(3)   Local cultural and religious values are widely prevalent within LPD frameworks.
(4)   Programme content predominantly focuses on professional aspects (administration, performance,
      skills and overall organisational development), in addition to academic content related to
      instructional leadership and the supervision of teaching and learning.




                                                                                          London Review of Education
                                                                                  https://doi.org/10.14324/LRE.23.1.13

                       Examining educational leadership preparation and development programmes in the Gulf region   8



(5)   Student needs are highlighted in some of these programmes in relation to gifted and talented
      students, student behaviour management and students with special educational needs. However,
      other sociological aspects such as generational concerns, student and teacher engagement
      and belonging, socio-economic inequalities, inclusion, equity, diverse family backgrounds and
      multilingual needs of students are widely absent.

Key differences
Structure
The structure and operational features of LPD programmes in Bahrain are significantly different from
Kuwait and Qatar. In Bahrain, public school leaders are required to complete a leadership qualification
equivalent to a higher diploma, offered by the Bahrain Teachers College, University of Bahrain.
Alternatively, Kuwait and Qatar Ministries of Education oversee and govern leadership development
programmes through Ministry-affiliated centres, which could be open to collaboration with national and
international universities, with minimal exception for private providers.

Focus areas
Leadership development in Kuwait heavily focuses on training teacher and improving teaching and
learning, whereas Qatar programmes focus more on school improvement, evaluation and organisational
aspects related to the leadership role. Bahrain programmes, in general, focus mostly on instructional
leadership and supervision, in addition to a well-rounded set of leadership dimensions (Robinson, 2011).


The analytical framework
This study examined existing frameworks and programmes of leadership preparation and development
in the three Gulf countries based on the descriptors offered by Walker et al. (2013), who explored the key
features of professional development programmes internationally. Walker et al. (2013) suggested that
leadership development programmes can be understood by exploring their key content areas, focuses,
knowledge frameworks, sources of content, curriculum consistency and coherence, and structural and
operational aspects. These descriptors can be deeply informative of the relevance and value of
leadership professional learning for practising and aspiring leaders (Davies et al., 2005). After generating
key features, commonalities and differences, the following section discusses whether these programmes
reflect the dimensions of professional signature pedagogies for leaders that enable them to develop their
thinking, performance and action with a sense of moral purpose (Shulman, 2005).


Discussion
Shulman’s (2005) signature pedagogies framework strongly aligns with the overarching goals and values
of educational reform across the three countries, especially as they target educational enhancement
through knowledge, skills and moral aspects. This discussion analyses the findings while responding
to the key questions raised by Shulman (2005) with regard to key pedagogies and ways of preparing
professional practitioners (school leaders), given the tensions of the field and the changing dimensions
and expectations of leaders’ work. According to Shulman’s (2005: 2) signature pedagogies, there are
‘three fundamental dimensions of professional work – to think, to perform, and to act with integrity’.
Signature pedagogies have: (1) a surface structure of processes for teaching and learning about the
profession; (2) a deep structure that involves assumptions about the best ways to impart knowledge and
the most appropriate forms of knowledge; and (3) an implicit structure, particularly the beliefs, values
and moral underpinnings of practice (Shulman, 2005).
      Although each of the three countries explored in the study has its unique approach to leadership
development driven by its own educational reform agenda, the findings reflect an overall phenomenon of
homogenisation and centralisation of leadership preparation and development in public schools. While
the guiding frameworks and programmes recognise different levels of leadership experience and job
roles, the needs of schools driven by their diverse communities or locations are rarely addressed. On




                                                                                          London Review of Education
                                                                                  https://doi.org/10.14324/LRE.23.1.13

                        Examining educational leadership preparation and development programmes in the Gulf region   9



the contrary, there is a generic training approach that everyone is expected to undertake, especially
when instructed by the Ministry of Education. Due to the limitation of the methodology adopted
by the study, little is known about individual and group initiatives, and leaders’ contribution to the
development and design of these programmes. The findings do not reveal whether leaders have the
choice to enrol in programmes that meet their professional needs, rather than based on career stage or
official appointment.
      The outcomes of the study showed that there is a significant focus on school improvement,
instructional leadership and relevant theories addressing the supervision of teaching and learning, but
less attention to learning theories underpinning leading, teaching and student learning. Additionally, a
common component is the focus on the what and how of school leaders’ work; that is, how they lead
and manage their schools and teams, and what they do as principals or deputies, but not much on the
why. The findings, including commonalities and differences, revealed an overview of what knowledge
frameworks are reinforced and what activities are highlighted as a part of LPD programmes, in addition
to the centrality of local cultural values.

Signature pedagogies in Bahrain, Kuwait and Qatar’s leadership preparation and
development
The main purpose of this study, besides examining the key features of LPD programmes in the three
contexts, was to explore whether these programmes explicitly offer or indicate potential directions for
specific signature pedagogies for the profession of school leaders. By analysing the surface structures,
deep structures and implicit structures (Shulman, 2005) driven by the findings of this document review,
the following sections discuss the extent to which the findings indicate specific signature pedagogies
and what these mean in the three contexts. According to Shulman (2005), signature pedagogies consist
of: (1) surface structures that are ‘operational acts of teaching and learning’ or observable strategies and
mechanisms; (2) deep structures that can be described as assumptions about the transfer and exchange
of knowledge; and (3) implicit structures or the underlying beliefs, values and dispositions embedded
within teaching and learning. According to Shulman (2005), it is not the presence of some of these
structures that is key in his theory, but the integration and balance of these different aspects in a specific
professional learning approach that can be described as a signature pedagogy.

Bahrain
Bahrain has distinct and well-structured educational leadership preparation programmes for middle and
senior school leaders. The programmes are designed in collaboration with the Bahrain Teachers College,
Bahrain Ministry of Education and the University of Bahrain. They offer the leadership competencies set
by the Ministry of Education, especially those related to improving school performance according to
the Bahrain Quality Assurance requirements. The programmes intend to prepare and improve school
leaders’ knowledge and skills in various areas, particularly leadership styles, strategic planning, human
and financial resource management, action research, best practices in school leadership, home–school
communication, improving student achievement, dealing with ethical and legal issues, and other areas.
The programmes also focus on improving the leaders’ skills in dealing with various real-life situations
encountered by students, parents and other stakeholders (Abdel-Hameed et al., 2018). The High
Diploma of School Leadership offered to leaders after completing the programme requirements is
recognised by the Bahrain Civil Services Bureau for leaders’ promotion purposes. Public school leaders
in Bahrain are encouraged to engage with professional training workshops offered by the Ministry of
Education and other entities, and to connect with their peers.
     The surface structure for Bahrain’s education leadership programme entails a set of course materials
prepared and shared by course instructors, as well as a list of suggested course references. The sessions
are usually interactive, where both instructors and leaders present and exchange ideas and opinions
about the taught theories and topics. The deep structure of the pedagogy rests on the assertion that
what is being taught emphasises how to think as a school leader in various contexts and situations,
and where they apply appropriate leadership theories and styles; in other words, case studies are
always an essential part of the course materials, and they are discussed and analysed by all participants,
taking into account the various school contexts. The implicit structure of the pedagogy (the moral
dimension) focuses on values and beliefs, which are extracted from the Bahraini Islamic culture. The




                                                                                           London Review of Education
                                                                                   https://doi.org/10.14324/LRE.23.1.13

                       Examining educational leadership preparation and development programmes in the Gulf region   10



ethical dimension is carefully taken into account in most cases. One of the courses taught in the
leadership preparation programme deals with ethics and law in education. This course provides leaders
with the laws and regulations applied in various situations; however, Islamic values are always a base for
leaders’ decisions in each case.
      Similar to Kuwaiti programmes, there is more focus on instructional leadership and supervision of
teaching and learning besides school improvement and effectiveness theories, but nothing in particular
on learning theory related to adults and students. The findings also revealed the need for more
attention to the practical aspects of the role. While leaders enrolled in these programmes engage
with theory related to different aspects of the role, there is a gap in connecting knowledge aspects
to practical ones. Although the programme includes group discussions as a teaching strategy, it does
not explicitly connect intellectual exchange with practical problem-solving skills that are directly relevant
to workplace challenges.

Kuwait
Kuwait has a unique educational leadership preparation programme. Despite the ambiguity in standards
regarding the expected outcomes related to leadership skills, leadership evaluations for principals
express commitment, working with the group, management skills and self-development ambitions.
Regarding self-development, the Ministry of Education encourages school leaders’ autonomy to gain
knowledge, connect with peer groups and be active in informal communities of teachers. As a result of
ambiguous preparation standards, some school leaders go the extra mile to improve themselves, while
others may stick to the minimum requirement.
      The surface structure of Kuwait’s education is the focus on textbooks. Therefore, good teaching
practices are also a part of leaders’ development programmes. Leadership training focuses on how
to lead schools with high expectations for student learning through effective teaching and competent
use of curriculum textbooks. The deep structure relates to what knowledge frameworks are taught
in school leadership training. A Kuwaiti school leader preparation programme discusses leadership
theories, administration and management skills, planning and evaluation. There is significant input from
Western leadership theories, rather than a contextually and culturally relevant construction of knowledge.
Educational leadership theories and constructs driven by local social realities and scholarship are rare.
There is a need to interrogate borrowed Western theories concerning school realities and the so-called
mainstream knowledge embedded within the LPD programmes.
      The implicit structure represents the moral dimension, beliefs, attitudes and values, which are highly
celebrated in Kuwaiti and other Muslim contexts as social values and beliefs are interconnected with
faith. For example, a school leader in such a context is a role model who has parental-like authority
and autonomy. Until recently, teachers and school leaders were trusted as parents, and they had
the authority to treat their students as if they were their children in informal education. With the
transformation of education to being formally and directly supervised by the Ministry, less autonomy
and more standards were required of schools, minimising teachers’ and leaders’ professional judgement.
For leaders’ preparation programmes to be effective, specific values must be incorporated that give
appreciation and more value to educators and leaders.
      Based on a review of the yearly plans of the Administrative Affairs and Administrative Development
Sector (see Table 1), the objectives and desired outcomes of training workshops were not clearly stated.
There may be a need for more clarification on what outcomes the leadership preparation programme
in Kuwait should achieve. It appeared that there was a shortage of clear standards and skills for school
leaders. Both the Ministry of Education and educators need to define and agree on more fundamental
standards, values, attitudes and practices.
      Leader preparation programmes are also part of a whole education system that emphasises
students as the centre of the educational process. The lack of national assessments negatively impacts
school performance evaluations. It certainly affects the validity of school progress measurements that
are based on student academic achievement. As a result, school leadership preparation programmes in
Kuwait are not linked to student academic measures, making it difficult to assess their real impact.




                                                                                           London Review of Education
                                                                                   https://doi.org/10.14324/LRE.23.1.13

                       Examining educational leadership preparation and development programmes in the Gulf region   11



Qatar
Leadership preparation and development in Qatar are strongly aligned with the National Professional
Standards (Romanowski et al., 2018), which are reflected in the dimensions and components of its LPD
programme policies and frameworks. The standards document includes evidence and recommendations
from Hattie (2003) and OECD (2009) research that suggest specific guidelines and interventions for
improving teaching and learning based on multiple data collection sites. Nonetheless, the relationship
and relevance of these studies to the Qatari context is not addressed. The standards for school leaders
in Qatar and the handbook for leadership professional learning include a significant focus on school
effectiveness and improvement, the supervision of teaching and learning, and the multiple administrative
faces of school leaders’ role. Nonetheless, there is limited focus on understanding teaching approaches
and the processes of learning for both adults and young people, which represent the deep structures –
a key component of signature pedagogies for professional development.
      The document review showed that programmes in Qatar include knowledge and skills components
related to senior leadership roles (principals and deputy principals). The Ministry of Education and
its affiliated Centre for Educational Development offer a coherent programme for those appointed
into a leadership position to equip them with the needed knowledge and skills for a whole course
of preparation. The training is conducted as a series of lectures, interactive workshops or discussion
groups. However, it all stems from leadership and organisational theory and the prescribed role of school
leaders, rather than engaging closely with the practicalities of the field, particularly classroom issues
and experiences. Therefore, the surface structures or the observable methods and strategies of LPD in
Qatar is a consistent standards-based approach of direct trainer–trainee relationship in a group setting,
mainly a workshop or a conversational setting. The deep structures stem from paradigmatic hierarchical
framework governing these policies and programmes where leaders are largely viewed as receivers of
instruction and participants in the school improvement strategy, but they do not address leadership
learning per se or how leadership can advance the learning of teachers and students. The moral structure,
however, is explicitly addressed in the recurrent reminders of the importance of Qatari–Arabic and Islamic
values and traditions, and the social norms embedded within the family and collective culture of Qatar.


Conclusion
While the three structures of professional signature pedagogies can be relatively highlighted in the
outcomes of this review among the three LPD programmes in Bahrain, Kuwait and Qatar, their integration
and balance is not necessarily consistent with the core goal of this theory. According to Shulman
(2005: 53), ‘professionals must learn abundant amounts of theory and vast bodies of knowledge. They
must come to understand in order to act, and they must act in order to serve.’ Shulman (2005) calls
for a balanced approach that prioritises the connection of theory, practice and moral foundation in
professional learning, where all of these dimensions will lead to a useful and effective pedagogical
learning experience. His theory calls for developing the ‘habits of mind, habits of heart and the habits of
hand’ (Shulman, 2005: 56), where leaders need to develop these habits combined to ease the complexity
and uncertainties of the role and sharpen their sense of professional judgement.
      The review and analysis of LPD frameworks in the three Gulf countries showed significant
improvement and efforts related to developing leadership as a key catalyst of education reform. Despite
some variations, the findings reflect a wide range of similarities where significant attention is dedicated
to leadership and organisational theory, the multiple facets of the job, in addition to leadership
learning, styles and approaches that are predominantly influenced by internationally renowned literature.
Surface structures, referring to school leadership dimensions and strategies, are evident across the three
contexts, with a more consistent approach in Bahrain than in Kuwait and Qatar. Deep structures, referring
to how learning happens and how it can be improved, are least addressed. Finally, moral structures,
related to local cultural and religious values, are evident, but the focus on the moral purpose of education,
schools and leadership is least addressed. Driven by Shulman’s (2005) signature pedagogies, the study
highlights the importance of addressing and integrating knowledge, performance and moral structures
in LPD programmes for more effective outcomes. In addition, contextualising professional development
programmes and engaging school leaders in decisions and choices related to their learning is essential.
      The literature review and the outcomes of this study emphasise the need for a more localised and
culturally responsive approach to leadership development within the GCC region. A recurring concern




                                                                                           London Review of Education
                                                                                   https://doi.org/10.14324/LRE.23.1.13

                       Examining educational leadership preparation and development programmes in the Gulf region   12



is the paucity of research conducted in settings that share similar cultural and social norms, which
limits the applicability of imported leadership models (Hammad et al., 2022). Scholars argue that this
lack of contextual alignment often leads to ineffective implementation or outright rejection by school
leaders who perceive Western practices as impractical. To address this issue, leadership preparation
programmes must strive to balance international best practices with local knowledge and cultural
sensitivities. This balance is particularly vital for professional development strategies, including coaching
and mentoring, which should be tailored to reflect the values and traditions of the region. Ultimately,
advancing school leadership within the GCC requires a collaborative effort from both researchers and
educators to develop frameworks that resonate with the unique social, cultural and educational dynamics
of the Middle East. Such efforts will help build sustainable leadership practices that support educational
reform and foster high-quality learning outcomes for all students (Bailey et al., 2021).
      Based on its outcomes and the limitations of its methodology, this study recommends an empirical
investigation that examines the perspectives of school leaders in the public sector in relation to the LPD
programmes with which they are engaged, and the extent to which these programmes can potentially
contribute to specific signature pedagogies of the profession. Further examination of peer dialogic
exchanges and consistent forms of collaboration, as well as connecting learning with student needs, is
crucial to form a more comprehensive view of the effectiveness of these programmes in each of the
three contexts.


Declarations and conflicts of interest
Research ethics statement
Not applicable to this article.

Consent for publication statement
Not applicable to this article.

Conflicts of interest statement
The authors declare no conflicts of interest with this work. All efforts to sufficiently anonymise the
authors during peer review of this article have been made. The authors declare no further conflicts
with this article.


References
Abdel-Hameed, F., AlMahdi, O., Abouzeid, A., Al-Wadi, H., Jalal, M., Fateel, M. and Yousuf, S.
     (2018) ‘Perceptions of assistant principals and principals of Bahrain government schools about the
     impact of the Bahrain Teachers College Educational Leadership Program on their performance’.
     Paper presented at the meeting of Sustainability and Resilience Conference: Mitigating Risks
     and Emergency Planning, Manama, Kingdom of Bahrain, 15–16 October. Accessed 5 June 2025.
     https://knepublishing.com/index.php/Kne-Social/article/view/3105/6552.
Alajmi, M. (2022) ‘School principals’ experiences of autonomy and accountability: Outcomes of the
     School Education Quality Improvement Project in Kuwait’. International Journal of Educational
     Management, 36 (4), 606–17. [CrossRef]
Alenezi, K.H. and Alsaleh, A.A. (2021) ‘Kuwaiti public school principals’ perspectives toward in-service
     training programs and its role in the development of leadership skills’. Journal of Educational &
     Psychological Sciences, 22 (2), 219–57.
Alfadala, A. (2015) K–12 reform in the Gulf Corporation Council (GCC) countries: Challenges and policy
     recommendations. Qatar: WISE. Accessed 5 June 2025. https://www.wise-qatar.org/2015-wise-
     research-K12-reform-GCC-countries.
Alhouti, I. (2023) ‘The uncompleted reforms: The political mechanisms of reforming educational systems
     in the Arab Gulf States’. Postcolonial Directions in Education, 12 (1), 66–114.
Alhouti, I. and Male, T. (2017) ‘Kuwait principals: Preparation, induction and continuing development’.
     International Studies in Educational Administration, 45 (1), 89–105.




                                                                                           London Review of Education
                                                                                   https://doi.org/10.14324/LRE.23.1.13

                      Examining educational leadership preparation and development programmes in the Gulf region   13



Al-Mahdy, Y.F.H., Hallinger, P., Emam, M., Hammad, W., Alabri, K.M. and Al-Harthi, K. (2021) ‘Supporting
      teacher professional learning in Oman: The effects of principal leadership, teacher trust, and
      teacher agency’. Educational Management Administration & Leadership, 52 (2), 1–22. [CrossRef]
Badri, M. and Khaili, M.A. (2014) ‘Migration of P–12 education from its current state to one of high quality:
      The aspirations of Abu Dhabi’. Policy Futures in Education, 12 (2), 200–20. [CrossRef]
Bailey, L., Purinton, T., Al-Mahdi, O. and Al Khalifa, H. (2021) ‘Conceptualizing school leadership in
      the Gulf Cooperation Council (GCC) cultures: Demarcating challenges for research’. Educational
      Management Administration & Leadership, 49 (1), 93–111. [CrossRef]
Barber, M., Mourshed, M. and Whelan, F. (2007) Improving Education in the Gulf (The McKinsey
      Quarterly). Chicago: McKinsey & Company.
Black, W.R. and Murtadha, K. (2007) ‘Toward a signature pedagogy in educational leadership preparation
      and program assessment’. Journal of Research on Leadership Education, 2 (1), 1–29. [CrossRef]
Bowen, G.A. (2009) ‘Document analysis as a qualitative research method’. Qualitative Research Journal,
      9, 27–40. [CrossRef]
Bush, T. (2009) ‘Leadership development and school improvement: Contemporary issues in leadership
      development’. Educational Review, 61 (4), 375–89. [CrossRef]
Bush, T., Glover, D. and Harris, A. (2007) Review of School Leadership Development. Nottingham:
      National College for School Leadership.
Chaaban, Y., Qadhi, S., Al-Thani, H., Floyd, A. and Du, X. (2023) ‘Supports and constraints to middle
      leadership development in higher education: A Q-methodology study’. Educational Management
      Administration & Leadership, 53 (3). [CrossRef]
Darling-Hammond, L., Wechsler, M.E., Levin, S., Leung-Gagne, M. and Tozer, S. (2022) Developing
      Effective Principals: What kind of learning matters? Learning Policy Institute. [CrossRef]
Davies, S., Darling-Hammond, L., LaPointe, M. and Meyerson, D. (2005) Developing Successful Principals:
      Leadership study. Review of research. Stanford Educational Leadership Institute. Accessed 5 June
      2025. https://edpolicy.stanford.edu/library/publications/244.html.
Education and Training Quality Authority (2019) Directorate of Vocational Reviews. Millennium Training
      Centre, Bahrain. Accessed 10 October 2024. https://www.bqa.gov.bh/wp-content/uploads/2024/
      10/MTC-EnL-C4-RR.pdf.
Fisher, D. (2019) ‘In what ways and for what reasons do leaders of international schools deploy their
      leadership behaviours in response to the cultural context of staff with whom they work?’. PhD thesis,
      University of Bath, Bath, UK.
Fitzgerald, T. (2012) ‘Documents and documentary analysis’. In A. Briggs, M. Coleman and M. Morrison
      (eds), Research Methods in Educational Leadership and Management. London: Sage, 292–308.
GCC-STAT (Gulf Cooperation Council Statistical Center) (2023) ‘Population statistics in GCC countries’.
      GCC STAT Data Portal. Accessed 3 June 2025. https://dp.marsa.gccstat.org/statistical-domain/
      population.
Hallinger, P. and Chen, J. (2015) ‘Review of research on educational leadership and management in Asia:
      A comparative analysis of research topics and methods, 1995–2012’. Educational Management
      Administration & Leadership, 43 (1), 5–27. [CrossRef]
Hallinger, P. and Heck, R. (1997) ‘Exploring the principal’s contribution to school effectiveness’. School
      Effectiveness and School Improvement, 9 (2), 157–91. [CrossRef]
Hammad, W., Samier, E.A. and Mohammed, A. (2022) ‘Mapping the field of educational leadership
      and management in the Arabian Gulf region: A systematic review of Arabic research literature’.
      Educational Management Administration & Leadership, 50 (1), 6–25. [CrossRef]
Hammad, W., Scott, S., Chaaban, Y. and Alazmi, A. (2024) ‘Principal preparation in the Arabian Gulf
      Region: A comparative study of three countries’. Journal of Research on Leadership Education,
      1–29. [CrossRef]
Hattie, J.A.C. (2003) ‘Teachers make a difference: What is the research evidence?’. Paper presented at the
      Building Teacher Quality: What does the research tell us ACER Research Conference, Melbourne,
      Australia, October. Accessed 5 June 2025. http://research.acer.edu.au/research_conference_2003/
      4/.
hooks, b. (1994) Teaching to Transgress: Education as the practice of freedom. London: Routledge.
IMF (International Monetary Fund) (2023) Gulf Cooperation Council: Economic prospects and policy
      challenges for the GCC countries. Accessed 5 June 2025. https://www.imf.org/en/Publications/
      CR/Issues/2023/12/14/Gulf-Cooperation-Council-Economic-Prospects-and-Policy-Challenges-
      for-the-GCC-Countries-542513.




                                                                                          London Review of Education
                                                                                  https://doi.org/10.14324/LRE.23.1.13

                      Examining educational leadership preparation and development programmes in the Gulf region   14



Joyce, B.R. and Showers, B. (2002) Student Achievement Through Staff Development. 3rd ed. Alexandria,
      VA: Association for Supervision & Curriculum Development (ASCD).
Karami-Akkary, R. and El Sahib, N. (2019) ‘A review of studies on educational administration in Arab
      countries (Shamaa Database 2007–2017)’. Idafat, 45, 67–90.
Kirk, D. (2015) ‘Innovate or replicate? Education reform initiatives in the Gulf Cooperation Council states’.
      The Muslim World, 105 (1), 78–92. [CrossRef]
Leithwood, K. and Seashore-Louis, K.S. (2012) Linking Leadership to Learning. San
      Francisco: Jossey-Bass.
Nóvoa, A. (2018) ‘Comparing Southern Europe: The difference, the public, and the common’.
      Comparative Education, 54 (4), 548–61. [CrossRef]
OECD (Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development) (2009) OECD in Figures 2009. Paris:
      OECD Publishing. [CrossRef]
Robinson, V. (2011) Student-Centered Leadership. Chichester: Wiley.
Romanowski, M.H., Alkhateeb, H. and Nasser, R. (2018) ‘Policy borrowing in the Gulf Cooperation Council
      countries: Cultural scripts and epistemological conflicts’. International Journal of Educational
      Development, 60 (C), 19–24. [CrossRef]
Shulman, L.S. (2005) ‘Signature pedagogies in the professions’. Daedalus, 134 (3), 52–9. [CrossRef]
University of Bahrain (2015) Educational Leadership Programs’ Handbook. Zallaq: Bahrain Teachers
      College, University of Bahrain.
Walker, A., Bryant, D. and Lee, M. (2013) ‘International patterns in principal preparation: Commonalities
      and variations in pre-service programmes’. Educational Management Administration & Leadership,
      41 (4), 405–34. [CrossRef]




                                                                                          London Review of Education
                                                                                  https://doi.org/10.14324/LRE.23.1.13