MOVE: Journal of Community Service and Engagement
                   Vol. 01, No. 04, March 2022
                   Page : 85-90                                                   E-ISSN: 2808-2990
                   DOI : 10.54408/move.v1i4.38                                    P-ISSN: 2828-4941


 Socialization of Simple Books to Improvement The Quality
                   of School Management
 Neneng Sri Suprihatin1*, Lulu Nailufaroh2, Nikke Yusnita Mahardini3

 1*,2,3
       Faculty of Economics and Business, Serang Raya University

 Corresponding author: neneng.sri@unsera.ac.id

                                           Abstrak
    Kegiatan Pengabdian kepada Masyarakat dilaksanakan di Kelurahan Lontar Baru
    Kecamatan Serang dengan target staf tenaga pengajar dan keuangan di lingkungan
    Mitra pengabdian. Kegiatan ini bertujuan untuk memberikan penyuluhan atau sosialisasi
    guna meningkatkan pemahaman dan pengetahuan tentang pembuatan laporan
    keuangan, serta pengetahuan tentang akuntansi keuangan guna meningkatkan kualitas
    manajemen sekolah. Metode kegiatan pengabdian masyarakat ini menggunakan
    metode ceramah dan praktik. Metode ceramah digunakan untuk menyampaikan materi
    dan tanya jawab. Pengabdian kepada masyarakat juga dilakukan dengan praktik
    langsung dengan cara asistensi pencatatan, pembukuan, pembuatan laporan keuangan
    secara sederhana. Luaran kegiatan ini adalah pembukuan sekolah secara sederhana
    dan sesuai dengan standar akuntansi keuangan yang berlaku yang menghasilkan
    Laporan keuangan untuk Sekolah PAUD A-Ba-Ta Untuk itu, manajemen mitra
    diharapakandapat melakukan pencatatan arus kas keluar-masuk, maupun mencatat
    kegiatan operasional lainnya secara mudah dan hasilnya pun dapat digunakan
    sebagaimana mestinya.

    Kata kunci: Sekolah PAUD, Pembukuan Sederhana, Kualitas Manajemen, Laporan
                Keuangan

                                              Abstract
    Community Service Activities are carried out in Lontar Baru Village, Serang District, with
    the target of teaching staff and finance in the service partners' environment. This activity
    aims to provide counseling or socialization in order to increase understanding and
    knowledge of financial reporting, as well as knowledge of financial accounting in order
    to improve the quality of school management. This community service activity method
    uses lecture and practice methods. The lecture method is used to deliver material and
    ask questions. Community service is also carried out with direct practice by assisting in
    recording, bookkeeping, and making simple financial reports. The output of this activity
    is simple school bookkeeping and in accordance with applicable financial accounting
    standards which produces financial reports for PAUD A-Ba-Ta Schools. For this reason,
    partner management is expected to be able to record cash flows in and out, as well as
    record other operational activities easily and the results can be used properly.

    Keywords : PAUD schools; Simple Bookkeeping; Quality Management; Financial
               statements




                                                                   85

MOVE: Journal of Community Service and Engagement is licensed
under an Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 International (CC BY-SA 4.0)

                                                                        Sri Suprihatin et al.


Introduction
       According to Nurmaina (2016), education has become a basic need for humans.
Education is an important factor in forming quality individuals. Indonesian children
should not be left behind with other nations in the world. Therefore, early education must
be instilled in them. Education of children in PAUD A-Ba-Ta Serang City at an early age
is very necessary because at that stage the teaching system will affect the behavior and
mindset of children. The child's curiosity will arise if he finds something new and
interesting so that the child tends to want to try this new thing. That's when a child needs
proper guidance.
       One of the government policies in the education sector that supports lifelong
education is the recognition of early childhood education (PAUD). Early childhood
education (PAUD) is an education that is quite important and even becomes a strong
foundation for realizing a smart and strong generation. PAUD is a form of education that
focuses on laying the foundation for physical growth and development (fine and gross
motor coordination), intelligence (thinking power, creativity, emotional intelligence,
spiritual intelligence), socio-emotional (attitude and behavior, and religion). language
and communication, in accordance with the uniqueness and developmental stages
passed by early childhood.
       Understanding children are small humans who have potential that still needs to be
developed. He has distinctive characteristics and is not the same as adults and will
develop into a fully adult human. In this case, the child is a human being or individual
who has certain developmental patterns and needs that are different from adults.
Children have various potentials that must be developed (Nurmaina, 2016).
       The general goal of early childhood education is to develop various potentials of
children from an early age as preparation for life and better adaptability to their
environment. Meanwhile, based on the objectives of the didactic, psychological aspect,
the main educational objectives in Early Childhood Education are:
 1. They are developing knowledge, attitudes and skills to be able to help themselves,
     namely being independent and responsible for themselves, such as being able to
     care for and maintain their physical condition, being able to control their emotions
     and being able to build relationships with other people.
 2. Laying the basics of how to learn (learning how to learn).
       This is in accordance with the development of the paradigm of the world of
education through the four pillars of education proclaimed by UNESCO, namely learning
to know, learning to do, learning to be and learning to live together, which in its
implementation in early childhood education institutions is carried out through learning
by playing approach, learning is fun. joyful learning) as well as developing simple life
skills as early as possible.
       Ihsan (2014) explained that education is critical, so efforts to improve and improve
the quality of education must be carried out continuously. Through education, it is hoped
that empowerment, maturity and independence, and the nation's quality as a whole can
be realized because education is one aspect of life that is functional for every human
being and has a strategic position to educate the nation's life. This approach is known
as the concept of school-based management (SBM) or school-based management.
Quality is the only thing that matters in education, business and government. Schools
are one of the three educational centres that are required to be able to produce superior
output. The efforts in designing school organizations consist of several school
administration teams comprised of people who work together to achieve organizational
goals.
       The main goal is to develop school policy procedures, solve common problems,

                                                                                          86
https://equatorscience.com/index.php/move

Vol.1, No.4, March 2022                                        E-ISSN : 2808-2990, P-ISSN : 2828-4941



utilize all the potential of members of teamwork. Through education, it is hoped that
empowerment, maturity and independence, and the nation's quality as a whole can be
realized because education is one aspect of life that is functional for every human being
and has a strategic position to educate the nation's life.
       Schools have complete responsibility and authority to independently determine
educational programs and various local school policies following the vision, mission, and
educational goals to be achieved by the school. With greater autonomy, schools have
greater authority in managing their schools, so schools are more independent. With its
independence, schools are more empowered in developing programs that are, of
course, more in line with their needs and potential.
       According to Mulyasa (2011), school-based management characteristics can be
known, among others, from how schools can optimize the performance of school
organizations, teaching and learning processes, human resource management, and
resource management and administration. At the PAUD A-Ba-Ta School, Serang City
consists of ± 30 students and students consisting of playgroups, TK A and TK B and has
teaching staff and financial staff consisting of 5 people, including the Principal. There are
problems in preparing financial reports or school bookkeeping at this A-Ba-Ta PAUD
school.
       The preparation of financial information at the school still uses the traditional
system, which is not by applicable accounting standards. At the same time, the practice
of formal financial statements is also essential for the PAUD school. Generally, the
obstacles faced by PAUD schools are because:
  1) lack of mastery of information technology and
  2) lack of understanding of bookkeeping.
  3) the discrepancy between the educational background and the bookkeeping skills
       that must be mastered.
       So this causes the financial staff at PAUD A-Ba-Ta School to experience problems
in doing simple bookkeeping. If the financial report functions according to its position, it
becomes information for external parties. Even financial reports will be one of the primary
sources of information for business owners and teaching staff in the school environment
to facilitate the school's decision-making.
       Financial management is the most vital part of the governance of an organization
or an entity. Standard financial governance used by using simple bookkeeping for school
management is still not considered important by school owners, especially those with
the status of private schools owned by individuals using foundation business entities in
school management. Many school administrators (foundations) are usually managed by
several people, both individuals and family associations, who ignore the financial
management process in their school management. Such conditions can be caused by
several things, one of which is the condition of human resources (HR) who do not know
the process in simple bookkeeping procedures. ), besides that, the lack of mastery of
information technology is also a factor in the failure to implement ideal financial
governance for schools. This condition resulted in the quality of school management that
was far from expectations. Schools are also required to be more transparent and
accountable in financial management, especially for private schools that receive school
operational assistance for students whose funds are sourced from the APBN/APBD.
       The process of preparing financial statements cannot be separated from
accounting science. Therefore, it is necessary to understand the accounting cycle and
some terms in accounting science so that these terms can be easily accepted and
recorded by business actors. Because studying the accounting cycle, the time required
is not short. So we will not discuss many things about accounting, but only the

87
                                                      https://equatorscience.com/index.php/move

                                                                       Sri Suprihatin et al.


accounting principles used to simulate the financial statements. In simple terms, based
on its activities, the accounting cycle contains several activities, namely recording,
classifying, summarizing, and financial reports.
      Therefore, there is a need for a review to provide an overview of simple
bookkeeping and illustrations of how to prepare simple financial statements. The report
is quite easy to understand and practice by anyone. The concept offered is a very basic
concept on how to record various financial activities at PAUD A-Ba-Ta School Serang
City according to transactions received by business actors every day. Such as incoming
and outgoing cash book, office stationery purchase book, student monthly tuition
payment book, teaching staff payroll book and accounts receivable subsidiary book.
      Based on the background described, the school can conclude that the problem is
that partners still lack a basic understanding of bookkeeping management applied by
partners in managing school finances so that the reports produced can meet the needs
of stakeholders in it.
      Based on the partner problems that have been stated in chapter 1, in order to
answer these problems, the servant offers several solutions, including:
  1) Conducting school financial management training activities to answer partner
      problems using the following methods:
     a. Presenting resource persons to explain in full about simple school bookkeeping
         in PAUD A-Ba-Ta or financial management by applicable financial accounting
         standards.
     b. Do practice exercises with assistance for school finance staff or teaching staff at
         A-Ba-Ta PAUD schools by doing bookkeeping exercises for recording school
         activities.
 2) Conduct regular and continuous monitoring accompanied by periodic evaluations to
     assess the effectiveness of the success of the training activities.

      This community service activity is carried out through training and assistance in the
learning process of school financial management. The output targets of this community
service are:
 1) Increased insight and understanding as well as expertise in financial management
    for PAUD A-Ba-Ta in Serang City, Banten Province
 2) Increased knowledge of financial staff and teaching staff regarding simple
    bookkeeping in school financial management and can practice simple bookkeeping
    at PAUD A-Ba-Ta in Serang City, Banten Province.

Implementation Method
      The location of the service subject entitled "Socialization of Simple Bookkeeping
to Improve the Quality of School Management" was carried out at the A-Ba-TA Early
Childhood Primary Education (PAUD) school, which is located at Jl. Majesty No. 10
Rt.001 Rw.004, New Lontar, Lontarbaru, Kec. Serang, Serang City, Banten 42115, with
the object of research, namely the simple opening of school finances. The planned
service activities can be carried out three times, namely April, July and September
2021. In addition, periodic monitoring and evaluation will continue until December 2021.
      For school financial management training to run appropriately and directed, the
method of implementing activities is designed in several stages of action, including:
    a) Observation and implementation stage
       The series of activities in this stage include:
       • The opening begins with the delivery of remarks

                                                                                         88
https://equatorscience.com/index.php/move

Vol.1, No.4, March 2022                                        E-ISSN : 2808-2990, P-ISSN : 2828-4941



        •   Submission of material regarding the understanding and importance of
            financial management or school financial bookkeeping using power points
        • Financial processing training through the simulation of financial processing
            of school financial staff using simple bookkeeping
        • Limited discussion on understanding simple bookkeeping materials in
            schools to improve the quality of school management.
     b) Final Evaluation Stage
        • Monitoring of activities that have been carried out. Monitoring was carried
            out by asking financial staff and teaching staff in the A-Ba-Ta PAUD school
            environment who attended training regarding the difficulties found in
            implementing the training program. Furthermore, the devotees formulate
            solutions to solve these difficulties from the problems encountered.
        • Evaluation. The evaluation was carried out to determine the success of this
            activity which was obtained from the following indicators: the implementation
            of a financial management training program or simple school bookkeeping,
            the performance of mentoring in school financial management so that
            financial staff and teaching staff in the A-Ba-Ta PAUD school environment
            can record financial bookkeeping. School appropriately and optimally.
        c) Reporting.
        The output target to be achieved is a service report that will be published in a
        national journal.

Result and Discussion
      Overall service activities have been completed starting from submitting a service
proposal to the preparation of the final service report. This service activity is divided into
three stages, namely the stage of observation and implementation, monitoring, and final
evaluation. The observation phase of the object of community service took place in
March and April 2021 by conducting interviews and discussions with one of the teachers
at the A-Ba-Ta PAUD school and observing the existing situation and conditions to
obtain sufficient information. It was related to the state and shape of the object of
community service to determine the problems and solutions that the author will carry out
for the service partners. While the next stage, namely the implementation of service
activities by assisting teaching staff at A-Ba-Ta PAUD schools, has been carried out
optimally, and the teaching staff at the PAUD schools can also be cooperative in carrying
out this activity which lasted for two stages, namely phase I on August 25 In 2021, initial
socialization regarding the management of financial statements required in financial
reporting at PAUD A-Ba-Ta will be carried out, phase I is focused on providing a
conceptual understanding of what and how partners will design the process of preparing
financial reports. Furthermore, on October 12, 2021, Phase II activities were carried out
to ensure that the financial reporting practices carried out by PAUD A-Ba-Ta were by the
concept given by the service team. While implementing routine monitoring and
evaluation activities carried out to partners, a mentoring process is carried out to ensure
that the results of the activities can be helpful for partners.




89
                                                      https://equatorscience.com/index.php/move

                                                                       Sri Suprihatin et al.




                             Figure 1. Socialization of Simple Books

Conclusion
      Several things can be concluded from the temporary results of this service activity,
including the implementation of mentoring activities regarding simple bookkeeping was
carried out to several teaching staff at PAUD A-Ba-Ta and the owner of the PAUD
school. This service activity motivates PAUD school teachers to understand simple
bookkeeping to improve the quality of school management. The staff and teaching staff
at the PAUD School are very severe and enthusiastic about participating in this simple
bookkeeping socialization activity and taking notes starting from the bookkeeping of
cash in and cash out.

Acknowledments
      The authors thank Serang Raya University for all the support to the community
service team and, most notably, the community service partners for their cooperation in
the successful implementation of community service.

References

Nurmalina, N. (2016). Hubungan Penerapan Bahasa Indonesia dengan Pengembangan
     Kepribadian Peserta Didik PAUD Kualu Ceria. Jurnal Obsesi: Jurnal Pendidikan
     Anak Usia Dini, 2(1), 73-78.

Ihsan, I., Djailani, A. R., & Ibrahim, S. (2014). Penerapan Manajemen Berbasis Sekolah
       Dalam Meningkatkan Mutu Pendidikan Di SD Negeri 62 Kota Banda Aceh. Jurnal
       Administrasi Pendidikan Program Pascasarjana Unsyiah, 2(2), 73208.




                                                                                         90
https://equatorscience.com/index.php/move