Original Article                                            International Journal of Research - GRANTHAALAYAH
              ISSN (Online): 2350-0530                                                                 May 2021 9(5), 272–289
              ISSN (Print): 2394-3629

HOW SHOULD THE CLASSROOM BE MANAGED DURING THE
COVID-19 PANDEMIC?
E. Handayani Tyas1 and Lamhot Naibaho2
1
    Education Management Department, Postgraduate Program, Universitas Kristen Indonesia, Indonesia
2
    English Language Education, Faculty of Letter and Language Education, Universitas Kristen Indonesia, Indonesia




                                           ABSTRACT
                                           This study is about classroom management during the Covid-19 Pandemic. This
                                           study aims to ind out how the classroom should be managed during the Covid-
                                           19 Pandemic. It was done at Universitas Kristen Indonesia within three months,
                                           from February – April 2021. The method of the study is library research, where
                                           the researchers were the instruments of this study. To answer the problem of
                                           the study, the researchers collect some documents related to school manage-
                                           ment taken from online and printed journals, books, articles. The documents
                                           analyzed to provide the answers to this study were taken from the library and
                                           Google Scholar. The result of this study is that good and correct management
                                           requires commitment from all elements involved in school management, par-
Received 6 May 2021
                                           ents of students and community members who are members of the school com-
Accepted 20 May 2021                       mittee, and the community in the school environment during the Covid-19 Pan-
Published 31 May 2021                      demic. To run the school management smoothly, the leadership must apply the
Corresponding Author                       principles of transparency and professionalism. So it is concluded that those
Lamhot Naibaho, lamhot.naibaho             involved in the school management should cooperate, and transparency and
@uki.ac.id
                                           professionalism should be implemented during the Covid-19 Pandemic.
DOI 10.29121/
granthaalayah.v9.i5.2021.3943
Funding: This research received         Keywords: Pandemic19, School, Management
no speci ic grant from any funding
agency in the public, commercial,
or not-for-pro it sectors.
                                        1. INTRODUCTION
Copyright: © 2021 The
Author(s). This is an open access       School management is the key to success in achieving quality in managing schools
article distributed under the
                                        because with good management, and schools will succeed in meeting the demands
terms of the Creative Commons
Attribution License, which              for quality education following national education standards. Good management
permits unrestricted use,               (vision, mission, clear/focused goals, discipline, hard work, innovative work, com-
distribution, and reproduction in
any medium, provided the original       petence, commitment, credibility, accountability, integrity, noble character, honesty,
author and source are credited.         transparency, transformation, coordination, collaboration, communication etc.) will
                                        produce quality graduates Komoldit et al. (2018), Nadeak and Naibaho (2020a). A
                                        school principal should know about education/school management because with-



How to cite this article (APA): Tyas, E. H., & Naibaho, L. (2021). How should the classroom be managed during the covid-19   272
pandemic? . International Journal of Research - GRANTHAALAYAH, 9(5), 272-289. doi: 10.7821/granthaalayah.v9.i5.2021.3943

                                                    Tyas E. Handayani and Naibaho Lamhot




                                        out being equipped with managerial skills, a school principal will work only guess-
                                        work/guesswork/ roughly according to his opinion, so that ’like a loco, he will be
                                        released from his car’. Principals who do not study management theory will not
                                        achieve school goals effectively because achieving goals must be based on systematic
                                        behaviour related to the concepts, assumptions, and generalizations of management
                                        theory Bush (2006).
                                            The more intelligent consumers are in assessing the quality (quality) of a prod-
                                        uct, automatically requiring business people and any business, including schools, to
                                        improve their products and services further. Therefore, professionals are well aware
                                        of the importance of quality management to continue to exist and advance amid
                                        today’s intense global competition Schwab and Sala-I-Martín (2013). Over the past
                                        few years, many ventures, including completely unpredictable technological, eco-
                                        nomic, social schools, that managers who used to believe in the myth of stability are
                                        now thrown out of their belief. The large and middle school institutions, especially
                                        the small ones, began to grow one by one. Schools and their leaders are struggling to
                                        make various changes that are taking place very quickly and evaluate the impact of
                                        these changes if they are to survive.
                                            School management must ind innovative solutions in solving various problems
                                        that interfere with the school organization, especially daily challenges. Various
                                        changes require quali ied managers who can work better by using the latest tech-
                                        niques and creative ideas that breakthrough- thoroughly - thoroughly - thoroughly
                                        (to think through, through and comprehensively)—especially working during the
                                        Covid-19 pandemic like now, which has been a year and who knows when it will
                                        end Tyas and Naibaho (2021b), Naibaho (2021a). Currently, management demands
                                        comprehensive skills and expertise, and the managerial scope must be comprehen-
                                        sive and transformative. Managers can keep up with new skills, especially in IT
                                        (Information and Technology), to answer needs in a turbulent and unpredictable
                                        environment. The world of education experiences the Covid-19 pandemic in Indone-
                                        sia, but the whole world is feeling the consequences Nadeak et al. (2021), Nadeak et
                                        al. (2020).
                                            By studying school management, it is hoped that it will understand the crucial
                                        problems faced by the world of education. Especially schools, because through
                                        school/community-based quality improvement management learning, it is hoped
                                        that it can provide in-depth knowledge and understanding of basic concepts, func-
                                        tions and roles, processes and procedures, positions and roles as reliable educators
                                        and education personnel. One of the educational problems faced by the Indonesian
                                        nation is the low quality of education at every level and education unit, so it is con-
                                        sidered urgent enough to make various efforts to improve the quality of education
                                        in every school Naibaho (2014a). Awareness of the importance of education which
                                        can provide hope and better possibilities in the future has encouraged various efforts
                                        and attention from all levels of society to the steps and developments of the world of
                                        education.


International Journal of Research - GRANTHAALAYAH
                                                                                                                           273

                                        How should the classroom be managed during the covid-19 pandemic?




                                            Various indicators, such as the development of national and local curricula,
                                        increasing teacher competence through training, procurement of books and learning
                                        resources/media, procurement of educational infrastructure and facilities, have
                                        not supported the improvement of the quality of school management as expected.
                                        Based on this fact, various questions arise, such as, among others, what is wrong in
                                        our educational administration? Admittedly, some schools, especially those in cities,
                                        have shown quite encouraging improvements in the quality of education, but on
                                        the other hand, others are still apprehensive. Learning that is conducted online has
                                        many problems with the network. Not all of the educational resources are digitally
                                        literate. Not all of the conditions in the territory of the Republic of Indonesia can be
                                        reached by the internet Nugroho (2010). To get a good signal, educators and stu-
                                        dents must look for a strong signal (up to the hill) because what often happens when
                                        learning from home experiences a broken signal, power outages, computers/laptops
                                        and cellphones that have to take turns, etc.
                                            Optimizing resources concerning school empowerment is the most appropriate
                                        alternative to create an independent school with high excellence. Empowerment is
                                        intended to provide broader autonomy in solving problems in schools. It requires
                                        a policy change in education management with the principle of providing author-
                                        ity in managing and making decisions according to the demands and needs of each
                                        school locally Tyas and Naibaho (2021a), Naibaho (2021b). Regional autonomy has
                                        been implemented since 2001. Along with that, almost all development ields are
                                        autonomous, including education. Autonomy in education is carried out in stages,
                                        namely at the provincial, district/city and school levels. Autonomy at the school
                                        level is known as school-based education management or School-Based Management
                                        (SBM) Katuuk (2014). Through various studies, it was found that one of the weak-
                                        nesses of schools was how to implement SBM with a focus on School-Based Quality
                                        Improvement Management (SBQIM) Hadijaya (2015).
                                            School as an educational institution is a place (container) for the educational pro-
                                        cess to be carried out and has a complex and dynamic system. In its activities, a school
                                        is a place that is a place for educators and students to gather and in one interrelated
                                        order. Therefore, the school is seen as an organization that requires management.
                                        The role of management requires managers who are competent, full of dedication,
                                        have strong work motivation, are resilient and diligent, so they do not give up eas-
                                        ily when faced with failure. Precisely with a high commitment of a manager, work-
                                        ing hard and working innovative (work hard and work-wise), managers will dare
                                        to make breakthroughs to make innovations if they face obstacles that prevent the
                                        vision, mission and goals of the school Traitler (2015), Venter (2006). The serious-
                                        ness of education of icials, school supervisors, school principals, educators, parents,
                                        and students to work together to do the best work and always be based on an honest
                                        and wise attitude.
                                            The implementation of SBQIM in schools is required to implement school pro-
                                        grams and ensure the quality of all aspects of the implementation and educational


International Journal of Research - GRANTHAALAYAH
                                                                                                                            274

                                                    Tyas E. Handayani and Naibaho Lamhot




                                        outcomes. In addition, schools must also capture moments of autonomy and carry
                                        out self-reform to improve their performance. The self-reform that schools need
                                        to do is to improve the educational process starting with changes in the attitudes,
                                        culture and society of school administrators as well as the utilization of existing
                                        resources, carried out in the best possible way so that the implementation of SBQIM
                                        is successful, effective, ef icient and optimal. Furthermore, the core activity of school
                                        organizations is managing Human Resources, which are expected to produce quality
                                        graduates following the demands of society’s needs, and in turn, school graduates are
                                        expected Naibaho (2014b).
                                            Education is not a simple endeavour but an activity that is dynamic and full of chal-
                                        lenges, especially in ”dif icult” times because of the corona. Education will always
                                        change along with changing times, and every time education is always the focus of
                                        attention and often becomes the target of dissatisfaction because education concerns
                                        the interests of all people, not only regarding investment and living conditions in the
                                        future but also regarding the conditions and atmosphere of life now. That is why
                                        education always requires improvement and improvement in line with the increas-
                                        ing needs and demands of community life Kolibu et al. (2021). To improve the quality
                                        of education, of course, it cannot be separated from the quality of human resources
                                        and the increase in the social status of the nation’s people. Therefore, schools need
                                        to be managed, regulated, organized, and empowered to produce optimal products
                                        or results. Internally, the school has a set of educators, students, curriculum, infras-
                                        tructure, and facilities; externally, the school owns and relates to other agencies ver-
                                        tically and horizontally. In education, schools have stakeholders (who have an inter-
                                        est), including educators, students, society, government, the business world. Hence,
                                        schools need accurate management (management) to provide results that follow all
                                        parties’ needs and demands Reeves (2009).
                                            Schools that are the community’s choice, namely schools with quality graduates,
                                        are ’assessed’ well by the community. To realize such schools, a change in policy in
                                        education management is needed to provide authority in management and decision-
                                        making according to the demands and needs of each school locally Kristiana (2019).
                                        It can be ascertained that policy change in its implementation is not a simple mat-
                                        ter. Policy changes require the readiness of various resources and the ability of man-
                                        agers at the school level. However, more important is an adequate understanding
                                        and readiness to know what and how schools should carry out the new system in
                                        decentralization. Some of the main reasons that demand policy changes in school
                                        management include the demands of the community’s educational outcomes due to
                                        changes in socio-political, economic and cultural policies.


                                        2. RESEARCH METHOD
                                        The method of the study is library research, where the researchers were the instru-
                                        ments of this study. This study aims to ind out how the classroom should be man-


International Journal of Research - GRANTHAALAYAH
                                                                                                                             275

                                        How should the classroom be managed during the covid-19 pandemic?




                                        aged during the Covid-19 Pandemic. It was done at Universitas Kristen Indonesia
                                        within three months, from February – April 2021. To answer the problem of the
                                        study, the researchers collect some documents related to school management taken
                                        from online and printed journals, books, articles. These documents analyzed to pro-
                                        vide the answers to this study were taken from the library and Google Scholar.


                                        3. DISCUSSION
                                        Some of the juridical foundations in the implementation of the education system in
                                        Indonesia are as follows: a) the 1945 Constitution and its amendments; b) Law no.
                                        20 of 2003 concerning the National Education System, Article 51 paragraph (1) ”The
                                        management of early childhood, basic and secondary education units is implemented
                                        based on minimum service standards with the principles of school/madrasah-based
                                        management”; c) Law no. 25 of 2000 concerning the 2000-2004 National Develop-
                                        ment Program in Chapter VII concerning the Education Sector Development Program
                                        Section, precisely the target, namely, ”the realization of school and community based
                                        management of education”; d) Law no. 32 of 2004 concerning Regional Government;
                                        e) Government Regulation No. 25 of 2000 concerning the Authority of the Govern-
                                        ment and Provincial Regions as Autonomous Regions; f) Government Regulation No.
                                        19 of 2005 on National Education Standards, particularly school management stan-
                                        dards, namely School Based Management; g) Decree of the Minister of National Edu-
                                        cation No. 044 of 2002 concerning the Establishment of the Education Board and
                                        School Committee; and h) Decree of the Minister of National Education No. 087 of
                                        2004 concerning School Accreditation Standards, especially regarding School Based
                                        Management Kristiana (2019).
                                            The various efforts made by the government and school administrators have not
                                        fully met the expectations of the community. It is based on the fact that there are
                                        still obstacles in the ield caused by the complexity of educational problems in line
                                        with increasingly complex community needs. The higher the community’s social life
                                        and the development of science and technology, the higher the community’s social
                                        life demands Esteves and Vanclay (2009). These demands lead to education because
                                        people believe that education can answer and anticipate these various challenges.
                                            Education is one of the efforts that schools can make as an institution where peo-
                                        ple hope for a better life in the future. Public support for the provision of primary
                                        education shows quite encouraging enthusiasm, as seen by many private educational
                                        institutions, both public and af iliated with certain religions. Community participa-
                                        tion is also often manifested by the participation of parents in other activities in the
                                        school, which are accommodated in the School Committee and line with the imple-
                                        mentation of School-Based Education Management Cheng and Chan (2000). The
                                        community’s need for quality education is often faced by the internal conditions of
                                        educational institutions, such as the limited availability of quali ied / professional
                                        educators/teachers, limited education costs, inadequate teaching and learning facil-


International Journal of Research - GRANTHAALAYAH
                                                                                                                            276

                                                    Tyas E. Handayani and Naibaho Lamhot




                                        ities, and a school environment that is not conducive. In addition, the change in the
                                        standard of learning success, which is getting higher to serve market needs, turns out
                                        to be more challenging to catch up, due to the less supportive learning environment,
                                        plus the ”frightening” corona ”attack” makes learning unable to be carried out of line.
                                            With togetherness and participation between the community and the govern-
                                        ment, it is hoped that there will be signi icant changes in the ield of education
                                        because indeed education requires changes towards continuous improvement
                                        through the management or management of education, and schools are respon-
                                        sible for carrying out activities to manage their programs effectively and ef icient
                                        (mangkus and sangkil, Improving School Ef iciency). It is hoped that the under-
                                        standing of SBM can provide additional knowledge, insight to education managers
                                        to understand the culture and increase the quality and control of schools, and
                                        the participation of local stakeholders can improve/enhance school performance.
                                        As a quality educational institution, it certainly requires much money because it
                                        must provide a variety of good learning infrastructure and facilities to support the
                                        performance of educators, education staff and students Tyas et al. (2020), Malhoit
                                        (2005). Therefore, there needs to be a breakthrough for school principals to deal
                                        with changing situations and needs.
                                            As a comparison, the MBS model has been tried in America, derived from Edward
                                        E. Lawler and his friends. It has had an impact on improving the quality of teaching
                                        and learning. It is due to a more effective mechanism, namely that decision-making
                                        can be carried out quickly and provide a new motivation to work as motivation for
                                        achievement to the principal in carrying out his duties as a school manager. In many
                                        cases, it was stated that SBM had had a positive impact as experienced by schools in
                                        several other countries such as New Zealand and Chile. For schools in Indonesia, the
                                        current idea and understanding of SBM is an exact moment, and whether we want it
                                        or not or like it or not, we are already in an era of globalization which is perceived
                                        as a ’world without borders, competition in the world of industry and trade. Impact
                                        also on the world of education. School management that is run half-heartedly and
                                        carelessly has no longer got a place in the community’s hearts Nadeak and Naibaho
                                        (2019). Schools must compete even though they must remain side by side (to com-
                                        pete and to corporate), therefore embrace society and take advantage of its potential
                                        positively.
                                            School as a system is composed of components of context, input, process, out-
                                        put, and outcome. Context affects the input, input affects processes, processes affect
                                        output, and output affects outcomes. Therefore, the principal should manage the
                                        school by planning, implementing, monitoring and evaluating (applying the princi-
                                        ples of PDCA: Plan - Do - Check - Action). Context is an externality that affects edu-
                                        cation delivery and, therefore, must be internalized into school administration. A
                                        school that can internalize the context into itself will make the school part of the con-
                                        text and not isolated. If so, the school will become a community school and not a
                                        school in the community. Context includes advances in science and technology, com-


International Journal of Research - GRANTHAALAYAH
                                                                                                                             277

                                        How should the classroom be managed during the covid-19 pandemic?




                                        munity values and expectations, government and community support, government
                                        policies, juridical basis, economic demands, demands for globalization, demands for
                                        self-development and opportunities to graduate to continue education or enter soci-
                                        ety Servaes (2009).
                                            School input is everything that is needed for the education process to take place,
                                        especially the teaching and learning process. Inputs are classi ied into two, namely
                                        processed and processed. The input that is processed is the student, and the input
                                        from the processor includes the vision, mission, goals, objectives; curriculum; edu-
                                        cation staff; funds, infrastructure and facilities, school regulations, school organiza-
                                        tion, school administration, school culture, and the role of the community in support-
                                        ing schools. The process is the occurrence of changing something into something
                                        else. The process includes management, leadership, and especially the teaching and
                                        learning process. In education, the process is the occurrence of changes in students’
                                        behaviour before undergoing education and afterwards. The quality of the teach-
                                        ing and learning process is very dependent on the quality of the interaction between
                                        educators and students Naibaho (2021c). Educator behaviour in the classroom, for
                                        example, the clarity of teaching, the use of variations in teaching methods, variations
                                        in the use of learning resources and media, teaching enthusiasm, use of question
                                        types, class management, use of time, discipline, empathy for students, interpersonal
                                        relationships, expectations, innovativeness of teaching, and effective use of teaching
                                        and learning principles Wubbels (2011). Likewise, the quality of interaction of stu-
                                        dents in the classroom is very dependent on the quality of their behaviour in the
                                        classroom. Students’ behaviour in class, for example, the seriousness of learning,
                                        enthusiasm for learning, attention to lessons, curiosity, effort, questions, and readi-
                                        ness to learn (mentally and physically).
                                            Educational output is the result of learning (learning achievement), re lecting how
                                        effectively the teaching and learning process is held. Learning achievement is deter-
                                        mined by the level of effectiveness and ef iciency of the teaching and learning pro-
                                        cess. Learning achievement is indicated by an increase in basic abilities and func-
                                        tional abilities. The outcome is the long-term impact of the output/learning outcome,
                                        both for the individual graduates and the community. It means that if the learning
                                        outcomes are good, the impact will also be good. In reality, this is not always the
                                        case because many factors outside of learning outcomes in luence the outcome. The
                                        outcome has two dimensions, namely: (1) opportunities to continue education and
                                        employment opportunities, and (2) graduate self-development Nadeak and Naibaho
                                        (2020b). A good school can provide many access/opportunities for graduates to
                                        continue their following education and the opportunity to choose a job. The school
                                        framework as a system can be seen in Table 1 below. If the school wants to do a school
                                        analysis, a SWOT (strength, weakness, opportunity, and threat) analysis starts with
                                        the outcome and ending in context. If the school wants to solve problems or prepare
                                        schools, it starts from the context and ends. This way of thinking is a sequential way
                                        of thinking using a systems framework Zhao (2010).


International Journal of Research - GRANTHAALAYAH
                                                                                                                            278

                                                       Tyas E. Handayani and Naibaho Lamhot




                                         Table 1 School Framework as a System

                                                    Component                                        Sub – Component
                                                      Context             1.Demands for self-development and the opportunity to graduate
                                                                          2. Government and community support
                                                                          3. Government policy
                                                                          4. Legal foundation
                                                                          5. The progress of science and technology
                                                                          6. Community values and expectations
                                                                          7. Economic demands
                                                                          8. Globalization demands
                                                      Input               1. Vision, mission, goals, objectives
                                                                          2. Curriculum
                                                                          3. Energy
                                                                          4. Learners
                                                                          5. Infrastructure and facilities
                                                                          6. Financing
                                                                          7. School regulations
                                                                          8. Organization
                                                                          9. Administration
                                                                          10. Community participation
                                                                          11. School culture
                                                     Process                                  Teaching and learning process
                                                     Output               1. Academic achievement
                                                                          2. Non-academic achievements
                                                                          3. Figures repeat
                                                                          4. Dropout rate
                                                     Outcome              1. Educational opportunities
                                                                          2. Job opportunities
                                                                          3. Self-development



                                           Visually, school as a system can be seen in Figure 1 below. If we want to analyze
                                        schools, we start with outcomes, outputs, processes, inputs, and end contexts. Con-
                                        versely, if we want to solve problems or prepare, the direction is reversed, namely
                                        starting from the context, input, process, output, and ending with the outcome. It is
                                        a coherent system of thinking Hofman et al. (2013).




                                          Figure 1 School as a System




International Journal of Research - GRANTHAALAYAH
                                                                                                                                           279

                                        How should the classroom be managed during the covid-19 pandemic?




                                            School performance can be measured from the following dimensions, namely
                                        quality, productivity, effectiveness, and ef iciency, both internal and external. Quality
                                        is a comprehensive description and characteristics of a good or service that shows its
                                        ability to satisfy speci ied or implied needs. In the context of education, the quality
                                        referred to includes inputs, processes and outputs. Especially for the quality of school
                                        output can be categorized into academic and non-academic (for example, sports and
                                        arts). The quality of school output is in luenced by the level of input readiness and
                                        the school process. Productivity is the ratio between school output and school input.
                                        Both school output and input are in the form of quantity. Quantity of school inputs,
                                        for example, the number of educators/teachers, school capital, materials and energy.
                                        The quantity of school output is, for example, the number of students who graduate
                                        school each year. An example of productivity, for example, if the school graduated
                                        more students than last year with the same input, it can be said that this year the
                                        school is more productive than in the previous year.
                                            Effectiveness is a measure that states the extent to which objectives (quality,
                                        quantity, and time) have been achieved. Meanwhile, ef iciency can be classi ied into
                                        two, namely internal ef iciency and external ef iciency. Internal ef iciency refers
                                        to the relationship between school output (achievement of learning achievement)
                                        and input (resources) used to process/produce school output. Internal school ef i-
                                        ciency is usually measured by cost-effectiveness. Every cost-effectiveness assess-
                                        ment always requires two things: an economic assessment to measure the cost of
                                        input (input) and an assessment of learning outcomes (learning achievement, length
                                        of study, dropout rate) Hummel-Rossi and Ashdown (2002). Meanwhile, external
                                        ef iciency is the relationship between the costs used to produce graduates and the
                                        cumulative bene its (individual, social, economic, and non-economic) obtained after
                                        a long time outside of school. Cost-bene it analysis is the primary tool for measuring
                                        external ef iciency.
                                            School-Based Management (SBM) is a practical approach that aims to design
                                        school management by giving power to school principals and increasing commu-
                                        nity participation in efforts to improve school performance, including school princi-
                                        pals, educators, parents of students, and the community. SBM changed the decision-
                                        making system by transferring decision-making authority and management to each
                                        interested group on each basis (Local Stake Holders). With the SBM concept, it is
                                        expected that every school can make continuous quality improvements and have the
                                        independence to be more accountable Grinshtain and Gibton (2018).
                                            The PDCA (Plan-Do-Check-Act) circle or PDSA (Plan-Do-Study-Act) is also called
                                        the Deming circle because Deming created it. The PDCA circle can also be called the
                                        RUAL (Plan-Trial-Observe-Carry out) circle Chen et al. (2016). The circle describes
                                        the processes that always occur in every activity or quality performance. The circle
                                        can be seen in the following igure:
                                            In every activity or quality improvement effort (quality performance), there are
                                        four steps taken or four processes, and the whole is a circle, namely:


International Journal of Research - GRANTHAALAYAH
                                                                                                                             280

                                                    Tyas E. Handayani and Naibaho Lamhot




                                          Figure 2 PDCA Circle



                                            1. Plan (P) - The irst step, determine the problem that will overcome or the weak-
                                               ness that will improve and draw up a plan (solution) to overcome that problem,
                                               which means improving quality.
                                            2. Do (D) - The second step, carry out the plan at the pilot level (U) and improve
                                               all processes.
                                            3. Check (C) - The third step, assessing carried out activities and inding weak-
                                               nesses that need to be ixed, in addition to the things that have been done cor-
                                               rectly. Based on these weaknesses, an improvement plan is prepared to be
                                               implemented further.
                                            4. Act (A) - The measure, carrying out an increase in incremental enhancement,
                                               the weaknesses in number (3). The results are observed, and there are three
                                               possibilities: a) The results are of good quality so that the court method can
                                               be used in the dating period; b) The results are not quality. It means that the
                                               method is not suitable and must be replaced or corrected again in the dating
                                               period, and c) The way of listening may be used in different circumstances
                                               (other).

                                        Thus, the actual process does not end at step four but returns to step one and so on.
                                        Such a circular process occurs in continuous quality improvement.
                                            There are three basic steps to achieve progress; according to Juran, three main
                                        steps need to be taken to achieve world-class quality: a) Try to make a structured and
                                        sustainable quality improvement with complete dedication and a sense of urgency -
                                        1) Quality improvement must be carried out in a planned manner. Therefore, there
                                        must be a solid planning system, which focuses on meeting customer needs; 2) Qual-
                                        ity improvement must be continuous because customer needs are constantly chang-
                                        ing; 3) There must be commitment, persistence and loyalty to all employees, espe-
                                        cially leaders Juran and Feo (2010). All must be aware that quality improvement is
                                        signi icant; b) Institute an extensive and robust training program, and c) Adhere to
                                        solid determination and good leadership at higher management. Managers and lead-
                                        ers must always be role models. Therefore, even in terms of commitment, they must
                                        be role models.

International Journal of Research - GRANTHAALAYAH
                                                                                                                          281

                                        How should the classroom be managed during the covid-19 pandemic?




                                            In quality planning, Juran developed a management system called Strategic Qual-
                                        ity Management, which consists of three levels. Each level makes a unique contribu-
                                        tion to quality improvement. That way, the division of management functions is clear
                                        for uni ied purposes, not individually. It is one of the main principles of SQM. The
                                        three levels are a) Top management is responsible for establishing strategic quality
                                        policies. The strategic quality policy includes vision, mission, principles and strate-
                                        gic steps; b) Middle and lower management are responsible for establishing a tech-
                                        nical quality policy based on a strategic quality policy. The technical quality policy
                                        includes basic technical steps for quality improvement and c) Employees are respon-
                                        sible for quality control in the implementation process Juran (2003). Every employee
                                        must understand and consistently obey all the technical steps (procedures) that have
                                        been determined in quality improvement.
                                            Based on an analysis using the Pareto diagram, Juran found that most of the prob-
                                        lems (weaknesses) in quality improvement efforts reside in the management system,
                                        especially in the processes that occur, not in the person. Generally, people’s mis-
                                        takes are due to weaknesses in the system and process. The Thumb Rule 85/15 was
                                        found (Role of thumb 85/15), which means that approximately 85% of the weak-
                                        nesses are in systems and processes, and only about 15% in other factors. Therefore,
                                        if something goes wrong, do not be the irst to be reprimanded or punished, but irst,
                                        research the systems and processes that occur Bisgaard (2008).
                                            The Juran Trilogy, which is the most important and in luential contribution of
                                        Juran’s thoughts in quality management, which is also an essential aspect of MMT,
                                        is the Juran Trilogy, which he sets out in his book Juran On Quality by Design. There
                                        are three main management functions in traditional general management, namely
                                        planning, implementing, and evaluating. For Juran, the three functions are (1) Qual-
                                        ity Planning; (2) Quality Control; (3) Quality Improvement. These three functions
                                        are called the Juran Trilogy. There is a speci ic and systematic sequence of steps in
                                        each function, as shown in the table.


                                         Table 2 Juran Trilogy Juran (1986)

                                                         The Juran Trilogy: The Three Functions of Quality Management
                                           No         Quality Planning       No       Quality Control       No          Quality
                                                                                                                    improvement
                                           1.        Identify and de ine     1.     Carry out the de ined    1.   Analyze the results
                                                         customers.                quality plan following         of evaluations that
                                                                                   the speci ied technical        have been carried
                                                                                   steps and procedures.             out on quality
                                                                                                                        control
                                                                                                                  implemented and
                                                                                                                       determine
                                                                                                                      weaknesses.
                                                                                                                 Continued on next page




International Journal of Research - GRANTHAALAYAH
                                                                                                                                   282

                                                       Tyas E. Handayani and Naibaho Lamhot




                                           Table 2 continued
                                           2.     Identify and determine        2.             Evaluate all        2.   Retrying customer
                                                     customer needs.                   processes/steps during                 needs.
                                                                                        the process/steps and
                                                                                               record any
                                                                                        errors/weaknesses (if
                                                                                                  any).
                                           3.         Planning products         3.     Make improvements to        3.    Develop a quality
                                                    whose properties are                  errors/weaknesses             improvement plan
                                                     following customer                based on the evaluation           based on data on
                                                           needs.                        results, as long as the         weaknesses and
                                                                                       process is still ongoing.         customer needs.
                                           4.       Arrange and determine       4.         Conducting a inal       4.     Prepare all the
                                                       the systems and                      evaluation of the              facilities and
                                                      processes that can                 process and product             infrastructure as
                                                     produce the planned               and taking inventory of              well as the
                                                           product.                    strengths, weaknesses,            necessary human
                                                                                          and new things for                 resources.
                                                                                             further quality
                                                                                             improvement.
                                           5.       Describe all processes                                         5.        Forming a
                                                     in the de ined system                                                cooperation team
                                                       into activities and                                              and empowering it
                                                    operational (technical)                                              to be able to carry
                                                              steps                                                          out quality
                                                                                                                           improvements.
                                                                                                                   6.    Implement quality
                                                                                                                        improvement plans
                                                                                                                          with systems and
                                                                                                                          processes such as
                                                                                                                           quality control
                                                                                                                         (back like a circle).

                                           Furthermore, Juran distinguishes the following de initions of quality, and there
                                        are two types of quality: a) Strategic Quality or Great Quality or Macro Quality,
                                        namely strategic quality, especially in products that contain strategic policy charac-
                                        teristics; and b) Technical Quality or Small Quality or Micro Quality, namely technical
                                        quality, especially on products of a technical nature. Meanwhile, there are two levels
                                        of quality management, namely: a) Strategic Quality Management, which is the top
                                        quality level that outlines strategic quality policies; and b) Technical Quality Man-
                                        agement, which is the level of operational (technical) quality management, which
                                        determines technical quality.
                                           The next character is Crosby (Quality Vaccine) - Crosby analogizes quality culture
                                        with vaccination. In order for people to be resistant to disease, vaccination is neces-
                                        sary. In the organization (body), the primary bacterial disease is the product’s non-
                                        conformity with the needs due to speci ic weaknesses. The product becomes of poor
                                        quality, and the organization loses money (sick). To prevent this, it is necessary to
                                        hold quality vaccinations, namely instilling the principle (quality) from the beginning
                                        and continuously Crosby (1985).

International Journal of Research - GRANTHAALAYAH
                                                                                                                                           283

                                        How should the classroom be managed during the covid-19 pandemic?




                                            There are ive quality vaccines that Crosby found. The ive ingredients are princi-
                                        ples in the system that every employee and leader must cultivate. The ive ingredi-
                                        ents: (1) Integrity, all employees, especially leaders, must have integrity, in the sense
                                        of mastering their respective duties, having high commitment and morality. (2) The
                                        system must have a solid system, including quality planning, quality plan implemen-
                                        tation processes, evaluation for quality improvement, human resource empower-
                                        ment, and maintenance. Everything moves in an integrated manner to achieve com-
                                        mon goals. (3) Communication, the organization must have the best possible infor-
                                        mation and communication network to know well (well-informed) about all develop-
                                        ments in the organization. Openness must develop adequately. (4) Implementation,
                                        so that the implementation of all activities runs smoothly, all procedures and techni-
                                        cal steps must be appropriately prepared, employee training is carried out regularly,
                                        and relationships with suppliers and customers are well developed. (5) Policy, all
                                        quality policies are formulated and socialized BANDSUCH et al. (2008). Reports for
                                        each quality management function are prepared and communicated in an orderly,
                                        objective and transparent manner. Promotion and external relations are continu-
                                        ously improved, and the needs of customers are identi ied carefully and objectively.
                                        For quality culture, in the sense of instilling and growing these ive quality vaccine
                                        ingredients to all employees and leaders, Crosby proposes three main strategic steps
                                        that must be taken: commitment, education/training, and implementation.
                                            Commitment - All employees, especially leaders, must have a strong commitment
                                        (determination) to cultivate quality in the entire life of the organization. To form and
                                        instil commitment, there are four absolutes (Four Absolutes) that must be under-
                                        stood, lived, and implemented through consistent habituation, namely:

                                            1. Absolute First - Quality is de ined as conformity with customer requirements.
                                            2. Absolute Second - The quality system is understood as error prevention
                                            3. Absolute Third - Quality standards of performance are without defects (’Zero
                                               Defects’)
                                            4. Absolute Fourth - The measure of quality is the cost of nonconformity.

                                        Education / Training - Quality human resources must be available before program
                                        implementation (plan). For that, we need an in-service education/training system
                                        as part of management. Crosby divides education/training into three levels: a) Exec-
                                        utive education/training for top managers; b) Management education/training for
                                        middle and lower managers; and c) Employee education/training for all technical
                                        ( ield) employees. The program goals (ability goals) included Crosby called ’The six
                                        C’s’ (Six Cs). For every education/training participant, the six characteristics of the
                                        quality of the ability must be present at the end of the program, namely: comprehen-
                                        sion, commitment, competence, communication, correction, continuance.
                                            Implementation - After everything has been cultivated and internalized, primar-
                                        ily through education/training, then the quality improvement program and at the
                                        same time quality culture will be implemented according to Crosby’s fourteen steps.

International Journal of Research - GRANTHAALAYAH
                                                                                                                             284

                                                    Tyas E. Handayani and Naibaho Lamhot




                                        The operational steps in the quality improvement effort are as follows: a) Round-
                                        ing off management commitment; b) Forming a quality improvement team; c) Iden-
                                        tifying the main problem; d) Estimating the cost of quality; e) Increase the aware-
                                        ness and commitment of every employee to quality; f) Develop a system of corrective
                                        actions; g) Devising a perfect plan; h) Providing education/training for supervisors;
                                        i) Organizing days without defects; j) Determining goals; k) Overcoming the causes
                                        of error; l) Give recognition; m) Establish and activate the quality board; n) Do it
                                        again Adhwarjee et al. (2013).
                                            Crosby’s sequence is arranged in such a way; however, it is not a rigid one. Follow-
                                        ing the situation at hand, necessary changes can be made in the quality improvement
                                        process.
                                            Shigeo Shingo was heavily in luenced by Juran and Crosby’s views, so that his
                                        attention shifted from product quality control, which is usually done by inspecting
                                        the product alone, to total quality control, which focuses on systems and processes.
                                        Juran’s 85/15 thumb rule and Crosby’s Flawless concept provided the primary basis
                                        for developing his practical views. ’Poka-Yoke’ is a Japanese term used for the con-
                                        cept of Flawless. He concluded that every process could be observed carefully and
                                        continuously. If there is an error, the process must be paused, and the source of the
                                        error and its root must be found, then repaired immediately.
                                            Ishikawa uses statistical principles in developing quality control techniques. One
                                        of his notable contributions is the Fishbone Diagram or Ishikawa diagram, which is
                                        very effective as a problem analysis or causal analysis tool. With this diagram, the
                                        source of the cause and the problem can be found so that the solution can be worked
                                        out more precisely. By dealing with the root cause, no similar problem will arise.
                                        Ishikawa formed the Quality Society (Quality Circle) in Japan, whose members con-
                                        sist of quality experts. This function of the Quality Society encourages the develop-
                                        ment of quality culture movements, provides suggestions on quality improvement,
                                        and monitors the implementation of quality improvement efforts. In line with the
                                        quality society, he also proposed a cooperation team for quality improvement in com-
                                        panies, which has the function of carrying out quality improvement activities Mizuno
                                        (2020).
                                            Taguchi’s contribution to quality improvement techniques is contained in three
                                        main concepts: a) Quadratic Loss Function; b) Design Parameters; c) Planned Experi-
                                        ments based on statistics. The concept of the quadratic loss function is an application
                                        of the Crosby concepts of ’Quality is not expensive, ’without defects’, and ’cost of qual-
                                        ity. In the Taguchi concept, quality is understood in terms of unquali ied products.
                                        The cost of inferior quality products is ultimately higher, so control of the process
                                        from the outset is signi icant. With the concept of Parameter Design, Taguchi argues
                                        that diversity causes errors. That way, quality products can be reduced if the mea-
                                        surements (parameters) in all production processes are determined in a thoughtful
                                        and detailed manner. Then, in practice, all are carefully monitored from the very
                                        beginning [44].


International Journal of Research - GRANTHAALAYAH
                                                                                                                              285

                                        How should the classroom be managed during the covid-19 pandemic?




                                            School is a place for prospective scientists and skilled, educated personnel to be
                                        seeded, ready to build their society and nation. Schools as agents of renewal have a
                                        signi icant role in this highly competitive global era. Aware of its position and role,
                                        the school is tasked with providing a quality learning process, with the hope of pro-
                                        ducing graduates who are intelligent, skilled, have good character, and can enter the
                                        national and global job market. To build quality schools, various requirements are
                                        needed, regulations are needed following the development of schooling in Indone-
                                        sia. In addition, management autonomy is needed that provides lexibility for school
                                        principals to organize themselves according to the conditions of the school they lead.
                                        The emergence of awareness that various problems always arise during the imple-
                                        mentation of activities, so the ability to detect early problems that arise and those
                                        that will arise is needed to be adequately anticipated. Especially in very uncertain
                                        situations, then ’prevention before falling ill is more important than treating it.


                                        4. CONCLUSION
                                        From the explanation above, it can be concluded that school principals and educa-
                                        tors must be equipped with competency-based education that is life skills-oriented,
                                        both general skills such as personal skills and social skills and special skills such as
                                        academic skills and vocational skills. In this case, each subject is a ”tool” to develop
                                        life skills that students can use to face real life. In learning activities, efforts should
                                        be made to use contextual learning and teaching by actively interpreting and under-
                                        standing new teaching materials. In solving problems, encouraging students so that
                                        the concepts learned can be applied in everyday life, and teaching materials can be
                                        processed into parts from his knowledge, always remembering that in education,
                                        besides output, the process is also essential! Various factors determine the success of
                                        a school. Excellent and correct management, commitment from all elements involved
                                        in school management. Parents of students and community members who are mem-
                                        bers of the school committee and the school environment. For management to run
                                        smoothly, to be a matter of pride, democratic educational leadership must apply the
                                        principles of transparency and professionalism. If this principle is applied correctly
                                        and can optimize community support and participation, it will be an asset to create a
                                        strong/superior school. Finally, a solid commitment to jointly realize the vision and
                                        mission of the school, principals and educators/teachers must work optimally fol-
                                        lowing their duties and obligations, namely leading, managing, educating and teach-
                                        ing their students and vice versa students must also show ierce commitment to
                                        learning diligently, tenaciously, smartly and ready to become human learners. and
                                        able to learn lifelong (lifelong learning). Likewise, parents of students are obliged to
                                        encourage and always remind their children to learn appropriately and well (parents
                                        are the irst and foremost educators for their children). Meanwhile, other commu-
                                        nity members must also pay attention to the school, and function as social control, so
                                        that the school can continue to run and develop according to its track.


International Journal of Research - GRANTHAALAYAH
                                                                                                                               286

                                                     Tyas E. Handayani and Naibaho Lamhot




                                        REFERENCES
                                        Adhwarjee, D. K., Majumder, M., & Banerjee, N. I. L. O. T. P. A. L. (2013). Exploring Crosby’s
                                              Fourteen Steps To Quality Improvement Applied To Industry. International Journal Of
                                              Innovative Technology And Research(1), 544–546.
                                        BANDSUCH, M., PATE, L., & THIES, J. (2008). Rebuilding Stakeholder Trust in Business:
                                              An Examination of Principle-Centered Leadership and Organizational Transparency
                                              in Corporate Governance. Business and Society Review, 113(1), 99–127. Retrieved
                                              from https://dx.doi.org/10.1111/j.1467-8594.2008.00315.x 10.1111/j.1467-8594
                                              .2008.00315.x
                                        Bisgaard, S. (2008). Quality Management and Juran’s Legacy. Quality Engineering, 20(4), 390–
                                              401. Retrieved from https://dx.doi.org/10.1080/08982110802317398 10.1080/
                                              08982110802317398
                                        Bush, T. (2006). Theories Of Educational Management. International Journal Of Educational
                                              Leadership Preparation, 1(2), 2–2.
                                        Chen, P., Yuan, T., Sun, Q., Jiang, L., Jiang, H., Zhu, Z., Xu, . ., & A. (2016). Role Of Quality Con-
                                              trol Circle In Sustained Improvement Of Hand Hygiene Compliance: An Observational
                                              Study In A Stomatology Hospital In Shandong. China. Antimicrobial Resistance & Infec-
                                              tion Control, 5(1), 1–6.
                                        Cheng, Y. C., & Chan, M. T. (2000). Implementation Of School-Based Management: A Multi-
                                              Perspective Analysis Of The Case Of Hong Kong. International Review Of Education,
                                              46(3), 205–232.
                                        Crosby, P. B. (1985). Quality Without Tears. New American Library.
                                        Esteves, A. M., & Vanclay, F. (2009). Social Development Needs Analysis as a tool for SIA to
                                              guide corporate-community investment: Applications in the minerals industry. Envi-
                                              ronmental Impact Assessment Review, 29(2), 137–145. Retrieved from https://dx.doi
                                              .org/10.1016/j.eiar.2008.08.004 10.1016/j.eiar.2008.08.004
                                        Grinshtain, Y., & Gibton, D. (2018). Responsibility, authority, and accountability in school-
                                              based and non-school-based management. Journal of Educational Administration,
                                              56(1), 2–17. Retrieved from https://dx.doi.org/10.1108/jea-01-2017-0005 10.1108/
                                              jea-01-2017-0005
                                        Hadijaya, Y. a. (2015). School Based Management at Matauli 1 State Senior High School Pan-
                                              dan. Researchers World – Journal of Arts Science & Commerce, 6(4), 55–66. Retrieved
                                              from https://dx.doi.org/10.18843/rwjasc/v6i4/08 10.18843/rwjasc/v6i4/08
                                        Hofman, R. H., Boom, J. D., Meeuwisse, M., & Hofman, W. A. (2013). Educational Innovation,
                                              Quality, And Effects: An Exploration Of Innovations And Their Effects In Secondary
                                              Education. Educational Policy, 27(6), 843–866.
                                        Hummel-Rossi, B., & Ashdown, J. (2002). The State of Cost-Bene it and Cost-Effectiveness
                                              Analyses in Education. Review of Educational Research, 72(1), 1–30. Retrieved from
                                              https://dx.doi.org/10.3102/00346543072001001 10.3102/00346543072001001
                                        Juran, J. M. (1986). The Quality Trilogy. The Quality Trilogy. Quality Progress, 19, 19–24.
                                        Juran, J. M. (2003). Simon And Schuster. Juran On Leadership For Quality.
                                        Juran, J. M., & Feo, J. A. D. (2010). Juran’s Quality Handbook: The Complete Guide To Per-
                                              formance Excellence. Mcgraw-Hill Education. Juran’s Quality Handbook: The Complete
                                              Guide To Performance Excellence.
                                        Katuuk, D. A. (2014). Evaluation On School Based Management Implementation In Elemen-
                                              tary School At Tomohon City. North Sulawesi. Evaluation(7), 5–5.
                                        Kolibu, D. R., Peter, R., Naibaho, L., Paparang, S. R., & Hanock, E. E. (2021). Strengthening The



International Journal of Research - GRANTHAALAYAH
                                                                                                                                          287

                                        How should the classroom be managed during the covid-19 pandemic?




                                              Values Of Christian Education In Facing The New Normal Era. Psychology And Education
                                              Journal, 58(2), 10937–10944.
                                        Komoldit, K., Tawisook, M., & Pilanthananond, N. (2018). Graduate School Management Char-
                                              acteristics to Ensure Production of Quality Graduates for Sustainable Competitive-
                                              ness. Mediterranean Journal of Social Sciences, 9(4), 121–129. Retrieved from https://
                                              dx.doi.org/10.2478/mjss-2018-0121 10.2478/mjss-2018-0121
                                        Kristiana, M. D. (2019). Legal Reform On Indonesian Education Policy. Politics Of Law On
                                              School Days Policy: Legal Reform On Indonesian Education Policy. Journal Of Law And
                                              Legal Reform, 1(1), 5–24.
                                        Malhoit, G. C. (2005). Providing Rural Students With A High Quality Education: The Rural Per-
                                              spective On The Concept Of Educational Adequacy. Rural School And Community Trust.
                                        Mizuno, S. (2020). Management For Quality Improvement. Management For Quality Improve-
                                              ment: The 7 New QC Tools.
                                        Nadeak, B., & Naibaho, L. (2019). Managing Lecturers’ Competence Development At Univer-
                                              sitas Kristen Indonesia. Managing Lecturers’ Competence Development At Universitas
                                              Kristen Indonesia.
                                        Nadeak, B., & Naibaho, L. (2020a). MOTIVATION AND HRM FACTORS RELATION TO THE
                                              EMPLOYEE LOYALTY. Polish Journal of Management Studies, 22(2), 261–276. Retrieved
                                              from https://dx.doi.org/10.17512/pjms.2020.22.2.18 10.17512/pjms.2020.22.2.18
                                        Nadeak, B., & Naibaho, L. (2020b). Video-Based Learning On Improving Students’learning
                                              Output. Palarch’s. Journal Of Archaeology Of Egypt/Egyptology, 17(2), 44–54.
                                        Nadeak, B., Naibaho, L., & Silalahi, M. (2020). COVID-19 And Students’ Anxiety Management.
                                              International Journal Of Innovation, Creativity And Change, 13(7), 1574–1587.
                                        Nadeak, B., Naibaho, L., Sunarto, S., Tyas, E. H., & Sormin, E. (2021). Learning Management
                                              In Suburban Schools During The Midst Of COVID-19. Psychology And Education Journal,
                                              58(2), 1131–1139.
                                        Naibaho, L. (2014a). The Role Of Education And Culture In The Development Of Character
                                              And Civilization Of The Plural Indonesian Nation. Jurnal The Ary Suta Center Series On
                                              Strategic Management, 27(0), 69–69.
                                        Naibaho, L. (2014b). The Role Of Education And Culture In The Development Of Character
                                              And Civilization Of The Plural Indonesian Nation. Jurnal The Ary Suta Center Series On
                                              Strategic Management, 27(0), 69–69.
                                        Naibaho, L. (2021a). Online Learning Evaluation during Covid-19 using CSE-UCLA Evalua-
                                              tion Model at English Education Department Universitas Kristen Indonesia. Budapest
                                              International Research and Critics Institute (BIRCI-Journal): Humanities and Social Sci-
                                              ences, 4(2), 1987–1997. Retrieved from https://dx.doi.org/10.33258/birci.v4i2.1887
                                              10.33258/birci.v4i2.1887
                                        Naibaho, L. (2021b). Pre-Service Teachers’ Soft Skills And Achievement. Turkish Journal Of
                                              Computer And Mathematics Education (TURCOMAT), 12(10), 491–496.
                                        Naibaho, L. (2021c). Psycholinguistics In Language Learning. Psycholinguistics In Language
                                              Learning.
                                        Nugroho, Y. (2010). NGOs, THE INTERNET AND SUSTAINABLE RURAL DEVELOPMENT.
                                              Information, Communication & Society, 13, 88–120. Retrieved from https://dx.doi.org/
                                              10.1080/13691180902992939 10.1080/13691180902992939
                                        Reeves, D. B. (2009). How To Conquer Myths, Build Commitment, And Get Results. Ascd.
                                              Leading Change In Your School: How To Conquer Myths, Build Commitment, And Get
                                              Results.
                                        Schwab, K., & Sala-I-Martín, X. (2013). The Global Competitiveness Report. Full Data Edition.


International Journal of Research - GRANTHAALAYAH
                                                                                                                                  288

                                                    Tyas E. Handayani and Naibaho Lamhot




                                              World Economic Forum.
                                        Servaes, J. (2009). Communication policies, good governance and development jour-
                                              nalism. Communicatio, 35(1), 50–80. Retrieved from https://dx.doi.org/10.1080/
                                              02500160902906653 10.1080/02500160902906653
                                        Traitler, H. (2015). The Food Industry Innovation School. The Food Industry Innovation School:
                                              How To Drive Innovation Through Complex Organizations.
                                        Tyas, E. H., & Naibaho, L. (2021a). HOTS LEARNING MODEL IMPROVES THE QUALITY
                                              OF EDUCATION. International Journal of Research -GRANTHAALAYAH, 9(1), 176–
                                              182. Retrieved from https://dx.doi.org/10.29121/granthaalayah.v9.i1.2021.3100 10
                                              .29121/granthaalayah.v9.i1.2021.3100
                                        Tyas, E. H., & Naibaho, L. (2021b). MANAGING TRI PUSAT PENDIDIKAN IN THE COVID
                                              -19 PANDEMIC. International Journal of Research -GRANTHAALAYAH, 9(4), 492–
                                              500. Retrieved from https://dx.doi.org/10.29121/granthaalayah.v9.i4.2021.3893 10
                                              .29121/granthaalayah.v9.i4.2021.3893
                                        Tyas, E. H., Sunarto, S., & Naibaho, L. (2020). Building Superior Human Resources Through
                                              Character Education. TEST Engineering & Management, 83, 11864–11873.
                                        Venter, H. (2006). The Performance Management System For Educational Staff At Motheo
                                              College. The Performance Management System For Educational Staff At Motheo College:
                                              An Evaluative Case Study (Doctoral Dissertation.
                                        Wubbels, T. (2011). An international perspective on classroom management: what
                                              should prospective teachers learn? Teaching Education, 22(2), 113–131. Retrieved
                                              from https://dx.doi.org/10.1080/10476210.2011.567838 10.1080/10476210.2011
                                              .567838
                                        Zhao, J. (2010). School Knowledge Management Framework And Strategies: The New Per-
                                              spective On Teacher Professional Development. Computers In Human Behavior, 26(2),
                                              168–175.




International Journal of Research - GRANTHAALAYAH
                                                                                                                                  289