1

      Model of Educational Leadership Management in Boarding Schools
                          *Muhammad Ihsan Dacholfany1, Afiful Ikhwan2,
                             Agus Budiman3, Zuhri Saputra Hutabarat4
    1
      Universitas Muhammadiyah Metro, Jl. Ki Hajar Dewantara No.116, Lampung, Indonesia
       2
         Universitas Muhamamadiyah Ponorogo, Jl. Budi Utomo No.10, East Java, Indonesia
          3
            Universitas Darussalam Gontor, Jl. Raya Siman, Ponorogo, East Java, Indonesia
               4
                 Universitas Batanghari Jambi, Jl. Slamet Riyadi No.1, Jambi, Indonesia
                               *muhammadihsandacholfany@gmail.com

          ABSTRACT: Islamic boarding schools have a wealth of knowledge that
          can be researched and analyzed from various scientific aspects, so research
          on Islamic boarding schools will be available. This study will focus on the
          management pattern of pesantren leadership education by choosing the
          largest pesantren in the country, namely the Darussalam Gontor Modern
          Islamic Boarding School. A qualitative method with a case study approach.
          Data were obtained from key informants, Islamic boarding school
          documents and books, journals and articles as support related to the
          management of leadership education in the era of globalization. Data
          analysis in this study used content analysis techniques. The results of the
          study found that the management of leadership education in the form of
          regeneration in the style of the Gontor Islamic Boarding School was
          classified into six: briefing, training, assignment, habituation, control and
          role modelling. The revival of leadership values at the Gontor Islamic
          Boarding School includes education of ibrah, habituation, mauidzah,
          discipline, independence and exemplary. The pattern of leadership in
          Darussalam Gontor Islamic Boarding School is collegial (Trimurti). The
          administration of the Trimurti pesantren Darussalam Gontor became the
          central figure of the pesantren in the leadership of three kiai. With this
          collective leadership model, the Gontor Islamic Boarding School will
          eventually become a modern institution whose survival does not depend on
          a single kiai as the supreme leader. Thus, Islamic boarding schools are
          expected to be able to foster and produce Islamic human resources.

          Pesantren memiliki khazanah pengetahuan yang dapat diteliti dan analisa
          dari berbagai aspek keilmuan, sehingga tidak akan habis riset tentang
          pesantren. Pada focus kajian ini akan menitikberatkan pada pola manajemen
          pendidikan kepemimpinan pesantren, dengan memilih pesantren terbesar di
          negeri ini, yakni Pesantren Modern Darussalam Gontor. Metode kualitatif
          dengan pendekatan studi kasus. Data diperoleh dari informan inti, dokumen
          pesantren dan buku, jurnal serta artikel sebagai pendukung yang terkait

1
       orcid id: http://orcid.org/0000-0002-7848-6886
2
       orcid id: http://orcid.org/0000-0002-6412-3830
4
       orcid id: http://orcid.org/0000-0002-2348-3864



                                                            DOI: https://doi.org/10.35723/ajie.v8i1.339

      Model of Educational Leadership Management in Boarding Schools – Muhammad Ihsan Dacholfany, et al. 2




        dengan manajemen pendidikan kepemimpinan di di era globalisasi. Analisis
        data dalam penelitian ini menggunakan teknik content analysis. Hasil
        penelitian menemukan bahwa manajemen pendidikan kepemimpinan dalam
        bentuk kaderisasi ala Pondok pesantren Gontor diklasifikasikan dalam
        enam, briefing, training, assignment, habituation, control dan role
        modelling. Kaderisasi nilai kepemimpinan di Pesantren Gontor meliputi
        pendidikan ibrah, pembiasaan, mauidzah, kedisiplinan, kemandirian an
        keteladanan. Pola kepemimpinan pesantren Darussalam Gontor merupakan
        kepemimpinan kolegial (trimurti). Kepemimpinan trimurti pesantren
        Darussalam Gontor menjadi tokoh sentral pesantren pada kepemimpinan
        tiga kiai. Model kepemimpinan kolektif ini, akhirnya pondok pesantren
        Gontor yang mampu menjadi lembaga modern yang kelangsungannya tidak
        tergantung oleh seorang kiai sebagai pemimpin tertinggi lagi tunggal.
        Dengan demikian pondok pesantren diharapkan dapat membina dan
        menghasilkan sumber daya manusia Islami.

        Keywords: Leadership Management, Boarding School, Darussalam
        Gontor.
           Received: February 15, 2023; Revised: August 11, 2023; Accepted: January 2, 2024


I.   INTRODUCTION
     Islamic boarding schools are educational institutions and vehicles for Islamic religious
     education that are interesting to study from various perspectives, especially in this
     globalisation era, with modernisation from the early twentieth century AD to the end
     of the century (Nurtawab, 2019). Besides that, after that century, its role was not only
     as a place for the transformation of religious education but also to maintain Islamic
     traditions and create scholars, but more than that, currently, the role of boarding school
     is also to educate (Masqon, 2011);(Marini et al., 2023), and try to create a quality
     generation cognitively, affectively and psychometrically (Burde et al., 2015).
     According to Azra, the scientific dynamics of Islamic boarding schools are understood
     as institutional functions with three leading roles, namely, the transmission of Islamic
     knowledge. Second, maintenance of Islamic traditions. Third, coaching prospective
     scholars (Azra, 2019).
     Islamic boarding schools are part of today's Islamic education institutions. In every
     sense, they look shaky, mainly because their orientation is increasingly unclear
     (Ikhwan, 2021b). In this era of globalization, the Islamic education system should
     always orient itself to answer the needs and challenges that arise in our society as a
     logical consequence of change (Syam et al., 2023). Otherwise, Islamic education in
     Indonesia will be left behind in global competition (Dacholfany, 2015).
     This study will discuss education management in conceptualizing leadership, the most
     frequently discussed matter. The formulation of the collaboration of these two things
     is expected to solve the crisis in educational institutions in Indonesia, especially in
     Islamic boarding schools, because they are miniatures of the Indonesian Muslim
     community (Ni’am, 2015);(Saada, 2020). Progress and decline, and even the death of
     Islamic boarding schools, cannot be separated from the role of management and
     leadership of Islamic boarding schools (kiai) in fostering cadres and how to respond to
     the institutional transformation of Islamic boarding schools and their systems, which


                                                          DOI: https://doi.org/10.35723/ajie.v8i1.339

3   Al-Hayat: Journal of Islamic Education (AJIE)
    e-ISSN: 2599-3046 (online) | Volume 8, Issue 1 | January - March 2024
    p-ISSN: 2657-1781 (print)

     are intensely coloured by the character of leadership (Kamal & Ghani, 2014);(Muhith
     & El-Rumi, 2020). Thus, it is hoped that the administration of Islamic boarding
     schools will be able to face all problems or challenges in this globalization era with the
     hope that the role of the leader can organize and realize what is planned, such as the
     mission, vision, goals and work programs that have been designed (Dacholfany,
     2017b).
     In the problems mentioned above, the author will examine issues that are considered
     very important to discuss, namely the assumption that Islamic boarding school leaders
     have not been able to solve all the challenges and weaknesses faced in facing the
     globalization era, namely: how is the management of leadership education in Islamic
     boarding schools in preparing their successor cadres after he died, to become the next
     leader whose character and leadership spirit will be the same or more competent, and
     be relied upon to have scientific insights and skills in the era of globalization (Siahaan
     et al., 2019), while still having ijtihad for his leadership which is a legacy , which
     continues and is practiced including the term heir (ahli waris) (Fauzi, 2019), in his
     administration and of course in the world of Islamic boarding schools the focus is not
     only on religious education which is occupied (Kurniawan, 2018), but related to
     national, social insights , politics, economics, society, and so on, not to mention the
     presence of kiai as religious leaders (D’Aiglepieree & Bauer, 2018);(Sila, 2019).
     The history of the rise and fall of boarding schools in Indonesia is synonymous with
     the existence of kiai or their leaders. Islamic boarding schools progress rapidly
     because of the figure of the kiai who work hard with all his sacrifices, and vice versa
     (Hastasari et al., 2022). Boarding schools experience decline or even die because their
     kiai abandons them (Arroisi, 2012). This is considered a weakness for some people,
     and there is even an assumption that it has become a tradition of Islamic boarding
     schools that if the leader of the Islamic boarding school dies, then the next of kin will
     replace him in marriage or kinship. In the tradition of boarding school life, from one
     generation to the next generation, the kiai always pay special attention to their
     children's education to become a substitute for leading the boarding school institution
     (Syam et al., 2020). If the kiai has more than one child, usually the oldest child is
     expected to replace his position as leader. Boarding school after he died while other
     children were educated so that they could establish new boarding schools elsewhere
     (Kusdiana & Lubis, 2014), but in reality, with many children or prospective cadres,
     the leaders did not meet the desired expectations, so the quality, values, principles,
     management and good traditions that have been maintained so far are becoming less
     and weaker.
     The management of leadership education in Islamic boarding schools is very
     dependent on leadership, whether it comes from children or relatives who replaced
     him after he died, comes from former senior students who are deliberately prepared to
     become the next leader, and there are even leaders of Islamic boarding schools whom
     the local government chooses for reasons all management and budget from local
     government.
     Thus, many Islamic boarding schools depend on the kiai, buya or director as the leader
     of the absolute highest authority. Because the leadership of the Islamic boarding
     school is the spirit of the Islamic boarding school, its vital role cannot be replaced by
     other components. Therefore, the life or death or development of Islamic boarding
     schools is very dependent on their leaders because the characteristics and style of



                                                                 DOI: https://doi.org/10.35723/ajie.v8i1.339

    Model of Educational Leadership Management in Boarding Schools – Muhammad Ihsan Dacholfany, et al. 4




   Islamic boarding schools, as well as values, mottos, principles and traditions, are
   primarily determined by the leadership of Islamic boarding schools, so it is not
   surprising that there are differences between one Islamic boarding school and another.
   Hence, leadership and management factors are one of the keys to success in education
   in a way that leaders understand and solve problems and challenges that can be used as
   a basis for decision-making.
   The problems above show that Islamic boarding schools have a wealth of knowledge
   treasures that can be examined scientifically. Thus, researchers are interested in
   discussing the management pattern of leadership education at Gontor Islamic boarding
   schools. This study can be helpful and become an insight for stakeholders and
   managers of Islamic boarding schools and others so that they can deal with all the
   problems of Islamic boarding schools in the era of globalization per the desired
   expectations.


II. METHOD
   The approach used by the author in this research is to use a qualitative approach with a
   type of case research supported by a literature review (Ikhwan, 2021a). The data
   sources for this research come from selected experienced informants or documents on
   research focus and books as well as scientific journals and articles both nationally and
   internationally related to leadership education management in the era of globalization.
   Data analysis in this study used content analysis techniques, namely data processing in
   a separate way associated with the discussion of several ideas or thoughts of
   educational leaders, which were then described, discussed, and criticized according to
   the situation of the existing Islamic boarding schools (Creswell & Poth, 2016).
   Furthermore, similar data is categorized, and its content is critically analyzed to obtain
   concrete and adequate formulation.


III. RESULT AND DISCUSSION
   Management of Boarding School Leadership in General
   The management and leadership of Islamic boarding schools have distinctive
   characteristics according to Islamic culture and religious values. The phenomenon of
   this modern era, the development of management and leadership science, is
   increasingly dynamic. The use of increasingly advanced technology affects people's
   lives. Consequently, education in Islamic boarding schools needs to adapt to these
   advances while maintaining Islamic boarding schools' characteristics (Sagala, 2015).
   Islamic boarding schools are tasked with producing human beings who are genuine
   experts in religion and social science and have noble characters.
   Leadership is a matter of the relationship between the leader and those who are led in
   an institution such as an Islamic educational institution in a boarding school with the
   uniqueness of each. Islamic boarding school leadership is a determining factor for the
   success or failure of the institution to achieve its goals, vision and mission. The quality
   of a leader is also shown in personal integrity, consistency and a solid commitment to
   advancing the institution he leads, which can be seen in his ability to manage the
   organization, influence others, show the right path and behaviour that by Islamic
   teachings and is guided by traditions, philosophy, values and commitment that has


                                                        DOI: https://doi.org/10.35723/ajie.v8i1.339

5   Al-Hayat: Journal of Islamic Education (AJIE)
    e-ISSN: 2599-3046 (online) | Volume 8, Issue 1 | January - March 2024
    p-ISSN: 2657-1781 (print)

     been mutually agreed upon because every effort and work must be made together so
     that each program that has been jointly announced is more appropriate and efficient
     (Rissanen, 2012). Leaders must try to understand and acknowledge their followers'
     competence, capacity, initiative, participation and goodwill (so that they can act
     cooperatively to ensure the physical and spiritual well-being of those they lead. Who
     has high quality and public trust so people feel free to include their children or
     relatives in Islamic boarding schools? Thus, the educational model in Islamic boarding
     schools is unique to Indonesia and is not found in other countries. For this reason, this
     characteristic needs to be maintained both at the secondary level and at the college or
     university level.
     Gontor Islamic Boarding School Management: History and Present
     In this discussion, the author will examine the management of leadership education at
     Gontor Islamic boarding schools based in East Java Province, Indonesia, because,
     among several regions in the Indonesian Archipelago that have produced many
     productive scholars in the field of Islamic scholarship (Fathurahman, 2012), Islamic
     boarding schools parents in Indonesia play an important and strategic role in education
     (Ikhwan, 2016), especially if you look at its history, the Gontor Islamic boarding
     school, which has not received government recognition for more than half a century,
     has opened opportunities for itself to develop independently (Daniar & Zarkasyi,
     2019), so that it is interesting to study and as learning for other Islamic boarding
     schools and can add insight into knowledge that has a leadership regeneration pattern
     that is different from other Islamic boarding schools.
     Gontor Islamic boarding school was founded by Trimurti (three brothers), KH. Ahmad
     Sahal, KH. Zainuddin Fanani, and KH. Imam Zarkasyi, in 19 died7 K.H. Zainuddin
     Fanani died, wed by K.H. Ahmad Sahal, who died in 1977. Eight years later, in 1985,
     K.H. Imam Zarkasyi followed his two brothers. After Trimurti died, the leadership
     relay of the Darussalam Gontor Islamic Boarding School was given to the second
     generation.
     Trimurti, the Founder of the boarding school, has cadre his sons and daughters to fulfil
     the elements of eligibility to become leaders of the Gontor Islamic boarding school.
     Not only his sons and daughters but also his students so that one day they have the
     eligibility to lead and continue the leadership relay of the Gontor Islamic boarding
     school. Cadreization, for Trimurti, can guarantee the sustainability of the boarding
     school in the future, so it is not surprising that regeneration is one of the Five Term
     Plans proclaimed by Trimurti, meaning that after Trimurti Gontor Boarding School
     Leaders must continue the regeneration process continuously. Moreover, seriously, the
     cadre of leadership at the Gontor Islamic boarding school is carried out with a design
     and well-planned so that, according to the saying: "breaks grow and change". At the
     Gontor Islamic boarding school, even before it was broken, it had grown. "Do not let
     the Founder or Kiai die. The boarding school fails, too. Gontor's Islamic boarding
     school culture is summarized in the Five Souls: Sincerity, Simplicity, Independence,
     Ukhuwah Islamiyyah and Freedom. Its structure is outlined in Five Terms: Education
     and Teaching, Cadreization, Building, Khizanatullah (Funding) and Pondok Family
     Welfare. That is a small quantity of the culture and structure at Darussalam Gontor
     Boarding School. The alum hostel needs much to learn and reflect on (Sahal, 2020a).




                                                                 DOI: https://doi.org/10.35723/ajie.v8i1.339

 Model of Educational Leadership Management in Boarding Schools – Muhammad Ihsan Dacholfany, et al. 6




Board of Waqf Characteristics of Gontor Islamic Boarding Schools
Looking at its history, since the early period of the development of the Gontor Islamic
Boarding School, the Islamic boarding school has been referred to as a "Waqf Islamic
Boarding School", which was donated by trimurti (three brothers who founded
modern boarding school Darussalam Gontor, namely K.H. Abdullah Sahal, K.H.
Zainuddin Fananie and K.H. Imam Zarkasyi) On October 12, 1958, trimurti officially
handed over the Gontor Islamic Boarding School to the community (Muslims) who
were entrusted with the Gontor Islamic boarding school waqf. The handing over of
this waqf impacts the ownership of the Gontor Islamic boarding school, from
Trimurti's property to the people's, thus appointing or selecting the leadership of the
Islamic boarding school based on the skills and eligibility that have been regulated in
the Articles of Association and Bylaws of the Islamic boarding school for each
institution in the Gontor Islamic boarding school. Moreover, the assets belonging to
the Gontor Islamic boarding school continue to increase, and the trust and desire of the
people, both at home and abroad, to send their children or relatives to school is rising.
The Waqf Board is a legislative body responsible for the continuity and progress of the
boarding school Darussalam Gontor. Meanwhile, for its daily tasks and obligations,
this mandate is carried out by the new board of Islamic boarding school leaders.
Gontor Islamic boarding school, by the leadership philosophy, implements this,
namely: " ready to lead and ready to be led, broken growing, lost and replaced” (A. S.
Zarkasyi, 2011), and this has become the blueprint and genre (form) for the further
development of modern boarding school.
Structurally, the Board of Waqf Gontor boarding school will decide who will become
the Leader of the boarding school. However, culturally, there is still a composition for
families and cadres. The founders of the boarding school still refer to aspects of need
and feasibility. This is full of meaning and value and implicitly contains a structural
and cultural approach (Sahal, 2020b).
As for the cultural approach, the leadership of the Gontor Islamic boarding school
usually lasts the service period until his death, as is usual in Islamic boarding school
culture, such as KH. Shoiman Lukmanul Hakim died and was replaced by KH. Drs.
Imam Badri was replaced by KH. Syamsul Hadi Abdan. Then now by KH. Drs. Akrim
Mariyat, Dipl. Ad., Ed. Likewise KH. Dr. Abdullah Syukri Zarkasyi, M.A., is now
being replaced by his eldest brother, KH. Prof. Dr. Amal Fathullah Zarkasyi, M.A.
The leadership of boarding school Darussalam Gontor is carried out through a decision
of the management of the waqf board, which is the highest institution at boarding
school Darussalam Gontor, the founders (trimurti) have laid the basic foundations of
the boarding school Gontor which will become the basis for the further development
of the boarding school. After K.H. Imam Zarkasyi died, Gontor's leadership relay
shifted from the first generation to the second generation. In its session, the waqf
board appointed three new Gontor leaders: K.H. Abdullah Syukri Zarkasyi, MA and
K.H. Hasan Abdullah Sahal and K.H. Shoiman Luqmanul Hakim, thus the leadership
regeneration at the Gontor Islamic Boarding School does not only include the
descendants of the founder, because KH. Shoiman Lukmanul Hakim is not the son of
the founder of the boarding school (trimurti), but he is a former senior student who
later became a teacher. He entered the Gontor Islamic boarding school in 1936, then in
1999 KH. Shoiman Lukmanul Hakim, during the Waqf Board hearing, was replaced
by K.H. Drs. Imam Badri (a former senior santri) until he died in 2006. Then, in his


                                                     DOI: https://doi.org/10.35723/ajie.v8i1.339

7   Al-Hayat: Journal of Islamic Education (AJIE)
    e-ISSN: 2599-3046 (online) | Volume 8, Issue 1 | January - March 2024
    p-ISSN: 2657-1781 (print)

     session, the Waqf Board determined KH. Syamsul Hadi Abdan (a retired senior santri)
     as his successor. After the death of KH. Dr. Abdullah Syukri Zarkasyi, MA and KH.
     Syamsul Hadi Abdan, the waqf board held an extraordinary meeting which is the
     Waqf Board led by Dr. KH. M. Hidayat Nur Wahid, M.A whose members are Prof.
     Dr. KH. Aflatun Muchtar, M.A. KH. Abdullah Said Baharmus, Lc. Prof. Dr. KH.
     Hamid Fahmy Zarkasyi, M.A., M.Phil., Dr. H. Mulyono Jamal, M.A., Dr. KH. Ahmad
     Hidayatullah Zarkasyi, M.A. KH. Muhammad Danial, S.E. Ak. M.M. CPAs. CA., and
     KH Hasan Abdullah Sahal, Prof. Dr. KH. Amal Fathullah Zarkasyi, Drs. KH. Akrim
     Mariyat, Prof. Dr. KH. Din Syamsuddin, M.A, and the last member passed away on
     November 30 2020, the late KH. Heikal Yanuarshah Ibadillah, M. The son of KH.
     Hasan Abdullah Sahal (Career of Ma'had Al-Muqoddasah Li Tahfidhil Qur'an).
     On 6 Rabiul Awal 1442 H / 23 October 2020, a decree of the extraordinary session of
     the board of waqf boarding school Darussalam Gontor was made concerning the
     appointment of the leader of boarding school KH Hasan Abdullah Sahal (son of one of
     the trimurti), prof. Dr. KH. Amal Fathullah Zarkasyi (son of one of trimurti) and Drs.
     KH. Akrim Mariyat (a former senior santri who is also a teacher) was entrusted with
     becoming the chairman of the IKPM (Ikatan Keluarga Pondok Modern) Gontor
     Centre.
     Gontor Transformation: Collegial Collective Leadership (Trimurti)
     The leadership of the boarding school Darussalam Gontor is an executive body (after
     the death of the founders of the Boarding school/trimurti) who are elected by the waqf
     board every five years. On October 23, 2020, the board of trustees of the Darussalam
     Gontor waqf board boarding school was appointed. Thus, the leadership of the Islamic
     boarding school is the mandate of the waqf board is mandated to carry out the
     decisions of the Waqf Board and is responsible to the Darussalam Gontor waqf board
     boarding school high (Sugandini et al., 2018).
     Gontor board school makes a leadership management strategy so that it is ready to
     manage the sustainability of the leadership (kiai), providing unlimited benefits to the
     community and so that it can survive and even be competitive with other educational
     institutions. Only, but it also implies the authenticity of Indonesia. Moreover, the
     Gontor Islamic boarding school has been donated from wakif to nadzir (Gontor
     Islamic boarding school waqf board). Indirectly, the Gontor Islamic boarding school
     has started the regeneration process of boarding school leadership. It has been
     prepared for a long time. The leadership cadre management process at the Gontor
     Islamic boarding school is carried out with various steps, including uswah hasanah,
     direction, assignment, approach, involvement with Islamic boarding school activities,
     providing motivation, debriefing, coaching physically and spiritually (Arroisi, 2012).
     In this case, the Darussalam Gontor Islamic Boarding School is considered a form of
     collective leadership management, which can be interpreted as a collaborative and
     mutually beneficial leadership process, allowing all elements of an institution to take
     part in building an agreement that accommodates all goals. Collaboration does not
     only mean "everyone" can complete their tasks but what is most important is that
     everything is done in an atmosphere of togetherness and mutual support (al-jam'iyah
     al murassalah or collegiality and supportiveness).
     Thus the Gontor Islamic boarding school is carried out with collective leadership
     management (trimurti) which is a new phenomenon in Islamic boarding school
     leadership which is usually the central figure of the Islamic boarding school in a single


                                                                 DOI: https://doi.org/10.35723/ajie.v8i1.339

 Model of Educational Leadership Management in Boarding Schools – Muhammad Ihsan Dacholfany, et al. 8




kiai who is the leader of the Islamic boarding school but also the involvement and
participation of subordinates, such as holding regular meetings every thursday
(kamisan) continues to be carried out with institutional managers, units and the teacher
council and on the same day all the students are holding speech training, so that all
activities at the Islamic boarding school continue to run smoothly, and at the regular
meeting every thursday, everything that will be scheduled in the Islamic boarding
school program Islamic boarding schools were presented at the conference and
discussed and controlled up to evaluation, this is evidence of the involvement of
institutional leaders, units and caretakers, as well as ustadz in participating in
supporting efforts to progress and improve the education of the Gontor Islamic
boarding school.
With this collective leadership model, the Gontor Islamic boarding school will
eventually become a modern institution whose survival does not depend on a single
kiai as the supreme leader. The effort to apply the collective leadership model at the
Gontor Islamic boarding school in the management of the Islamic boarding school is
an endeavour to develop Islamic boarding schools and one of the answers to the
problems in this leadership. In line with that, Mujamil Qomar also said that leadership
changes could provide a theoretical and philosophical framework for education
relevant to the nation's needs in the future (Qomar, 2022).
Thus, the form of transformation of the leadership of the Gontor Islamic boarding
school in response to the challenges of the globalization era is carrying out collegial
collective leadership so that management, management of the boarding school,
learning and administration, cadre training, human resources and other infrastructure
facilities also experience changes and updates with various innovations created by the
leadership of the Islamic boarding school Gontor whose leadership implications can
have a positive impact on students and Islamic boarding schools, society and nations,
especially in responding to problems in the era of globalization.
In this case, the leader of the Gontor Islamic boarding school remains consistent and
consistent in carrying out its role as a centre for deepening religious knowledge and an
Islamic da'wah institution and participates in educating the nation's generation, all of
which, of course, will not be separated from Islamic values and teachings, as
rahmatan lil alamin. Thus, it is hoped that leaders will perform their roles (Sururi &
Dacholfany, 2019).
Thus, the leadership of the new Gontor Islamic boarding school tries in totality to
produce graduates as a relay of its leadership because the boarding school is a centre
for seeding, experience, and at the same time spreading Islamic knowledge, which in
turn is also the leader of the ummah and even the Indonesian nation while maintaining
the values, motto, Islamic boarding school principles and traditions that are already
good and noble with great care and selectiveness so that they are not contaminated by
the directionless currents of globalization and modernization while remaining open to
taking positive values and maintaining what is already good and continues to develop.
It is a continuity of processes and dynamics that have existed before and will
experience changes. Likewise, what will happen to the education system in boarding
school will continue to change and develop according to the times because Islamic
boarding schools must have advantages both from the aspect of scientific tradition as
well as the transmission and intensity of Muslims (Dhofier, 2011);(Kirana, 2017).




                                                     DOI: https://doi.org/10.35723/ajie.v8i1.339

9   Al-Hayat: Journal of Islamic Education (AJIE)
    e-ISSN: 2599-3046 (online) | Volume 8, Issue 1 | January - March 2024
    p-ISSN: 2657-1781 (print)

     Management of Change Management of the Gontor Islamic Boarding School
     From the point of view of institutional management in Islamic boarding schools, there
     has been a fundamental change, namely from centralized, hierarchical leadership,
     which tends to be a single fighter, changing to a collective management model such as
     the Foundation model as applied to the Gontor Islamic boarding school, because in the
     Philosophy and Institutional Motto that the Islamic boarding school belongs to the
     people, not belong to the kiai.
     At the Gontor Islamic boarding school, the education and teaching process is carried
     out 24 hours in the boarding school. Religious and general subjects are taught in a
     balanced way for six years, and non-academic education, like extracurriculars,
     complements the activities of its students at certain times while implementing an
     integrative, comprehensive and independent education system (Olman & Nida’, 2015).
     Integrative means the integration between intra, extra and co-curricular in one unit so
     that they can consistently integrate the three centres of family, school and community
     education in one program so that the kiai, besides functioning as a central figure, also
     becomes a moral force for the santri and all boarding school residents (Syarifah,
     2016).
     The other institutions under the leadership of modern boarding school Darussalam
     Gontor include a secondary higher education institution with a study period of 6 or 4
     years at the Tsanawiyah and Aliyah level, named Kulliyatul Mu'allimin al-Islamiyah
     (KMI), a higher education institution called UNIDA who have educational levels from
     S1, S2 and even S3, santri care institutions that take care of the care of students,
     especially the extra-curricular field. This institution oversees three student
     organizations: Organisasi Pelajar Pondok Modern (OPPM), namely the KMI student
     organization. The Coordinator of the Cluster of Modern Boarding School Darussalam
     Gontor, namely the KMI student scouting organization, Dewan Mahasiswa (DEMA),
     namely the organization for UNIDA students than the Institute engaged in the field of
     raising funds, maintaining, expanding, and developing boarding school assets called
     Yayasan Pemeliharaan dan Perluasan Wakaf Pondok Modern (YPPWPM) and the
     Institution for uniting Gontor alums called Ikatan Keluarga Pondok Modern (IKPM).
     In addition to the five institutions above, the leadership of the Gontor Islamic boarding
     school also oversees and manages certain sections formed to expedite the education
     and teaching process at the Islamic boarding school so that they are given
     responsibility for managing their activities under the umbrella of the Organization (H.
     F. Zarkasyi, 2015b), from Islamic boarding school organizations, you will see orderly
     and well-planned management of leadership education, both for students, teachers and
     boarding school managers learning to lead, because Gontor Islamic boarding school
     has guiding principles to be ready to be shown and ready to be given the mandate to
     rule.
     These sections are the Community development division called Pusat Latihan
     Manajemen dan Pengembangan Masyarakat (PLMPM), the Section which handles
     buildings called modern boarding school Darussalam Gontor Development Section,
     the Section which holds business units owned by boarding school called Koperasi
     Pondok Pesantren (Kopontren) La Tansa, the division engaged in the field of health
     services for students and the community, namely Balai Kesehatan Santri dan
     Masyarakat (BKSM). With such a management structure, the kiai and family do not
     have material rights from the boarding school. The kiai and teachers must take care of



                                                                 DOI: https://doi.org/10.35723/ajie.v8i1.339

Model of Educational Leadership Management in Boarding Schools – Muhammad Ihsan Dacholfany, et al. 10




the money from the students. They always need to differentiate between the rich and
the poor students. Financial affairs are the responsibility of administrative office staff
consisting of several senior santri and teachers who can be replaced periodically.
Thus, setting the course of educational organizations becomes dynamic, open, and
objective.
Leadership Cadreization Management at Gontor Islamic Boarding School
Leadership education management in the form of cadres a la Gontor Islamic boarding
school has been well implemented since the last Trimurti, KH. Imam Zarkasyi, one of
the leaders of Islamic education in the 20th century, was very concerned about
managing the regeneration process or the leadership relay of Islamic boarding schools
to continue well so that it could benefit Islamic boarding schools and the people. In the
end, Gontor Islamic boarding school was recognized as experienced and had its own
method for managing leadership education so that it was able to produce its cadres in
various ways and tips. This was inseparable from his expertise and vision. The second
KH. Imam Zarkasyi, the leader of the Gontor Islamic boarding school as trimurti, has
educated his students or cadres in a management way, and his concept is based on
decades of experience, up to nearly a century. This experience resulted in several
methods called the Leader regeneration method. At least six Leadership Education
management methods are applied in the regeneration process of the students and their
best cadres, including briefing, training, assignment, habituation, control and role
modelling.
First, briefing. In developing the character of a leader, giving direction to students or
teachers who are alumni or currently serving at the central branch of Gontor Islamic
boarding school before carrying out various activities is very important. With the
briefing, an understanding will be given of all the activities of the Gontor Islamic
boarding school, which will be carried out and then evaluated afterwards to find out
the standards for implementing these activities, so in every move at the Gontor Islamic
boarding school, there are directions such as the opening of the new school year,
distribution of teacher schedules, introductory week khutbatul 'arsy, exam briefing,
and other activities. The briefing aims to provide an understanding so that you can
understand what to carry out the action, what the implementation technique is, why
and how to implement it, and what is the content and philosophy.
Second, training. Direction alone is not enough, and you must receive life training so
that you can be creative and skilled in behaving and responding to life, to have broad
insights, both scientific insights, thoughts, and experiences, such as training for
teachers, organizations at the dormitory level up to the group of students, courses or
art and sports clubs, up to the student level, still receive training. The training includes
leadership, sacrifice, patience, simplicity, and living together training. The dynamics
of the training shape and colour the mentality and character because the more skilled,
the higher the self-confidence. These things encourage people always to participate
wherever they are. However, more than direction and training are needed, and
prospective leaders must be given assignments because, with jobs, they will be
educated, controlled and motivated in carrying out activities and dealing with global
problems.
Third is an assignment. The process of assignment is strengthening and self-
development. Therefore, whoever gets many assignments or involves himself in
playing a role and functioning in various activities and tasks will be strong and skilled


                                                     DOI: https://doi.org/10.35723/ajie.v8i1.339

11   Al-Hayat: Journal of Islamic Education (AJIE)
     e-ISSN: 2599-3046 (online) | Volume 8, Issue 1 | January - March 2024
     p-ISSN: 2657-1781 (print)

     in solving multiple life problems. That way, he is known as a dynamic person because
     the life system has high dynamics and discipline and is filled with a soul or philosophy
     of life. In the Gontor Islamic boarding school dictionary, it is not applicable for people
     to be notified or notified, given assignments and given assignments. What applies is
     that whoever takes the initiative to find work or assignments, it is he who will benefit
     the most. Therefore, assignments are an honour and trust as well as prosperity. Getting
     assignments and being able to complete them means being honoured and trusted at the
     cottage boarding school.
     Fourth habituation is an essential element in mental and character development.
     Gontor Islamic boarding school education is habituation. Therefore, the whole system
     of life at Gontor Islamic boarding school often begins with a process of coercion, such
     as, for the most part, it is difficult to follow the discipline of the Islamic boarding
     school. At first, there is an element of compulsion, but eventually, you will get used to
     discipline.
     Fifth control, supervise all the tasks and activities of the students so that they always
     get guidance so that everything that has been programmed gets controlled, evaluated,
     and is immediately known. This escort is essential to educate and motivate the
     students and teachers; even the clerics are also educated. As the saying goes, "The
     teacher does not only teach his students, but he also teaches himself."
     Sixth, role model in education. This effort became very important in the success of
     education because the Prophet Muhammad and his companions succeeded in fostering
     the community by providing role models. Hence, the process of leadership
     regeneration carried out by the Gontor Islamic boarding school education is a process
     of role modelling that is consistently given by its founders, leaders, caregivers,
     teachers, even the administrators at this Gontor Islamic boarding school.
     The six methods mentioned in the bag are insufficient if other approaches do not
     follow them. According to the Gontor Islamic boarding school, there are three
     approaches: A humane approach and a physical approach by humanizing prospective
     leaders. Second, program approach: This task approach will make future leaders more
     skilled, aiming to gain experience and insight. Third, the idealism approach is the
     effort to provide the spirit, teachings, and philosophy behind the assignments at the
     Gontor Islamic boarding school.




                                                                  DOI: https://doi.org/10.35723/ajie.v8i1.339

Model of Educational Leadership Management in Boarding Schools – Muhammad Ihsan Dacholfany, et al. 12




         Figure 1. Regeneration management at the Gontor Boarding School
The success of the leading education management method of the Gontor Islamic
boarding school has brought its alums to move in various lines of society, such as the
late Dr. KH. Idham Cholid, who Was Deputy Prime Minister of Indonesia in the Ali
Sastroamidjojo II Cabinet and Djuanda Cabinet as well as Chair of the MPR and Chair
of the DPR. KH. Hasyim Muzadi (Former Chairman of PBNU), Dr. Abdurrahman
Mohammad Fachir (former Deputy Minister of Foreign Affairs of the Republic of
Indonesia), Kyai Abu Bakar Baasyir (head of the Ngruki Solo Islamic boarding
school), Prof. Dr. Din Syamsuddin (former chairman of PP Muhammadiyah and
MUI), Adnan Pandu Praja (former deputy chairman of the corruption eradication
commission), KH. Ahmad Cholil Ridwan (former chairman of the Islamic da'wah
council and leader of the Husnayain Islamic boarding school), KH. Sadeli Karim as
general chair of Mathla'ul Anwar, KH. Ahmad Satori Ismail as available chair of
IKADI, KH. Ahmad Mohammad Tidjani as leader of Al Amin Sumenep Islamic
boarding school, Muhammad Maftuh Basyuni as the minister of religion of the
republic of Indonesia, KH. Mahrus Amin as the leader of the Darunnajah Islamic
boarding school in Jakarta, Hasanain Juaini received the Ramon Magsaysay award as
the winner of the Asian version of the nobel, Dr. Usman Syihab was an educational
and cultural attaché in Egypt. KH. Syukron Ma'mun was head of the Darurrahman
Islamic boarding school, Prof. Nucholis Madjid was chancellor of paramadina
university, Jakarta, researcher at the economic and social research institute (LEKNAS-
LIPI) and senior researcher at the Indonesian institute of sciences (LIPI), Jakarta,
member of the MPR-RI and Dr. Hidayat Nur Wahid, once chairman of the MPR and
now deputy chairman of the MPR, Prof. Amin Abdullah has served as Chair of the
Muhammadiyah tarjih council, executive board of the consultative committee,
Indonesian conference on religion and peace and board member of the journal
accreditation board who is also chancellor of UIN Sunan Kalijaga for two terms.
Muhammad Ainun Nadjib knows that Cak Nun was once the cultural editor of today's
daily culture and led the Dynasty Theatre, Yogyakarta and had served as secretary of
the Yogyakarta arts council, playwright, short story writer, and finally received the
Cultural Satyalancana Award from the President of the Republic of Indonesia, there
was Lukman Hakim Saifudin who had been deputy chairman MPR and the former


                                                     DOI: https://doi.org/10.35723/ajie.v8i1.339

13   Al-Hayat: Journal of Islamic Education (AJIE)
     e-ISSN: 2599-3046 (online) | Volume 8, Issue 1 | January - March 2024
     p-ISSN: 2657-1781 (print)

     Minister of Religion of the Republic of Indonesia, Prof. Dr. KH. Prof. Husnan Bey
     Fananie as Indonesian ambassador to the Republic of Indonesia ambassador to the
     Republic of Azerbaijan, Mohammad Kalend Osen as the pioneer of the English village
     in Pare Kediri District, Prof. Dr. Hamid Fahmy Zarkasyi as chairman of the young
     intellectual and ulama council (MIUMI) and recently appointed chancellor of UNIDA
     Gontor, and recently Hasbi Hasan as Secretary of the Indonesian Supreme Court, Prof.
     Bambang Suryadi, PhD as education and culture attache in Egypt, and many others to
     mention one by one.
     Guidance and formation of cadres of leaders at the Gontor Islamic boarding school are
     implemented through academic and non-academic pathways. Academically, the cadres
     must study at tertiary institutions at home and abroad, starting from undergraduate,
     master, and doctoral levels. Some are assigned to participate in training activities such
     as da'wah, management, entrepreneurship and others. After the completion of their
     academic program, there is an obligation to carry out community service at the Gontor
     Islamic boarding school by the written agreement agreed upon before departure to
     their respective study/training places, as for coaching and forming cadres leaders with
     non-academic pathways, implemented through assigned mandates such as being a
     deputy caretaker, deputy director or senior teacher at a branch Islamic boarding school
     or being entrusted with being in charge of every activity at the Gontor Islamic
     boarding school.
     It is natural that the Gontor Islamic boarding school is an institution to regenerate
     community leaders. For this reason, an ideal place to practice life has been formed for
     prospective community leaders by encapsulating various approaches. Humane
     approach, including tasks and idealism, thus enabling cadres to be born (created) and
     develop mindsets, attitudes and behaviours as leaders (A. S. Zarkasyi, 2005a). As the
     womb gives birth to cadres of community leaders, leadership education standards at
     boarding school Gontor are made with specific qualifications; the regeneration process
     developed also has precise dimensions. There are several qualifications (parameters)
     in leadership cadre formation, namely: Sincerity, always taking the initiative, being
     able to create networks and take advantage of them, trustworthiness, working hard and
     earnestly, mastering problems and being able to solve them, having high integrity,
     have high courage and are not afraid risk, honest and open, ready to sacrifice, firm and
     intelligent (in seeing, hearing, assessing, evaluating, deciding and solving every
     problem), able to communicate and muamalah well. Thus, the Gontor Islamic
     boarding school as an Islamic educational institution has succeeded in producing
     cadres of community leaders, being a place of worship and a source of religious and
     general knowledge, while still having the spirit of a boarding school even though they
     have become alumni.
     Gontor Islamic boarding has tried to prepare a generation of superior and quality
     leaders towards the formation of khaira ummah by educating and developing
     generations of believers, Muslims, virtuous, healthy-bodied, knowledgeable, free-
     thinking and respectful to the community by teaching religious and general knowledge
     in a balanced manner. (equally, each in a portion of 100%), towards the birth of
     'Ulama, who are intellectual and prepared citizens who believe and fear Allah SWT.
     To form a cadre of leaders at the Gontor Islamic boarding school, the kiai not only
     manages, teaches and leads partially but educates life as a whole and involves himself
     armed with faith, knowledge, charity, morals, communication/interaction and a strong



                                                                  DOI: https://doi.org/10.35723/ajie.v8i1.339

Model of Educational Leadership Management in Boarding Schools – Muhammad Ihsan Dacholfany, et al. 14




mentality, so that a born leader who must master the problem, always takes much
initiative, does not wait to be ordered, can create jobs and not look for work.
The Gontor Islamic boarding school has produced many leaders from regional,
national, and even international levels because it has the motto "ready to be led and
ready to lead". Taught several essential points KH. Imam Zarkasyi and the Gontor
Islamic boarding school founders are as follows: leadership skills based on theory
alone without including the soul and philosophy of life will mean little. The leadership
model obtained from academics alone will become passive. It differs from the
leadership model based on experience and direct leadership experience. Student or
teachers who as potential leaders must have a soul to fight and make sacrifices at the
Gontor Islamic boarding school, so educating students or cadres with several
assignments, empowered and mobilized with various kinds of tasks and activities is a
way to educate well. For example, when there are visits by the President, Ministers,
and officials from within and outside the country to the Gontor Islamic boarding
school, the students, teachers and caregivers must gather. They also welcome guests as
part of security, for example, marching band troops, receptionists, or decoration
department who prepare the background in the meeting hall or the field. In this event,
students or teachers as leaders' cadres contributed and worked to make the Gontor
Islamic boarding school event successful. The reception procedure like this is not only
to honour the arrival of guests but, more than that, to educate. The aim is to inform the
target how to welcome guests properly. This education is for students, considering that
many things are empowered, starting from students, teachers, and leaders. This is the
Gontor Islamic boarding school's style and how to produce future leaders.
Candidate leaders as cadres of the people have been trained to lead and live in an
organizational environment at the Gontor Islamic boarding school. Management
reform in an organization is carried out routinely every year. With management
regeneration and regeneration, the organization will experience changes in
management regeneration or organizational systems and values. The management
regeneration of an organization is a form of resurrection. In carrying out renewal in an
organization or committee, guarding against these cadres' militancy and work ethic is
necessary. Likewise, being given the task of being a teacher, caretaker at the Gontor
branch of Islamic boarding schools up to Student Organizations (OPPM), Scouting,
extra-curricular activity administrators, consulate (regional) administrators to
room/area administrators as mandates and responsibilities, this is done to fostering
cadres of people who will later become leaders both in Islamic boarding schools or in
society in the future.
In this case, not all boarding school kiai respond positively to this solution. They are
more able to reveal the weaknesses that may arise than the strengths. The existence of
foundations is understood as an attempt to shake the Kiai's leadership. The presence of
a foundation wants to ease the academic and moral burden. The tendency to form
foundations only appealed to modern Islamic boarding schools, which had yet to
succeed in attracting traditional Islamic boarding schools. Traditional boarding school
kiai tend to be more authoritarian than modern boarding school kiai.
Cadreization of Leadership Values at the Gontor Islamic Boarding School
Many Islamic boarding schools are consolidating institutional organizations,
especially in leadership and management. Traditionally, the leadership of the boarding
school is held by one or two kiai, who are usually the founders of the boarding school


                                                     DOI: https://doi.org/10.35723/ajie.v8i1.339

15   Al-Hayat: Journal of Islamic Education (AJIE)
     e-ISSN: 2599-3046 (online) | Volume 8, Issue 1 | January - March 2024
     p-ISSN: 2657-1781 (print)

     concerned. However, more than a single kiai leadership is required due to the
     diversification of education provided. Many boarding school then develop institutional
     foundations, which are collective leadership. The foundation's consequence and
     institutionalization were that the kiai's authority changed from absolute to no longer
     absolute but collective and handled together according to the division of tasks for each
     individual, even though the role of the kiai was still dominant. Provisions concerning
     educational policies are the consensus of all parties. Foundations have a significant
     role in the division of tasks related to the continuity of Islamic boarding school
     education. Changes in individual leadership towards collective leadership will
     significantly affect the relationship between boarding school and society. Originally,
     the relationship was initially patron-client in nature. A kiai with great charisma
     interacted with the broader community who respected him. Now, that kind of
     relationship is dwindling. Instead, what is developing is the institutional relationship
     between the boarding school and the district.
     Several models of informal and non-formal education management have been
     experienced by researchers as students, which are the strengths and characteristics of
     Islamic boarding schools, especially at the Gontor Islamic boarding school. The first is
     Ibrah education, which means taking lessons from an event. Ibrah is a psychic
     condition that brings humans to know the essence of an event that is witnessed,
     considered, concluded, weighed, measured and decided rationally so that the
     conclusions can influence the heart to submit to it and then encourage it to behave
     accordingly.
     The second is Habituation Education, as Islamic teachings are a religion that
     establishes togetherness in social life and therefore includes ritual worship and
     amaliyah worship which requires togetherness. Establishing this togetherness requires
     habituation (H. F. Zarkasyi, 2015a). The third is Mauidzah education. Mauidzah,
     according to Rashid Ridla, is: "a reminder of goodness and truth in what way can
     touch the heart and awaken it to practice." (Ridha, 1950).
     The fourth is Discipline Education. The intention is to maintain consistency or
     istiqamah attitude in carrying out religious teachings in sharia amaliyah and
     regulations created by clerics in Islamic boarding schools. In this education, of course,
     there are written and unwritten rules, which all the residents know of the boarding
     school, and punishments or sanctions for those who violate them. To make the
     discipline work effectively, the kiai generally authorizes the senior santri, or the
     nurturing division of the santri, to control the implementation of this discipline.
     Therefore, the kai will resolve all problems caused by this discipline (H. F. Zarkasyi,
     2015a).
     The fifth, independence education, is an essential characteristic that must be inherent
     in the Islamic boarding school education system, and an independent spirit means the
     ability and ability to help oneself. This spirit is a powerful weapon provided by
     Islamic boarding schools, Entrepreneurship to all teachers and students so that they are
     accustomed to, trained and educated (Daniar & Zarkasyi, 2019). Thus, educational
     leadership management in Islamic boarding schools will make students, teachers and
     cottage leaders live independently, such as managing kitchens, canteens, animal
     husbandry, retail, culinary and others.
     The sixth, the most important, is Exemplary Education in Islamic boarding schools
     because it is a unit integrated with the system. Islamic boarding schools, led by kiai,


                                                                  DOI: https://doi.org/10.35723/ajie.v8i1.339

   Model of Educational Leadership Management in Boarding Schools – Muhammad Ihsan Dacholfany, et al. 16




   must have role models for students, teachers, and the community. Thus, Islamic
   boarding schools are expected to be able to foster and produce Islamic human
   resources to produce quality alums who have knowledge, skills and technology
   insights and have the provision of piety and faith so that they can master, develop and
   apply while still being based on religious, moral and ethical values. Noble character
   by the norms of religious and government regulations (Dacholfany, 2017a).


IV. CONCLUSION
  The leadership of Islamic boarding schools is the right of the founders of Islamic
  boarding schools, whether they are held individually or collectively, either structurally
  or culturally and even bureaucratically. However, it is necessary to understand that the
  consequences and institutionalization of Islamic boarding schools are matters relating
  to educational policies and regulations, which are the consensus of all parties. If you
  want to survive, it must prepare the relay of Islamic boarding school leadership while
  still influencing the relationship between the Islamic boarding school and the
  government and society. Thus, the Islamic boarding school leadership should have
  plans and programs regarding the importance of the sustainability of Islamic boarding
  schools. Thus, Islamic boarding schools, as Islamic educational institutions, are
  expected to be agents of change in the current atmosphere of globalization and are
  expected to play their role dynamically and proactively. The existence of Islamic
  boarding school leaders is expected to be a reformer and innovator and make a
  meaningful contribution to the changes and improvements of Islamic boarding schools
  and Muslims, both at the theoretical and practical intellectual level, by maintaining
  and maintaining things that are still good and making or taking new things good and
  right.


V. REFERENCES
  [1] Arroisi, J. (2012). Integrasi Aqidah Syari’ah Dalam Dunia Pendidikan Membaca
      Potret Pengalaman Pondok Modern Darussalam Gontor. Jurnal At-Ta’dib, 7(2),
      321–338. http://dx.doi.org/10.21111/at-tadib.v7i2.78
  [2] Azra, A. (2019). Pendidikan Islam: Tradisi dan Modernisasi di Tengah
      Tantangan Milenium III. Prenada Media.
  [3] Burde, D., Middleton, J. A., & Wahl, R. (2015). Islamic Studies as Early
      Childhood Education in Countries Affected by Conflict: The Role of Mosque
      Schools in Remote Afghan Villages. International Journal of Educational
      Development, 41(March), 70–79. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ijedudev.2014.10.005
  [4] Creswell, J. W., & Poth, C. N. (2016). Qualitative Inquiry and Research Design:
      Choosing Among five Approaches. Sage publications.
  [5] D’Aiglepieree, R., & Bauer, A. (2018). The Choice of Arab-Islamic Education in
      Sub-Saharan Africa: Findings from a Comparative Study. International Journal of
      Educational             Development,           62(September),           47–61.
      https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ijedudev.2018.01.004


                                                        DOI: https://doi.org/10.35723/ajie.v8i1.339

17   Al-Hayat: Journal of Islamic Education (AJIE)
     e-ISSN: 2599-3046 (online) | Volume 8, Issue 1 | January - March 2024
     p-ISSN: 2657-1781 (print)

     [6] Dacholfany, M. I. (2015). Reformasi Pendidikan Islam Dalam Menghadapi Era
         Globalisasi: Sebuah Tantangan dan Harapan. Jurnal Akademika, 20(1), 179.
     [7] Dacholfany, M. I. (2017a). Inisiasi Strategi Manajemen Lembaga Pendidikan
         Islam Dalam Meningkatkan Mutu Sumber Daya Manusia Islami Di Indonesia
         Dalam Menghadapi Era Globalisasi. Jurnal At-Tajdid, 1(1), 1–13.
         http://dx.doi.org/10.24127/att.v1i01.330
     [8] Dacholfany, M. I. (2017b). Peran Kepemimpinan Perguruan Tinggi Islam Dalam
         Pembangunan Peradaban Islami. Nizam : Jurnal Studi Keislaman, 1(2), 148–164.
         https://doi.org/https://e-
         journal.metrouniv.ac.id/index.php/nizham/article/view/851
     [9] Daniar, S. I., & Zarkasyi, A. F. (2019). Social enterprise in the context of
         educational institution: Lessons from Gontor, Indonesia. Journal Opción, 35(19),
         2244–2258.
     [10] Dhofier, Z. (2011). Tradisi Pesantren: Studi Pandangan Hidup Kyai dan Visinya
          Mengenai Masa Depan Indonesia. LP3ES.
     [11] Fathurahman, O. (2012). The Roots of the Writing Tradition of Hadīth Works in
          Nusantara: Hidāyāt al-Habīb by Nūr al-Dīn al-Rānīrī. Studia Islamika, 19(1), 47.
          https://doi.org/10.15408/sdi.v19i1.369
     [12] Fauzi. (2019). Concept of Patah Titi: The Problem of Inheritance and Its Solution
          in       Aceh        Tengah.       Studia     Islamika,       26(1),      33–73.
          https://doi.org/10.15408/sdi.v26i1.6529
     [13] Hastasari, C., Setiawan, B., & Aw, S. (2022). Students’ Communication Patterns
          of Islamic Boarding Schools: the Case of Students in Muallimin Muhammadiyah
          Yogyakarta. Heliyon, 8(1), e08824. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.heliyon.2022.e08824
     [14] Ikhwan, A. (2016). Leadership in Islamic Education; Study of Thematic Al-
          Qur’an and Al-Hadist. Ulul Albab: Jurnal Studi Islam, 17(1), 3.
          https://doi.org/10.18860/ua.v17i1.3253
     [15] Ikhwan, A. (2021a). Metode Penelitian Dasar (Mengenal Model Penelitian dan
          Sistematikanya). STAI Muhammadiyah Tulungagung.
     [16] Ikhwan, A. (2021b). Pendidikan Agama Islam Berbasis Islam Kontemporer
          Perspektif Indonesia. CV. Tahta Media Group.
     [17] Kamal, S. S. L. A., & Ghani, F. A. (2014). Emotional intelligence and akhlak
          among Muslim adolescents in one of the Islamic schools in Johor, South
          Malaysia. Procedia - Social and Behavioral Sciences, 114, 687 – 692.
          https://doi.org/10.1016/j.sbspro.2013.12.768
     [18] Kirana, Z. C. (2017). Pandangan Azyumardi Azra Terhadap Modernisasi
          Pesantren. INOVATIF: Jurnal Penelitian Pendidikan, Agama, Dan Kebudayaan,
          3(1), 77–94.
     [19] Kurniawan, S. (2018). Sukarno’s Thought On The Importance Of Reintegration
          Of Religion And Science In Pesantren Education In Indonesia. Journal of
          Indonesian Islam, 12(2), 219–246. https://doi.org/10.15642/JIIS.2018.12.2.219-
          246
     [20] Kusdiana, A., & Lubis, N. H. (2014). The Pesantren Networking in Priangan


                                                                  DOI: https://doi.org/10.35723/ajie.v8i1.339

Model of Educational Leadership Management in Boarding Schools – Muhammad Ihsan Dacholfany, et al. 18




    (1800-1945). International Journal                of    Nusantara       Islam,    1(2),    123.
    https://doi.org/10.15575/ijni.v1i2.30
[21] Marini, M., Iman, N., & Syam, A. R. (2023). Influence Principal’s Leadership
     Style on Discipline Level of Madrasah Ibtidaiyah Darul Fikri. JIE (Journal of
     Islamic Education), 8(2), 110–123.
[22] Masqon, D. (2011). Dynamic of Pondok Pesantren as Indegenous Islamic
     Education Centre In Indonesia. Jurnal Tsaqafah-Gontor, 7(1), 156.
     https://ejournal.unida.gontor.ac.id/index.php/tsaqafah/article/view/114
[23] Muhith, A., & El-Rumi, U. (2020). Islam Realitas: Journal of Islamic and Social
     Studies. Islam Realitas: Journal of Islamic and Social Studies, 6(2), 119–136.
     https://doi.org/10.30983/islam_realitas.v6i2.3484
[24] Ni’am, S. (2015). Pesantren: The Miniature Of Moderate Islam In Indonesia.
     Indonesian Journal of Islam and Muslim Societies, 5(1), 111–134.
     https://doi.org/10.18326/ijims.v5i1.111-134
[25] Nurtawab, E. (2019). The Decline of Traditional Learning Methods in Changing
     Indonesia: Trends of Bandongan-Kitāb Readings in Pesantrens. Journal Studia
     Islamika, 26(3), 511–541. https://doi.org/10.36712/sdi.v26i3.11026
[26] Olman, D., & Nida’, F. (2015). Pesantren-Pesantren Berpengaruh di Indonesia.
     Penerbit Erlangga.
[27] Qomar, M. (2022). Wacana Islam inklusif dimensi-dimensi studi Islam
     kontemporer. IRCiSoD.
[28] Ridha, M. R. (1950). Tafsir al-Manar, Jilid II. Maktabah al-Qahirah.
[29] Rissanen, I. (2012). Teaching Islamic Education in Finnish Schools: A Field of
     Negotiations. Teaching and Teacher Education, 28(5), 740–749.
     https://doi.org/10.1016/j.tate.2012.02.001
[30] Saada, N. (2020). Perceptions of Democracy Among Islamic Education Teachers
     in Israeli Arab High Schools. The Journal of Social Studies Research, 44(3), 271–
     280. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jssr.2020.05.003
[31] Sagala, S. (2015). Manajemen Dan Kepemimpinan Pendidikan Pondok Pesantren.
     Jurnal Tarbiyah, 22(2), 216. http://dx.doi.org/10.30829/tar.v22i2.37
[32] Sahal, H. A. (2020a). Pimpinan pondok Pesantren Gontor. Rabu. 4 Rabi’ul
     Awwal 1442/21 Oktober 2020 pukul 15.50 WIB
[33] Sahal, H. A. (2020b). Sambutan Pimpinan Pondok Pesantren Gontor, tentang
     pengangkatan Pimpinan Pondok berdasarkan Keputusan Sidang Luar Biasa
     Badan Wakaf Pondok Gontor. Sabtu 7 Rabiul Awal 1442 H / 24 Oktober 2020
[34] Siahaan, D., Iswati, S., & Zarkasyi, A. F. (2019). Social Enterprise: The
     Alternatives Financial Support For Educational Institusion. International Journal
     of Economics and Financial Issues, 9(3), 1–11. https://doi.org/10.32479/ijefi.7626
[35] Sila, M. A. (2019). Book Review: Kiai dan Blater: Antara Kesalehan dan
     Kekerasan dalam Dinamika Politik Lokal di Madura. Studia Islamika, 26(1), 185–
     200. https://doi.org/10.15408/sdi.v26i1.11121
[36] Sugandini, D., Feriyanto, N., Yuliansyah, Sukwadi, R., & Muafi. (2018). Web


                                                     DOI: https://doi.org/10.35723/ajie.v8i1.339

19   Al-Hayat: Journal of Islamic Education (AJIE)
     e-ISSN: 2599-3046 (online) | Volume 8, Issue 1 | January - March 2024
     p-ISSN: 2657-1781 (print)

           Quality, Satisfaction, Trust And Its Effects On Government Website Loyalty.
           International      Journal    for     Quality   Research,   12(4),    895.
           https://doi.org/10.18421/IJQR12.04-07
     [37] Sururi, M., & Dacholfany, M. I. (2019). Implementation Of Total Quality
          Management In Cheap Packages Education Program in Community Learning
          Activity Center (PKBM) Maju Jaya Mesuji district lampung Indonesia.
          International      Journal     on      Integrated Education, 2(V), 1–9.
          https://doi.org/10.31149/ijie.v2i5.135
     [38] Syam, A. R., Supriyanto, A., & Mustiningsih, M. (2020). Democratic Leadership
          and Decisions Making on Education in Islamic Perspective. Cendekia: Jurnal
          Kependidikan Dan Kemasyarakatan, 1(1), 33–47.
     [39] Syam, A. R., Wiyono, B. B., Imron, A., & others. (2023). Leadership behaviour of
          a boarding school in Indonesia. Pegem Journal of Education and Instruction,
          13(1), 100–108.
     [40] Syarifah. (2016). Manajemen Kurikulum Kulliyatul Mu’allimin Al-Islamiyyah di
          Pondok Modern Darussalam Gontor. At-Ta’dib: Journal of Pesantren Education,
          11(1), 53–72. http://dx.doi.org/10.21111/at-tadib.v11i1.624
     [41] Zarkasyi, A. S. (2011). Profil Insititut Studi Islam Darussalam. Darussalam
          University Press.
     [42] Zarkasyi, H. F. (2015a). Educational System And Islamic Studies At Pesantren In
          The Context Of Dynamic On International Islamic Studies. Edukasi: Jurnal
          Penelitian Pendidikan Agama Dan Keagamaan, 13(3), 335–348.
          https://doi.org/10.32729/edukasi.v13i3.245
     [43] Zarkasyi, H. F. (2015b). Modern Pondok Pesantren: Maintaining Tradition in
          Modern System. Jurnal Tsaqafah-Gontor, 11(2), 223–248.




                                                                  DOI: https://doi.org/10.35723/ajie.v8i1.339