Model of School Management
                        Based on Islamic Education


                  Iyus Herdiana Saputra 1, Tri Ermayani 2, Edi Sunjayanto Masykuri3
{iyussukomanah21@gmail.com 1, ermayanitri3939@gmail.com 2, esunnjayanto@gmail.com 3}


        Mathematics Education Study Program, Universitas Muhammadiyah Purworejo 1
    Indonesian Language Education Study Program, Universitas Muhammadiyah Purworejo 2
      English Language Education Study Program, Universitas Muhammadiyah Purworejo 3



       Abstract. This research is revieweing the school management based on islamic
       education. It aims to obtain an overview of the implementation of Islamic boarding
       school education and a model for the development of education management at the Darul
       Hikmah Kutoarjo Islamic boarding school. This research problem will focus on how to
       plan, organize, coordinate, and control Islamic boarding schools. To answer the research
       problem, this type of qualitative research is used with a descriptive-analysis approach.
       The results of this study indicate that: a) The Darul Hikmah Islamic Boarding School
       Education Model is a pesantren education under the auspices of the Darul Hikmah
       Kutoarjo Foundation. The education pattern of Darul Hikmah Islamic boarding school is
       a boarding-based modern Islamic boarding school education pattern. In developing the
       management of the Darul Hikmah Islamic Boarding School, it uses the Target Based
       Management (MBS) or Management by Objective (MBO) model. The target to be
       achieved is to focus on education; c) To achieve this education, the management steps
       taken are: a) Planning. The planning model developed by the Darul Hikmah Islamic
       Boarding School is a strategic planning model consisting of planning, programming, and
       budgeting systems; b) Organizing. Organizing is carried out under a decentralized system
       in the division of powers and tasks and their development; 3) Coordination. Coordination
       is carried out in an effort to unify a series of activities in the organization of pesantren in
       order to increase cooperation and togetherness among organizational officials as much as
       possible; 4) Supervision. Supervision includes monitoring, supervision, evaluation,
       reporting, and follow-up of assessment results.

       Keywords: Education Development, Model, Management, Islamic Boarding School



1. INTRODUCTION

         This research discusses the development of pesantren education management in
relation to improving the quality of human resources (human resources). This is an actual
issue in the flow of contemporary pesantrenan conversation. [1], the word manage in the
dictionary is given the meaning: guiding and supervising, treating with care, taking care of
business or affairs, achieving certain business. [2], [3]. Meanwhile, in terminology, there are
several definitions of management, including those put forward by George R. Terry,




42 | Volume 7. No 2 November 2020

management is a process or framework that involves guiding or directing a group of people
towards organizational goals or real goals. Management in education is absolutely necessary
because it is the most important variable for managing an educational institution. Good
management will make a difference in the quality of the school and the quality of its students.
Then the main aspect of management as expressed by Everard and Morris is setting direction,
goals, and objectives. A clear orientation of ideas is central to theoretical approaches in
educational management. [4], [5], [6]. This is in line with Nanang Fatah's opinion in the basis
of education management that provides limitations on the term management, namely,
management is the process of planning, organizing, leading, and controlling organizational
efforts in all its aspects so that organizational goals are achieved effectively and efficiently.
[7], [8].
          To improve the quality of pesantren management, it is necessary to have a
modernization process for Islamic boarding schools. The purpose of the modernization
process of Islamic boarding schools in an effort to improve the existing Islamic education
system in the pesantren. This needs to be done in order to achieve organizational goals
according to its vision and mission. To develop boarding school management, the
management functions must be carried out properly. These management functions consist of
planning (planning), organizing, actuating, coordinating, and controlling. The five functions
can represent a management function for managerial activists who will combine the use of
human and material resources through collaboration to achieve goals. Another opinion
suggests that it is enough with four management functions, as stated by Terry: These four
fundamental functions of management are 1). Planning, 2) Organizing, 3) Actuating, 4)
controlling. [9]
          Recently, Islamic boarding schools have had new trends in the framework of
renovating the system that has been in use so far. The changes that can be seen in modern
pesantren include getting familiar with modern scientific methodology, being more open to
developments outside of itself, diversifying programs and activities at the pesantren being
more open and broad, and being able to function as a center for community development. As a
religion-based institution, pesantren was originally a center for the training of Islamic
religious broadcasting values. By providing a religion-based curriculum, the pesantren is
expected to be able to produce alumni who will be able to become strong religious figures
who are able to play a physical role in society in general [10]. Ki Hajar Dewantoro as a
national education figure and at the same time as the first Indonesian Minister of Education,
Teaching and Culture, argues that Islamic boarding schools are the basis and source of
national education because they are in line with the spirit and personality of the Indonesian
nation. The government also recognizes that pesantren and madrasah are the basis and source
of national education; therefore, it must be developed, given guidance, and assistance. The
authority of this guidance and development is under the authority of the Ministry of Religion
[11], [12].
          Law number 20 of 2003 concerning the national education system states that the
community is one of the parties responsible for education development. The community as
one of the stakeholders is expected to be able to provide solutions to various educational
problems that occur in our country. Education becomes something interesting to talk about.
Education in Islam is a series of human empowerment processes towards taklif (maturity),
both intellectually, mentally, and morally, to carry out the human function that is carried out
as a servant before his Khaliq and as a preserver (caliph) of the universe [13]. The prospect of
a pesantren in the future does not depend on other parties, but more on the pesantren itself.
The existence of pesantren in the midst of other education has a positive impact if the morality




43 | Volume 7. No 2 November 2020

of Indonesian society is felt to be getting better. It's just that, the role of pesantren is currently
more complex and community demands for the role of pesantren are increasing. In the midst
of complaints about the low quality of education in the country, pesantren are required to take
part in it. The community demands that Islamic boarding schools take part in community
empowerment, both in the economic and other fields. Pesantren are also demanded their
traditional role to produce ulama who can protect them in the midst of the global society.
          Malik Fajar said that, if you want to look at the future of Islamic education in
Indonesia which is able to play a strategic role for the advancement of the ummah and nation,
there needs to be open insight and courage in solving these basic things, among others, (1)
clarity between aspirations and operational steps, (2) strengthening in the field of institutional
systems, (3 improvements or renewal of management or management [14]. The above
phenomena should be a reference for Darul Hikmah Islamic boarding school education to
continue to make improvements or continuous quality improvement, considering that Darul
Hikmah Islamic Boarding School is one of the Islamic boarding schools in Purworejo
Regency which is managed with a sustainable concept (SMP and SMA), students are
boarding, using an integrated curriculum (national curriculum & boarding curriculum), using
an innovative, exploratory, creative, applicative and communicative approach in the
educational process and prioritizing the process in every educational activity. In addition,
Darul Hikmah Islamic boarding school has a strategic geographical location, namely in
Kutoarjo, where access to transportation is very easy to reach. In addition, Darul Hikmah
Islamic boarding school, which is located on the edge of the city, is very close to access to
various educational institutions, both formal and informal, as well as access to information
technology infrastructure, which is likely to play a major role in the acceleration of social
change.
          Darul Hikmah Islamic Boarding School is an educational institution that applies the
management pattern of modern Islamic boarding schools, where the pesantren is under the
auspices of the Ministry of Religion (Depag) while the formal education institutions are under
the auspices of the Ministry of National Education (Diknas), namely Darul Hikmah Middle
and High School. In this case, the competition for the quality of education, especially in the
Purworejo district, is increasing. Government policies with international standard school
programs (SBI) have increasingly spurred institutions education to improve the quality of
management or management is not left behind by pesantren education institutions.
          From here the researcher intends to carry out a study related to how the management
of Darul Hikmah Kutoarjo Islamic boarding school in Central Java Indonesia.


2. METHOD

          In a study, the method is an element that plays an important role, because the method
can provide directions on how to conduct research so that it can be justified. This type of
research can be categorized as field research, namely research in which data collection is
carried out in the field, such as in the community, community institutions and organizations,
government or can be interpreted as research by going directly to the place of research to
observe and be directly involved with the object. his research. [15].
          This research is a type of qualitative research. In qualitative research, the reality of
life as a whole is a natural or natural setting that cannot be understood in isolation, because it
is not just a collection of parts. Because the behavior and words of the researcher have the
potential to influence the people being studied, this research is conducted in an actual context




44 | Volume 7. No 2 November 2020

in a reasonable manner so that a relatively complete and objective understanding can be
obtained. The main consideration in determining the subject of this research is the suitability
of the sources of information related to the research problem. Furthermore, the researcher
collects data. Data collection technique is a technique used to determine what data will be
collected, where the data is obtained, and how it is done [16]. Data collection techniques in
this study were carried out using in-depth interviews, participant observation, a study of
documents, and questionnaires (questionnaire). After the data is collected, the next stage is
data analysis.

3. RESULTS AND DISCUSSION

Pesantren as Islamic School
           The management is an attempt to treat people, make decisions and a process of
organizing and optimizing resources that is in an effort to complete the assigned tasks to
achieve a goal [17]. Management is a process which is a circular activity, starting from
planning, organizing, directing to monitoring then returning to planning and organizing and so
on and never stops [18]. businesses and activities carried out by adults in delivering lessons,
giving examples, training skills to do, motivating and creating an environment social support
in shaping the child's personality students or the process of preparing the younger generation
to fill roles, transferring Islamic knowledge and values which are harmonized with the human
function to do good in the world and pick the result is in the afterlife [19].
           Pesantren in Indonesia has its own characteristic, one of them is Darul Hikmah
Islamic Boarding School is a modern Islamic boarding school with the Darul Hikmah junior
high and high school education levels since the planning has made a commitment to provide
educational services that prioritize integration and balance in fostering affective, cognitive,
and psychomotor domains within the framework of Islamic teachings. The pioneering of this
educational institution was sponsored by a family who long previously sponsored the
establishment of the Al-Izhar Islamic College in Pondok Labu Jakarta, one of the favorite
private Islamic education institutions (TK SD SMA) in the capital, supported by a solid
program, complete infrastructure, experienced teaching staff and reliable management.
Reflecting on the implementation of Al-Izhar, Darul Hikmah is also expected to develop
rapidly following in the footsteps of his elder brother in making achievements.
           As an Islamic education institution, Islamic boarding schools are required to further
improve and develop the quality of management of pesantren education in order to produce
quality graduates (output). Then the management functions must be properly managed.
Among the aspects that constitute a management function that the author examined are:

1. Planning.
         The education planning model used by PPDH can be categorized using the PPBS
model, namely the planning, programming, and budgeting systems. The initial planning
carried out by Darul Hikmah Islamic boarding school begins with setting a vision, mission and
goals, Darul Hikmah Islamic boarding school has a vision: To become a boarding school that
produces graduates who are smart, tough, and have noble character. This vision is then




45 | Volume 7. No 2 November 2020

described in 3 missions, namely: 1) Organizing Islamic education based on Islamic boarding
schools 2) Forming a community that is skilled in learning, skilled in worship, and skilled in
living. 3) Making all facilities and their environment a learning resource. There are goals to be
achieved for:
1. Preparing students to become community leaders and community members who have strong
personalities, namely individuals who are physically and mentally healthy, mastering religious
and general knowledge
2. Preparing students to have the skills to live independently and attend further education
The next stage is the education program preparation stage, starting from the curriculum,
achievement strategies, and curriculum implementation strategies.

a. Curriculum
    1. The curriculum used is the national education curriculum that is enriched and
        integrated with the pesantren curriculum
    2. The curriculum is structured to achieve various competencies including character and
        personal stamina (Personality and Endurance), mastery of scientific communication
        tools (Scientific Communication Tool), academic ability (Academic Skill), and life
        skills (Life Skill)

b. Achievement Strategy
    1. The process of learning activities is directed towards the realization of a complete
        learning process (mastery learning)
    2. Limiting the number of study groups and the number of students
    3. Developing the concept of independent learning
    4. Organizing tutorial teaching models for certain subjects
    5. Prioritizing the process in the learning approach
    6. Providing capacity development services to students according to their talents and
        interests
    7. Using communicative and varied teaching methods and positioning students as
        subjects
    8. Organizing learning clinics for students because of weaknesses in certain subjects
    9. Organizing improvement and enrichment programs
    10. Using a variety of evaluation models and implementing them on an ongoing basis
    11. For language development, it is obligatory for students to use a foreign language
        (Arabic / English) in their daily communication

c. Curriculum Program Implementation Strategy
     To achieve the targets and objectives that have been set, a program implementation
strategy is formulated as follows:
     1. Add face-to-face hours for certain subjects
     2. Enrich and adapt curriculum content to the needs of society and developments in
          science and technology
     3. Providing real experiences to students in every learning process
     4. Fostering and increasing educational resources




46 | Volume 7. No 2 November 2020

    5.   Renew and complete educational facilities and infrastructure
    6.   Establish partnerships with other institutions/agencies for educational development

d. Excellence Education Program
    1. Mastery of material and practice of Islam
    2. Mastery of MAFIKIB subjects (Mathematics, Physics, Chemistry, Biology)
    3. Development of leadership skills and the ability to communicate and collaborate
    4. Cultivating a sense of responsibility, discipline, and independence
    5. Mastery of certain foreign languages, at least Arabic and English
    6. Mastery of research basics
    7. Learning skills and skills to find and use learning resources
    8. Development of writing skills (Journalism)
    9. The ability to absorb information and use it as a learning resource
    After making planning and programming the next step is to estimate the costs that will be
incurred during a certain period. The PPBS model, which means that planning, programming,
and budgeting are seen as an inseparable system from each other. The performance of an
educational institution is influenced by several factors. PPDH compiles a strategic plan by
giving more emphasis to 5 (five) factors, namely: Teachers, Students, Curriculum, Methods,
and Parents of students.

2. Organizing.
     Organizing in the Darul Hikmah Islamic boarding school uses a decentralized system
where each department, head of division, and coordinator has full rights to carry out its
functions and duties. PPDH is a modern Islamic boarding school where the organizing system
used by PPDH is a modern organization with modern management so that the goals of PPDH
are achieved according to the objectives, PPDH takes several steps, namely:
     1. Structural and functional approaches.
     2. Organizational culture.
     3. Human resource development (human resources).

3. Coordination.
The coordination carried out by PPDH is as follows:
     1. Build a great spirit of cooperation among education personnel. The director always
          briefs his subordinates on the importance of togetherness in cooperation
     2. PPDH management provides working facilities and contact relationships that are
          quite smooth for all parties in the organization
     3. Starting the stages of activity properly and maintaining the quality of work as a
          continuous process.
In this case, PPDH embodies the following coordination stages:
     1. A conference or complete meeting of all stakeholders is held 2 times a year, that is, at
          the end of every odd and even semester learning at PPDH
     2. Regular meetings for certain officials Memorandum or chain instructions.
     3. The availability of organizational manuals and work procedures




47 | Volume 7. No 2 November 2020

4. Supervision.
      Supervision of PPDH management includes monitoring, supervision, evaluation,
  reporting and follow-up of supervision results. There are several roles and objectives of
  supervision carried out by the management of pesantren darul hikmah, including:
     a) Assessing and making policies and decisions for the benefit of pesantren
         development
     b) Assessing the curriculum program, whether it is appropriate or not, relevant or not, is
         too complicated or not
     c) Assess professional performance of coaches or teachers, whether they already have
         good competence or not
     d) Monitor the use of funds, whether the funds used for various activities orderedtren
         has been used effectively or not.
     e) From the results of the supervision, management gets input to improve the pesantren
         program in the future.

           The purpose of supervision is that all students can follow the activities set by Pondok
      Pesantren Darulhikmah. Pesantren in conducting supervision involves all elements
      ranging from the leadership, the education section, the principal and the santri
      organization. In addition to the internal cottage, PPDH in conducting supervision
      involving santri guardians, the participation of santri guardians can foster their
      commitment to encourage the educational achievement of their children booked. With the
      participation of santri guardians in the decision-making process will reduce resistance in
      the implementation of pesantren programs. All of this is done in an effort to create
      harmonization between institutions and santri guardians. Surveillance system in PPDH is
      also done by using technology, so that information is easily obtained and data can be
      easily obtained by using the system. In this era of technology and information, all kinds of
      information can be easily accessed wherever you are. The participation of santri
      guardians, institutions and santrinya in using good information technology is always
      considered pesantren darul hikmah. This is done as an effort to supervise the institution of
      programs that have been neatly arranged, so as to give birth to graduates of character.
               From the results of observations and interviews with the board of pesantren, it
      can be identified some characteristics that give birth to good character for santri pesantren
      darul hikmah including: the existence of a close relationship between santri and Kiayinya.
      Kiayinya very attentive santrinya, life saving and simple is really manifested in
      lingkunagn pesantren, the students are trained with independence and responsibility, the
      soul help help between santri and discipline culture. To maintain this discipline pesantren
      darul hikmah provide educational sanctions.
        Four management functions carried out in Darul Hikmah boarding school, namely:
planning, organizing, coordinating, and supervision, can be carried out properly and measured
in accordance with the modern pesantren education system. The management model used by
PPDH is management based on Goals (MBS) or Management by Objektive (MBO). The goal
to be achieved is to focus on education by giving birth to graduates who are strong aqidahnya,
intellectually intelligent, skilled and broad insights. Pondok pesantren darul hikmah is a
dormitory-based boarding school or modern pesantren with modern management. One of its
characteristics is that its students are required to use Arabic and English. This is all done to
answer the challenges of the times, that the santri can preach and be accepted in all walks of
life, according to the advice kiayi on pesantren, he said, "if you want to master the science of




48 | Volume 7. No 2 November 2020

religion then master the Arabic language and if you want to rule the world then kuasalilah
english language."

4. CONCLUSION

          Research on the Education Management of Darul Hikmah Kutoarjo Islamic Boarding
School, Central Java has resulted in several conclusions about the management of pesantren
which emphasize 4 management functions, namely: Planning, Organizing, Coordinating, and
Monitoring [20]. Based on this research, it can be concluded that to face the increasingly rapid
development of science and technology [21], [22], [23], the pesantren must continue to make
changes in itself, especially in organizational and management issues. Pesantren in the future
must have an increasingly modern organization and management, supported by human
resources who have the ability or skills in terms of organization and management. As an
alternative to modern organizations, is an organization with a matrix organization typology, as
for modern management alternatives, is to use Strategic Planning, Organizing with a
decentralized system, coordination which emphasizes cooperation and togetherness and
control with an integrated type of quality control, which makes community or customer
satisfaction as a The main purpose.

5. REFERENCES

[1]      S. Mashud and M. Khusnurdillo, Shulthon Mashud dan Moh Khusnurdillo,
         Manajemen Pondok Pesantren, 2nd ed. Diva Pustaka, 2004.
[2]      Sukarna, Sukarna, Dasar‐dasar Manajemen,. Bandung: PT. Mandar Maju, 1992.
[3]      C. C and T. S, “Business intelligence systems,” SCI, pp. 43–73, 2018.
[4]      G. R, Terry, Dasar-dasar Manajemen. Jakarta: Bumi Aksara, 2000.
[5]      Balash Farhad, Young Zang, and Abu Bahrain, “Lecturers and ET: Factors affecting
         ET adoption in teaching,” in 2nd International Conference on Education and
         Management Technology IPCSIT, Singapore, 2011, vol. 13.
[6]      M. Campbell, C. Berg, and ..., “Parental Self-Control as a Moderator of the
         Association Between Family Conflict and Type 1 Diabetes Management,” Journal of
         pediatric …, no. Query date: 2020-12-25 14:59:42, 2019, [Online]. Available:
         https://academic.oup.com/jpepsy/article-abstract/44/8/999/5510190.
[7]      N. Fattah, Landasan manajemen Pendidikan. Bandung: Remaja Rasydakarya, 2004.
[8]      A. Faj, “Manajemen Pendidikan Pesantren Dalam Perspektif Dr. KH. Abdullah
         Syukri Zarkasyi, M.A,” At-Ta’dib, vol. 6, no. 2, 2011.
[9]      Syafaruddin, manajemen lembaga pendidikan Islm, 1st ed. Ciputat: Ciputat Press.
[10]     A. Haedar and et all, Masa Depan Pesantren: Dalam Tantangan Moderanitas dan
         Tantangan Komplesitas Global, 1st ed. Jakarta: IRD Press, 2004.
[11]     Departemen Agama RI, Sejarah Pendidikan Islam di Indonesia. Jakarta: Dirjen
         Binbaga, 1986.
[12]     J. D. Caputo, On Religion. London.. UK: Roudlege, 2001.
[13]     A. Tafsir, Ilmu Pendidikan Dalam Perspektif Islam. Bandung: Remaja Rosdarkarya,
         1994.
[14]     M. Fazar, Visi Pembaharuan Pendidikan Islam (Jakarta : Lembaga Pengembangan
         Pendidikan dan Penyususnan Naskah Indonesia (LP3NI), 1998), pages.33. Jakarta:
         Lembaga Pengembangan Pendidikan dan Penyususnan Naskah Indonesia (LP3NI,
         1998.




49 | Volume 7. No 2 November 2020

[15]    S. et all, Panduan Penulisan Skripsi. Yogyakarta: Jurusan Pendidikan Agama Islam
        Fakultas Ilmu Tarbiyah, 2004.
[16]     arikunto suharsimi, Prosedur Penelitian: suatu Pendekatan Praktik. Jakarta: PT.
        Rineka Cipta.
[17]    D. Ernest, Theory and Practice. Tokyo: Mc Graw Hill kogakhusa, Ltd, Tokyo, 1973.
[18]    C. William, William C. Giegold. Management by Objective. , New York: Mc.Graw
        Hill Book Company, 1978.
[19]    Z. Darajat, Ilmu Pendidikan Islam. Jakarta: Bumi Aksara Jakarta 2009, 2009.
[20]    H. Rahman, “Peran Organisasi Keagamaan Muhammadiyah dalam Modernisasi
        Ekonomi Masyarakat Islam di Kota Pekanbaru (TAHUN 2017),” JOM FISIP, vol. 4,
        no. 2, Oktober 2017.
[21]    E. Sunjayanto Masykuri and et all, “Integrated Technology And Mutual Participation
        For Changing Communities Socially, Economically And Religiously,” presented at
        the        ICSTI,      Indonesia,      Oct.      2018,     [Online].     Available:
        https://eudl.eu/doi/10.4108/eai.19-10-2018.2281307.
[22]    S. Alharabi and S. Drew, “Using the Technology Acceptance Model in understanding
        academics’ behavioural intention to use learning management systems,”
        International Journal of Advanced Computer Science and Applications, vol. 5, pp.
        143–155, 2014, doi: Alharbi, S. and Drew, S. (2014) Using the Technology
        Acceptance Model in understanding academics’ behavioural intention to use learning
        management systems. International Journal of Advanced Computer Science and
        Applications, 5, 143-155. http://dx.doi.org/10.14569/IJACSA.2014.050120.
[23]    J. M. O. Parapi, L. I. Maesaroh, Basuki, and E. S. Masykuri, “Virtual Education: A
        Brief Overview of Its Role in The Current Educational System,” Scripta The English
        Department Journal, vol. 7, no. 1, pp. 8–11, 2020.




50 | Volume 7. No 2 November 2020