https://repamjournal.org

                                                                                         E-ISSN: 2691-0667
                  Research in Educational Policy and Management
                                                                                         Volume: 4 Issue: 2 2022

                                                                                         pp. 18-36




  Revisioning Educational Leadership Through Love and the Ancillary:
                         A Critical Self-Study


                                               Derek Markides*


* Foothills School Division, Calgary,
                                                 ABSTRACT
Alberta, Canada
E-mail: derekmarkides@gmail.com                  Engaging in a bricolage of critical self-study allowed one school
                                                 administrator to better understand his roles, responsibilities,
Article Info                                     and formation of identity within the context of a school system
Received: May 31, 2022                           while envisioning the divergent possibilities of a yet-to-be-
Revised: July 21, 2022
                                                 known future through the lens of love. The primary intention
Accepted: August 13, 2022
                                                 of this paper is to discuss alternative possibilities for
      10.46303/repam.2022.5                      educational leadership considered through an ancillary vision
                                                 of walking alongside enacted through pedagogies of love.
How to cite                                      Pedagogies of love can be understood as more than the
Markides, D. (2022). Revisioning
                                                 embodiment of romantic notions of the word. Pedagogies of
Educational Leadership Through Love and
the Ancillary: A Critical Self-Study. Research   love enact relationality: blending care, commitment,
in Educational Policy and Management,            knowledge, responsibility, respect, and trust. Ever-evolving and
4(2), 18-36.                                     situational, these pedagogies are understood as tentative.
https://doi.org/10.46303/repam.2022.5            During the critical self-study process, personal affective
                                                 experiences were reflexively interrogated to draw out and
Copyright license
This is an Open Access article distributed       unpack themes regarding one lived teaching life. Personal
under the terms of the Creative Commons          positionings, over time, emerged as a crucial part of studying
Attribution 4.0 International license (CC BY     one’s self as a means to explicate previously misunderstood
4.0).                                            privileges. The criticality of this self-study can be found in the
                                                 ways that the relationships between power, authority,
Note
This article is based on the primary content     knowledge production, and contextual social relations are
of the Author’s thesis, “Learning and            illuminated and mediated.
Leading Through Love: A Critical Personal        KEYWORDS
History Self-Study of an Educator”, written      Self-study; pedagogies of love; ecological sensibilities; critical
for the Werklund School of Education,
                                                 study; relationality; educational leadership.
University of Calgary.

19


                                           INTRODUCTION
       To understand education, one must love it or care deeply about learning, and accept it
       as a legitimate process for growth and change. To accept education as it is, however, is
       to betray it. To accept education without betraying it, you must love it for those values
       that show what it might become. (Battiste, 2013, p. 190)
Education is political. Regardless of the intention, education inadvertently promotes the status
and standing of groups in power and with privilege. Education is the enactment of societal
understandings, beliefs, and values. However, while we may envision a possible future through
education, enacted education is always entangled within our lived affective history and
experience. The structures, curricula, and pedagogies of education come into being through the
enmeshed experiences of the past, present, and possible future. When enacted in a good way,
education may afford engaging, enlightening, and emancipatory possibilities—possibilities of
hope and love. I understand hope to be the unwavering ability to imagine an unknown future.
Hope may allow for the possibility of disrupting currently entrenched understandings and beliefs
and help us recognize that there may be other ways to view, interpret, or name the world.
Markides (2017) suggests, “in a Western worldview ‘hope’ becomes fragmented and
measurable—acceptable research” (p. 293), research that is bounded by a history of safe and
quantifiable commensurability. In this context, love becomes the enactment of relationality—a
responsibility and reciprocity for and to all within a community.
        By reflexively drawing-out themes by engaging in the process of a critical self-study in a
similar manner to Samaras (2011), I have come to better understand that there are many ways
to enact educational leadership in schools, and these enactments are intimately connected to
leader paradigms and school culture. Throughout this paper, I will discuss my potentially
alternative paradigm and theoretical framework existing in the confluence of the critical and
complex and then share the themes that have emerged. Each of these themes could afford for
a new, possibly more adequate vision of education—one which contradicts the safety and
security of an absolutist and objective education—which is, in fact, social, messy, and
interconnected. When we envision schools and educational leadership through a lens of
ecological sensibilities and relationality, educators have the opportunity to engage learners in a
previously unimagined way, creating possibilities for broadened understandings of knowledge
production. This educational leadership vision is non-positivistic and ancillary—leaders as
guides walking and learning alongside teachers and students—enacting pedagogies of love.
Locating and Positioning
Absolon and Willett (2005) suggest that “neutrality and objectivity do not exist in research... we
write about ourselves because the only thing that we can write about with authority is
ourselves” (p. 97). I share who I am with no attempt to hide or remove biases and initiate this
dialogue to foster a sense of relationality and trustworthiness with readers. As Kovach (2017)
states, “it is not simply about trust in the findings and ‘validation of the data’; it is about trust in

                                                                                                20


the relationship” (p. 224). Therefore, it is up to the reader to make sense of, accept, deny, or
struggle with my emergent themes. As Mishler (1990) suggests, “focusing on trustworthiness
rather than truth, displaces validation from its traditional location in a presumably objective
neutral reality, and moves it to the social world—a world constructed in and through our
discourse and actions, through praxis” (p. 420).
       I recognize and acknowledge that I enjoy the privilege of working as a school
administrator, which will not only bring me credibility with readers who happen to have
administrative experiences but may serve to reduce my credibility as a veteran teacher. The
perception of trustworthiness is not simply whether the reader has faith in the data that I
present. It cannot be that simple. Trustworthiness has to do with how readers will come to trust
me. The trustworthiness of the stories that I share begins with the way I choose to articulate
them and then concludes with the ways in which readers choose and continue to choose to
connect their histories to these stories to make coherence in their understanding. The validity
of these stories becomes less about objectivity and more about relationality.
       I am a veteran teacher-turned-administrator with diverse K-12 teaching experiences. I
began my teaching career as a mathematics and physics teacher in high school and have since
taught a wide variety of subjects throughout K-12. I grew up in rural northern British Columbia,
Canada, and am a fierce advocate of student inclusion and supporting a balanced approach for
student access to fine arts, academics, physical education, and complementary courses. I have
a solid connection to nature and land-based pedagogy and have coached and competed in
athletics to the post-secondary level. I am a father and husband and am highly influenced by my
partner’s paradigms and pedagogy. I recognize and understand that as a collective of educators
and staff, all schools have unique cultures and histories and, as a result, seek to enact improved
practices and opportunities for learners in varied ways. As an educational leader, I continuously
engage in critical reflexive practices individually and with colleagues to foster emergent
possibilities for students while challenging hegemonic practices.
On Being Critical
Through self-study, I have been able to formalize my current understandings of the criticality of
my pedagogy. I align my understandings of criticality with Paulo Freire (1996) when he shares,
“to surmount the situation of oppression, people must first critically recognize its causes so that
through transforming action they can create a new situation, one which makes possible the
pursuit of fuller humanity” (p. 29). I now better understand that all education and associated
pedagogies are political. As a result, the enactment of paradigms and what we believe about
students will, in turn, define what possibilities may be afforded through education.
       By using the term critical and incorporating critical pedagogy, I adhere to the
understandings of Freire (1996), Steinberg and Kincheloe (2018), Giroux (2011), and the
descriptions that Henry Giroux shares as part of an interview with Tristán (2013).

21


       Critical pedagogy illuminates the relationships among knowledge, authority, and power.
       It draws attention to questions concerning who has control over the conditions for the
       production of knowledge, values, and skills, and it illuminates how knowledge, identities,
       and authority are constructed within particular sets of social relations. Similarly, it draws
       attention to the fact that pedagogy is a deliberate attempt on the part of educators to
       influence how and what knowledge and subjectivities are produced within particular sets
       of social relations. (para. 2)
       Enacting critical pedagogy thus promotes critical reflexivity whereby teachers and
students are challenged to engage in an “investigation of their social location in the world as
well as their relationship with the world” (McLaren, 2015, p. 46).
Contrasting Two Paradigmatic Possibilities?
For this paper, I would challenge readers to consider a possibly alternative paradigm that may
contradict the historically adequate convergence-focused safety of an absolutist and positivistic
paradigm. When enacted in the best and most efficient way, this paradigm for education and
educational leadership was believed to be predictable and controllable. Alternatively, I put
forward a messy, interconnected, and collective understanding of education, where learning
and learners may be understood through a more adequate paradigm for the possibilities
associated with the multiplicity of cultures, beliefs, and understandings of a social, interactive,
(inter/intra)-connected collective and complex humanity. The embodiment of this paradigm I
consider to be enacted through pedagogies of love as defined by bell hooks (2001) as the
relational enmeshment of care, commitment, knowledge, responsibility, respect, and trust.
I suggest that educational leaders have the opportunity and the ethical and moral responsibility
to evaluate, consider, and challenge how appropriate or adequate their inherited curricula
(Tarc, 2011) are within the current and emerging cultural and collective context. Educational
leaders are now called upon to make decisions through multiple lenses in a responsive manner
that considers the past but creates the opportunity for their transformative work to become
tacit and readily subsumable through future iterations of reinvention to disrupt hegemonic
teaching paradigms through pedagogies of love.
        Doll (1993) suggests that “it is not the individual as an isolated entity which is important
but the person within the communal, environmental frame. In fact, the concept of isolated or
rugged individualism… is a fiction” (p. 92). The wants and desires and the successes and failures
of each society are as diverse as our planet’s ecosystems, and no one way to exist can be
considered the hierarchical best way. Through transformed possibilities for education, teaching
and learning would not be “about convergence onto a pre-established truth, but about
divergence—about broadening what can be known and done” (Davis & Sumara, 2007, p. 64).
Doll (1993) suggests that such a shift would make it so that “the focus would now be on a
community dedicated to helping each individual, through critique and dialogue, to develop
intellectual and social powers” (p. 174).

                                                                                                22


         Shifting paradigms would not negate the learning of content; rather, it will require an
increased level of richness, recursion, relation, and rigor (Doll, 1993) by considering learning as
reflexive processes. Educators who consider this critical and ecological framework may create a
space for pedagogies of love—education that is ancillary and not necessarily causative. I hope
that all educators may understand that the vision of the absolutist and reductionist teaching
paradigms are no longer adequate to support students as they move into uncertain futures. This
possible new consideration aligns with Doll (1993) when he suggests that education “is a
process—not of transmitting what is known but exploring what is unknown” (p. 155). Therefore,
it is the responsibility of ethical educators and leaders to be both dependent and accountable
for the unknown.
         Doll (1993) also states that “a constructive curriculum emerges through the actions and
interactions of its participants” (p. 162). The divergent possibilities of the not-yet-imagined
ecological sensibilities may allow students to consider schools as places—no longer
disconnected from life outside of school—where vivid memories of community, complexity, and
collectivity facilitate long-term connections to the process of learning. Through the embodiment
of ethical relationality, Donald (2016) envisions that “people face each other as relatives and
build trusting relationships by connecting with others in respectful ways through the
embodiment of ethical relationality. In doing so, we demonstrate that we recognize one another
as fellow human beings and work hard to put respect and love at the forefront of our
interactions” (p. 10). By (re)imagining schools as complex ecosystems, educators and learners
may embody the transformative pedagogies of love.
         When one comes from a paradigm of control, a certain element of fear exists with an
inability to predict or control all aspects of what could happen in the classroom. Alternatively,
connected curricula and the associated pedagogies of love, afford for the (re)imagining of
education as inherently messy; occasionally uncomfortable; open, biological/ecological,
chaotic; meaningful, transformative, empowering, and emancipatory. By considering the
classroom as a complex adaptive system, we can enact an ancillary teaching paradigm where
classrooms and learning may be understood as collectives that are self-organizing and
generative—environments where students with agency adapt and impact their own and all
others’ trajectories. Considering the actuality of complex understandings of education could
require educators to shift their paradigm to recognize the enmeshed nature of the classroom
collective—complex relationships that are codependent and often bottom-up. When
considered through this alternative lens, Doll (1993) postulates:
         The teaching-learning frame switches from a cause-effect one where learning is either a
         direct result of teaching or teaching is at least a superior-inferior relationship with
         learning. The switch is to a mode where teaching becomes ancillary to learning, with
         learning dominant, due to the individual’s self-organizational abilities. (p. 101)
         Education embodying and enacting historically adequate paradigms of control,
presupposes that teaching effectively prepares students for a known future by ensuring that

23


learning discrete and static pieces of knowledge. Perpetuating these understandings may
solidify for students and teachers that content area disciplines or classrooms are mutually
exclusive and disconnected. When language that supports absolutist and reductionistic
metaphors for students is used, positivist binaries of learning are perpetuated to future
generations—leaving no room for acceptable divergent alternative epistemologies. It is
important to emphasize that the current hegemonic, positivistic, convergent, data-driven
teaching paradigm is but one possibility for education, one of a multiplicity of possibilities for
education.
Bricolage and Critical Self-Study
        To know the past is to know oneself as an individual and as a representative of a socio-
        historical moment in time; like others each person is a victim, vehicle, and ultimately a
        resolution of a culture’s dilemmas. (Bullough & Gitlin, 1995, p. 25)
        The multimethodological nature of the bricolage allows for the opportunity to widen
one’s senses to a divergence of possibilities in inquiry, avoiding the reductionistic tendencies of
singular research perspectives. By employing bricolage, researchers are not necessarily tied to
the axiomatic foundations of a singular research method and fully acknowledge the complexity
and subjectivity of social research.
        As bricoleurs recognize the limitations of a single method, the discursive structures of
        one disciplinary approach, what is missed by traditional practices of validation, the
        historicity of certified modes of knowledge production, the inseparability of knower and
        known, and the complexity and heterogeneity of all human experience, they understand
        the necessity of new forms of rigor in the research process. (Kincheloe, 2001, p. 681)
        For this reason, social research is not and should not be considered objective. Therefore,
it is up to the researcher-as-bricoleur to recognize and embrace uncertainty and messiness
within social contexts in the pursuit of robust research. By recognizing their active participation
within and onto research, the bricoleur acknowledges their undeniable impact on social
research through relationships that allow for their increased expertise in the relationality of
power and oppression interior to disciplines.
        The bricolage is a process that acknowledges the complexity that has been ignored within
social research. The bricoleur works to uncover the interrelated nature of social research,
looking toward relationships rather than things (Kincheloe, 2001). This type of research's
complex interactions and relationality necessitate the reconsideration of a methodological
framework in an active manner rather than a passive and static methodological stance.
Accordingly, the bricolage affords what many of us already understand: that “we occupy a
scholarly world with faded disciplinary boundary lines. Thus, the point need not be that
bricolage should take place—it already has and is continuing” (Kincheloe, 2001, p. 863).

                                                                                                24


                                            SELF-STUDY
Self-study is a critical, dialogical, and relational qualitative research and necessitates an
interdisciplinary and responsive methodology that, in this case, affords the honoring and
witnessing of an administrator’s stories. As a result, no one method can adequately
accommodate both the researcher as (emic) insider and (etic) outsider (Innes, 2009) while
allowing for the recognition of the emergent nature of social research. Self-study research exists
in the confluence of biography and history (Bullough & Pinnegar, 2001) and the self and other,
whereby the researcher situates themselves inside the process (Samaras, 2010). Self-study is
“autobiographical, historical, cultural, and political and takes a thoughtful look at texts read,
experiences had, people known and ideas considered” (Hamilton & Pinnegar, 1998, p. 236). This
place of complex, contextual, and irreproducible interactions is at the center of self-study
research where the everchanging and evolving space for personal research necessitates us not
to focus specifically on the self but rather on the space between the self and the practice and
the other.
        According to LaBoskey (2004), the characteristics required for self-study methodology
necessitate self-studies are: self-initiated and focused, improvement-aimed, interactive,
primarily qualitative methods, and exemplar-based validation (pp. 842-853). Similarly, Samaras
(2011) suggests a five-foci framework for enacting self-study research where self-study is
personally situated inquiry, critical and collaborative, improvement-focused, transparent and
systematic, and generative for knowledge and presentation. As the primary participant, critical
self-study has allowed me to unpack and reconstruct my affective history to inform my
professional and personal identity formation. In turn, I have gained meaning to my pedagogical
understandings and made explicit the connections of my practice to theory (Samaras et al.,
2004).
        Foundational to this self-study research process were the following three possibilities for
teaching as defined by Samaras et al. (2004): 1) self-knowing and forming—and reforming—a
professional identity; 2) modeling and testing effective reflection; and 3) pushing the boundaries
of teaching. (p. 913).
        Self-knowing and forming a professional identity is intimately connected to reflexivity
and autobiography. By unpacking and revisiting the enmeshed and affective past, I have
envisioned a broader possible future. Reflective acts become those of reflexivity when we
“consider what is not obvious and what is yet to become because a grounding in personal
experiences encourages consciousness and being awake to themselves and to the contexts in
which they are embedded” (Samaras et al., 2004, p. 915).
        Modeling and testing effective reflection seem to be key to challenging and reimagining
the possibilities for education. While there is a great deal of emphasis on self-reflection in
preservice teacher training, time and the complexity of teaching life can become barriers to
growth opportunities of self-study for practicing teachers and administrators. Through self-
study and its autobiographical provocation, we can challenge the perception of the objectivity

25


of teaching, learning, and knowing and provide opportunities to better know who we are as
educators.
        Pushing the boundaries of teaching may come from a better understanding of self
through self-study. Samaras et al. (2004) suggest that teachers drawing on their personal
histories through self-study may “examine the inconsistencies involved in their teaching and
showcase their failings so that they and others, especially their students, might learn from their
mistakes” (p. 924). Reflection on personal histories may help teachers to understand better the
multiplicity of affective histories and associated understandings that students bring with them
into learning spaces, in turn transforming pedagogies.
        Engaging in critical self-study through a critical and complexity-focused ecological lens
allows for the disruption of sacrosanct understandings while broadening possibilities by
considering complex connectivities. The recursive and iterative process involved
autobiographical writing, interpreting critical friend feedback, and rewriting/reporting.
Throughout these processes, I was challenged to (re)consider what I understood about
educational leadership and schools as well as my professional identity.
Why Pedagogies of Love?
bell hooks (2001) defines love as a combination of care, commitment, knowledge, responsibility,
respect, and trust, where all of these characteristics work (inter/intra)-dependently. Weber
(2017) states that:
       Love is not a pleasant feeling, but the practical principle of creative enlivenment. This
       principle describes the way in which living communities on this planet—groups of cells,
       organisms, ecosystems, tribes, families—find their own identities while also fostering the
       relationship that they have with others and with the system surrounding them. (p. 6)
       Additionally, hooks (2010) suggests that “the loving classroom is one in which students
are taught, both in the presence and practice of the teacher, that critical exchange can take
place without diminishing anyone’s spirit” (p. 162). Love is inherently interwoven within strong
professional relationships and care. Darder (2017) suggests that “greater possibilities for school
and social transformations can be realized” (p. 96) when we engage in dialogue where love is at
the heart of the work.
       While there is no question that romantic notions of love exist, through this critical self-
study, my intention has been, at least partially, to trouble common perceptions of what love
can mean and what pedagogies of love can afford. From the bell hooks' definition of love, I have
come to better understand that love can provide room for failure, struggles, and mistakes but
ultimately to grow. Richard Wagamese (2016) suggests that:

                                                                                              26


        Love is not always the perfection of moments or the sum of all the shining days—
        sometimes it’s to drift apart, to be broken, to be disassembled by life and living, but
        always to come back together and to be each other’s glue again. Love is an act of life,
        and we are made more by the living. (p. 151)
        As educators of generations of young people, it is our responsibility to (re)consider our
understandings of classroom pedagogies with a sense of urgency and humility—(re)focus on a
shift toward pedagogies of love. Clingan (2010) shares:
        If we humans move beyond the feeling and the fears about love, stretch our minds past
        our wondering about love, and take our greatest philosophies and thoughts about love
        to a consistent practical application, that we will see, healthier communities that are
        filled with and sustained by love. (n.p.)
        Enacting a pedagogy of love can allow for an equitable and socially just education which
allows for stronger, collaborative, and kind relationships.
Changing Roles of Educational Leaders
Educational leaders’ roles have changed greatly throughout the past decades and the impact of
these leaders on student learning is second only to those of classroom teachers (Adams, 2016).
The roles of school leaders have shifted from a role primarily focused on management toward
ones that also include instructional leadership, community engagement, mentorship of new and
upcoming inductees, and engagement and consultation with the community. All of these shifts
require the enactment of pedagogies of love. Table 1, adapted from Bedard and
Mombourquette (2015) illustrates how the roles of leadership have changed and continue to
change for educational leaders, and I use indicators of From and Toward as a recognition of a
constantly evolving reference frame.
Table 1. Shifts in Educational Leadership
 From                           Toward
 Compliance based                Capacity building shared commitment and dignity, and focus
                                 on mission and vision
 Administrative matters and Instructional Leadership, relationality, building culture
 managerial work
 Loosely            connected Robust professional networks
 divisional elements
 Traditional,        top-down Sharing and collaborating, and more permeable boundaries
 decision making                 between district and schools
 Narrow data collection          Broader means and acceptance of data collection,
                                 specifically around qualitative data
 Leadership succession           Focused, standards-based identification and selection
 Outside,        expert-based Embedded professional learning and increased leadership
 professional learning           autonomy over school professional learning
 Passive engagement of Building relational trust with stakeholder through
 stakeholders                    consultation and increased transparency

27


        The prominent changes that stand out in the righthand column in Table 1 allude to the
understanding that community engagement and collectivity are recognized to be drastically
more important than in the past. Ultimately, leadership is now, more than ever, pedagogical
responsibility and relationality—the art and science of modeling effective practices with
learners and communities in an ancillary manner. Through a deeper, more dynamic awareness
of (our)self, we may be able to shift pedagogies from those of the “impossible imperative
assignment” (Markides, 2018, p. 42). Put differently, educators and educational leaders,
through the consideration of an alternative, emergent, and interconnected paradigms “are
being asked to consider identity not so much as something already present, but rather as
production, in the throes of being constituted as we live in places of difference” (Aoki, 1993, p.
260).
        Self-study has allowed for the critical illumination of ways to afford interconnected
possibilities in educational leadership. It is this ancillary and ecological sensibility, envisioned as
a direct challenge to the reductionistic, fictitious simplification of classroom dynamics that may
challenge pedagogies that conjure a singular, prescriptive, and safe understanding of living
classrooms—classrooms that are ever-emergent, continually adapting, and divergently
redundant. These alternative spaces of the possible and the not-yet-imagined can be fertile
locations of growth and change.
                                        EMERGENT THEMES
In this section I will share and discuss a summary of the themes that emerged from the critical
self-study process. The themes listed in the following section will read as a summary and short
literature review of ideas. Each of these themes has emerged through the overarching
framework of pedagogies of love and is based on bell hooks’ (2001) definition of love as the
enmeshment of care, commitment, knowledge, responsibility, respect, and trust within the
theoretical framework in the confluence of criticality and complexity.
Love and Wisdom
Many of the metaphors for wisdom are related to age and experience, however, these
understandings seem to be rooted in love. Cozolino (2013) suggests that wisdom is the way in
which intelligences are brought harmoniously together—the synergy of the heart and mind. For
Staudinger (1999), those who appear to be wiser are “creative, endorse a judicial, and
nonconservative cognitive style, furthermore, are open to new experiences and show personal
growth, as well as having been exposed to existential life events and/or to certain professional
settings” (p. 660). Wisdom appears to be embodied within a life of love, a comprehensive
experience and outlook, an empathetic and kind outlook, an attitude to/for others, and
resiliency for personal responsibility toward growth-focused solution attainment. Wisdom is not
simply gained through experience, time, or existence.
        Becoming wise appears to be more about openness to hearing, witnessing, and
envisioning the possible. “While knowledge gives you the capacity to understand what you are

                                                                                               28


doing, wisdom helps you to attain correct, prudent, and just application of that knowledge”
(Cozolino, 2013, p. 209). Wisdom may be about experiencing and then better knowing how to
respond in the future because “Knowledge is not wisdom. But wisdom is knowledge in action”
(Wagamese, 2016, p. 130). Wisdom can be about supporting others through one’s own
experiences by challenging how best practices rhetorics have evolved to better practices and
then to wiser practices—always evolving. For “it is in the journey that one becomes wise”
(Wagamese, 2019, p. 51).
       Wisdom in the context of educational relevance can be understood as embodied
pedagogical dampening helping us to believe that we are on the correct path to supporting
learners and can provide us faith in the pedagogy of love as a means to trust and commit to
supporting all learners. Wisdom requires a deep understanding of specific content so that we
may be better able to listen to our students through writings and dialogues and truly hear their
intentions and not just our own—seeking to listen for contextual meanings and not searching
for faults.
Love as Radical Listening
Winchell et al., (2016) suggest that “radical listening involves consciously valuing others by
attempting to hear what the speaker is saying for the meaning he or she intends, rather than
the meaning the listener interprets through his/her own view of the world” (p. 101). They draw
on the teachings of Joe Kincheloe (2008) where they specify that in order to gain critical
consciousness, first, one must recognize that, 1) knowledge is contextual and can never be
separated from the knower; 2) the ways of knowing we reward as educators reflect what we
value; and, 3) in order to re-envision our understanding of the world must listen in value what
others have to say about the world specifically those with understandings that vary from our
own (Winchell et al., 2016).
        Radical listening allows for shifts in power dynamics within schools and requires teachers
and educational leaders to be placed into a position where they are not the knower of all
information. Decentering power is an act of love and is atypical of what most pedagogical
practices and teaching metaphors necessitate. Winchell et al. (2016) challenge that, “it is
possible that what might arise from being reflexively aware of radical listening included learning
from other, setting aside one’s own standpoints, and messing with axiology by intentionally dis-
privileging cherished values” (p. 102).
        Radical listening requires that we acknowledge the complexity of the messiness of
humanity within schools. We must acknowledge what students bring in and what students’ lives
look like outside of the classroom while incorporating their knowledges into the work that we
do every day. Radical listening demands that we acknowledge that students are autonomous
beings with motivations and preconceived understandings. Radical listening requires the
teacher to be brave and trust in the process of learning where knowledge is not some fixed
understanding but rather how we negotiate the way we make sense of the world.

29


        Radical listening allows for moving away from singularity of understanding towards a
multiplicity of ways to make sense of ideas and concepts and requires teachers, in a loving
manner, to encourage dialogue as a means for transformations. It shifts the privilege of hearing
towards the student’s intention when speaking. Freire (1996) suggests that:
        Dialogue cannot exist, however, in the absence of profound love. The naming of the
        world, which is an act of creation and re-creation, is not possible if it is not infused with
        love. Love is at the same time the foundation of dialogue and dialogue itself. (p. 70)
        Radical listening represents a decentring of the teacher’s power, but still allows for
direction and focus, by a caring and loving teacher who is a guide rather than the center of
attention. This is a shift in a metaphorical understanding of teaching itself toward the ancillary—
teachers as guides walking and learning alongside students.
        Radical listening is a pedagogy of love when enacted within the classroom where a
commitment to the learning process and relationality are prioritized. This commitment respects
learners as individuals within the classroom community. Ultimately, “radical listening is thus
prismatic in transformative, involving multiplicities of culture, experiences, and self, which
works to counter the monochromatic epistemologies and ontologies that are prized by social
efficiency and put forth as “universal truths” for all humanity” (Winchell et al., 2016, p. 106).
Love as Relationality
Relationality and trust are intimately interconnected and are enactments of love. As Kovach
(2017) suggests, “relationality is a set of values; relationship is the action” (p. 223). When we
celebrate differences, we enact pedagogies of love. As we recognize the complexity of
relationality when working with other humans, we begin to see that there can be no singular
way to understand, learn, or see. This does not mean that we cannot come to similar conclusions
but helps us to recognize the infinite pathways we can take towards understandings.
       By understanding the tentative state of flux (Kovach, 2017) in which we exist, we may
challenge our perception of reality. We do not always have one-to-one means to map our
paradigms and worldviews to those of others in order to communicate effectively. It is the
recognition and valuing of difference as the place where we can incorporate an ethical
relationality (Ermine, 2007) that can allow for dialogues that seek understanding rather than
power. Seeing our paradigms as possibly incommensurable to those of others, we can then
begin to consider different vantage points. It is this comfort with the discomfort of relationality
that will allow us “not to extrapolate but rather to seek situational understanding” (Kovach,
2017, p. 221).
       Dwayne Donald (2009) posits, “ethical relationality is an ecological understanding of
human relationality that does not deny difference, but rather seeks to more deeply understand
how our different histories and experiences position us in relation to each other” (p. 6). As
educators interested in shifting classroom practices and pedagogies towards those of love, it is
imperative that relationality is at the forefront of our work. Ethical relationality and dialogue

                                                                                              30


are entangled in a way that are co-implicit. We must seek to understand, hear, and radically
listen to value student knowledges and thoughts.
        Relationships within schools focused on pedagogies of love require care, commitment,
knowledge, responsibility, respect, and trust, and it is the actions that the teacher carries out
and the ethic that they uphold and foster within the space that fosters relationality. This
relationality may allow for safe spaces for students to take greater risks which can allow for
learning opportunities that transcend learning outcomes occasioning transference to other
knowledges.
Love as the Beginnings of Decolonizing Education
        Modern educational thought finds actual human consciousness too messy to be studied,
        which may account for why youth get the facts but not the discussion of what their own
        purpose is within the life in which they are submersed. (Battiste, 2013, p. 31)
        The education that I received was positivistic, a singularly, hegemonic truth taught
through the narrative of racist myths (Donald, 2009)—a post-contact historical narrative. The
strength of this education was its neat, orderly, fact/truth-focused absolutism, a form of
cognitive imperialism that assumes that the dominant understanding of the world is the only
possible, correct, and privileged knowledge that is perpetuated throughout Western society.
According to Battiste (2013), when “knowledge is omitted or ignored in the schools and a
Eurocentric foundation is advanced to the exclusion of other knowledges and languages, these
are conditions that define an experience of cognitive imperialism” (p. 26). Unfortunately,
cognitive imperialism will never be an adequate enactment of curriculum, “it denies the fact
that human beings have their own ways of being and thinking, their own reasons and
motivations” (Biesta, 2013, p. 3).
        On a daily basis, caring educators enact the only curriculum that they know—a colonized,
familiar, static body of knowledge—in order to help students achieve success in a fictitious
known future. The singular colonized vision of success sets up a dichotomous reality of have or
have-not, success or failure, normal or deviant. These binaries are the embodied and enacted
politics of Eurocentric education and its curriculum which negates the plethora of possible
alternative epistemologies. Little Bear (2000) posits, “no matter how dominant a worldview is,
there are always other ways of interpreting the world. Different ways of interpreting the world
are manifest through different cultures, which are often in opposition to one another” (p. 77).
Because dominant culture is the culture that has instituted and maintained a colonized
curriculum, it is this same culture that must undergo a transformation in understanding, lens,
and pedagogy to decolonize curriculum. Therefore, divergent thinking is required for the
decolonization of education.
        The colonized curriculum ignores all but the dominant culture’s truths and is based on
students converging toward the attainment of discrete, measurable, quantifiable targets that
are already fully understood—a dead body of knowledge. In this curricular context, students

31


must be objectively measured. This implies that a specific—often identical—expected behavior
has already been anticipated as a measure of the successful attainment of the objective
regardless of who the learner may be. Treating each of these learners as identical does not allow
for the divergence of thought or variation of process. In this vision of education, deviation is
easy to deal with, it indicates a failure on the part of the student that may be fixed. The “desire
to make education strong, secure, predictable, and risk-free” (Biesta, 2013, p. 3) is deeply
entrenched within the positivist curricular paradigm, however, it does not recognize learners
for who they are—complex organisms that act both independently and as part of larger
collectives. “It denies the fact that human beings have their own ways of being and thinking,
their own reasons and motivations” (p. 3).
        Transformations away from a simplistic, predictable, strong, safe, and quantifiable view
of education (Biesta, 2013) can be an enactment of love and is decolonial work—a recognition
that the persistent view of students as controllable variables has never been adequate. In
education, students and classrooms are not simply related. But to view students non-
mechanistically may require a completely different paradigm for curricula—one focused on
relationality, reciprocity, and responsibility. Marie Battiste (2013) suggests, “the modern
educational system was created to maintain the identity, language, and culture of a colonial
society” (p. 30). So, we have caring people doing the best that they know how while
perpetuating a continued convergence towards “a single intellectual and spiritual modality”
(Davis, 2009, p. 192). How can we disrupt these static colonial paradigms? How can we begin to
decolonize curriculum?
        To decolonize education, we must begin by recognizing that education and teaching are
always political acts and are more complex than previously understood—there can be no
generic understanding of knowledges or experiences. Perhaps decolonization of curriculum
begins with a recognition of the possible, the awakening to a multiplicity of epistemologies, and
an awareness of the divergence of thought that just may be one of many truths. Decolonizing
curriculum and classroom spaces is about honoring and celebrating relationality, truly listening
to students, and de-centering knowledge structures—it is about enacting pedagogies of love.
To decolonize education—to make it inclusive and empowering for all learners—we must
recognize the complexity of learners and their lives; we must understand that all learners come
with their own affective histories, aspirations, motivations, desires, and goals. Decolonization
by enacting pedagogies of love “depends crucially on the extent to which we believe that
education is not just about the reproduction of what already exists but is genuinely interested
in the ways in which new beginnings and new beginners can come into the world” (Biesta, 2013,
p. 4).
        Pedagogies of love may foster emancipatory classrooms that “offers the space for
change, invention, spontaneous shifts, that can serve as a catalyst” (hooks, 1994, p. 11)—a
catalyst for hope, opportunity, and empowerment. School must be a place that recognizes the
multiplicity of literacies and the multiplicity of narratives, one that rejects the singular

                                                                                                32


understandings of colonial education, one that nurtures students’ aspirations and strengths,
one that is supported by masters of their craft that facilitate the empowerment of all learners.
This education needs to be experiential—an education that recognizes “that our experience is
always incomplete” (Greene, 2013, p. 137).
       Decolonizing the curriculum, according to Linda Tuhiwai Smith (2012), “does not mean
and has not meant a total rejection of all theory and research or Western knowledge. Rather, it
is about centering our concerns and world views from our own perspective and for our own
purposes” (p. 41). It is not a complete rejection of the oppressive norm, but rather a divergent
transformation that subsumes current pedagogical beliefs. Decolonizing curriculum and
classrooms require teachers to enact pedagogies of love whereby they better know students for
who they are and walk alongside them on a journey of coherence and understanding. For Little
Bear (2000) “One of the problems with colonialism is that it tries to maintain a singular social
order by means of force and law, suppressing the diversity of human worldviews” (p. 77). The
risk of decolonizing education is that society will recognize the complexity that exists—
complexity that is divergent, messy, and self-sustaining. By valuing the multiplicity of
epistemologies, education may become more inclusive of all learners—supporting coherence of
world-curricula (Lessard et al., 2015) and fostering acceptance of diverse worldviews.
       The work, according to Greene (2013) for “teachers is to stimulate an awareness of the
questionable, to aid in the identification of the thematically relevant, to beckon beyond the
everyday” (p. 138). As educators, our every day must be spent realizing and normalizing
decolonization, together. Shifting practices and pedagogies to ones that emphasize possibility
and love. It is the work of brave educators as guides, to delve into the unknown of the not-yet-
imagined, working alongside students to make these changes possible. Perhaps decolonization
of education is about seeing education for what it can be—to afford hope for all learners
through the embodiment of pedagogies of love.

                                          CONCLUSION
Through this critical and reflexive personal history self-study I have identified the themes that I
feel define my current identity-in-progress as an educator and administrator. Over my life, my
paradigm has evolved from a passive, positivistic, predetermined recognition of the world
towards that of an ecological, caring, relational, and interconnected world-in-flux—a symbiotic
world where the human and more-than-human (Abram, 1996) world are irreducibly enmeshed.
I feel that if educators and administrators can reconsider their understandings of education
through a sense of wholeness, embodying pedagogies of love, education may well become the
catalyst for societal growth and change. The themes drawn out through the process of self-study
were love and wisdom, love as radical listening, love as relationality, and love as the beginnings
of decolonizing education.
        By looking further than statistics and effect sizes and considering the wholeness of
learners and their affective experiences, education may possibly achieve substantially more

33


than it was ever intended to do. “When we act from love the results transform for the good.
With love our laws can change, our systems can change, and we can in fact begin to heal the
world” (Clingan, 2010, n.p.). Life preparation—a known, predictable life—is no longer the
purpose or intention of school. Pedagogies that serve as a catalyst for social awareness,
decolonization of curriculum, and social change should and can be the hope and possibility of
education—ancillary possibilities.
        Pedagogies of love can be understood as more than the embodiment of romantic notions
of the word. Pedagogies of love enact relationality: blending care, commitment, knowledge,
responsibility, respect, and trust. Ever-evolving and situational, these pedagogies are tentative
and can help students in understanding who they are is as important as what they understand;
and what can be shown on assessments. This shift in pedagogy presents the possibility for
students to better understand their interconnection and inherent responsibilities to others and
the world. Students can be motivated to see the beauty of the messiness that is the enmeshed
complexity of society and the human and more-than-human worlds.
        Rochelle Brock (2005) suggests that “when education targets wholeness of
being…individual and collective transformation happens” (p. 94). Education that prioritizes the
ethical engagement of students and respects their academic well-being while winning their
hearts and souls will prove to support social change. bell hooks (1994) is adamant that by
teaching “in a manner that respects and cares for the souls of our students is essential if we are
to provide the necessary conditions where learning can most deeply and intimately begin” (p.
13). By departing from the safety of the oppressive rational ideal of an already imagined future
we can consider a future through a pedagogy of love that is not yet imagined—a place of the
possible.
        Ultimately, the self-study has emerged as a story of impact and possibility—perceptions
of the subtle perturbative evolution of leadership and teaching paradigms for the
transformation of pedagogies from reductionist and positivist towards enmeshed and relational
ancillary possibilities of love. As Kahn and Kellner (2008) suggest, “education, at its best,
provides the symbolic and cultural capital that empowers people to survive and prosper in an
increasingly complex and changing world and the resources to produce a more cooperative,
democratic, egalitarian, and just society” (p. 25). I believe we deserve this society.

                                          REFERENCES
Abram, D. (1996). The spell of the sensuous: Perception and language in a more-than-human
      world. Pantheon Books.
Absolon, K., & Willett, C. (2005). Putting ourselves forward: Location in Aboriginal research. In
      L. Brown & S. Strega (Eds.), Research as resistance: Critical, Indigenous and anti-
      oppressive approaches (pp. 97–126). Canadian Scholars’ Press.

                                                                                               34


Adams, P. (2017). Enacting Alberta school leaders’ professional practice competencies: A
        toolkit by Bedard, G. J., & Mombourquette, C. A. Canadian Journal of Educational
        Administration and Policy, (182).
Aoki, T. (1993). Legitimizing lived curriculum: Towards a landscape of multiplicity. Journal of
        curriculum and supervision, 8(3), 255-268.
Battiste, M. (2013). Decolonizing education: Nourishing the learning spirit. Purich.
Bedard, G. J., & Mombourquette, C. P. (2015). Conceptualizing Alberta district leadership
        practices: A cross-case analysis. Leadership and Policy in Schools, 14(2), 233-255.
Biesta, G. J. J. (2013). The beautiful risk of education. Paradigm.
Bullough, R. V., & Gitlin, A. D. (1995). Becoming a student of teaching: Methodologies for
        exploring self and school context. Garland Pub.
Bullough Jr, R. V., & Pinnegar, S. (2001). Guidelines for quality in autobiographical forms of
        self-study research. Educational Researcher, 30(3), 13-21.
Brock, R. (2005). Sista talk: The personal and the pedagogical (Vol. 145). Peter Lang.
Clingan, J. (2010). A pedagogy of love. Journal of Sustainability Education, 9.
Cozolino, L. (2013). The social neuroscience of education: Optimizing attachment and learning
        in the classroom. WW Norton.
Darder, A. (2017). Reinventing Paulo Freire: A pedagogy of love. Routledge.
Davis, W. (2009). The Wayfinders: Why ancient wisdom matters in the modern world. House of
        Anansi Press
Davis, B., & Sumara, D. (2007). Complexity science and education: Reconceptualizing the
        teacher’s role in learning. Interchange, 38(1), 53–67.
Donald, D. (2009). Forts, curriculum and Indigenous Métissage: Imagining decolonization of
        Aboriginal-Canadian relations in educational contexts. First Nations Perspectives, 2(1),
        1-24.
Ermine, W. (2007). The ethical space of engagement. Indigenous Law Journal, 6(1), 193-203.
Freire, P. (1996). Pedagogy of the oppressed. Penguin. (original work published 1970).
Giroux, H. A. (2011). On critical pedagogy. Bloomsbury Publishing USA.
Greene, M. (2013). Curriculum and consciousness. In D. J. Flinders, & S. J. Thornton (Eds.), The
        curriculum studies reader (4th ed. 127-138). Routledge.
Hamilton, M. L., & Pinnegar, S. (1998). Conclusion: The value and promise of self-study. In M.
        L. Hamilton (Ed.), Reconceptualizing teaching practice: Self-study in teacher education
        (pp. 235-246). Falmer Press.
hooks, b. (1994). Teaching to transgress: Education as the practice of freedom. Routledge.
hooks, b. (2001). all about love: New visions. Harper Collins.
hooks, b. (2010). Teaching critical thinking: Practical wisdom. Routledge.
Kahn, R., & Kellner, D. (2008). Paulo Freire and Ivan Illich: Technology, politics and the
        reconstruction of education. In C.A. Torres & P. Noguera (Eds.), Social justice education
        for teachers (pp. 13-34). Sense Publishers.

35


Kincheloe, J. L. (2001). Describing the bricolage: Conceptualizing a new rigor in qualitative
        research. Qualitative inquiry, 7(6), 679-692.
Kincheloe, J. L. (2008). Knowledge and critical pedagogy: An introduction (Vol. 1). Springer
        Science & Business Media.
Kovach, M. (2017). Doing Indigenous methodologies: A letter to a research class. In N. K.
        Denzin & Y. S. Lincoln (Eds.), The Sage handbook of qualitative research (5th ed., pp.
        214-234). Sage.
LaBoskey, V. K. (2004). The methodology of self-study and its theoretical underpinnings. In J. J.
        J. Loughran, M. L. Hamilton, V. K. LaBoskey, & T. Russell (Eds.), International handbook
        of self-study of teaching and teacher education practices (Vol. 1, pp. 817-869). Springer.
Lessard, S., Caine, V., & Clandinin, D. J. (2015). A narrative inquiry into familial and school
        curriculum making: Attending to multiple worlds of Aboriginal youth and families.
        Journal of Youth Studies, 18(2), 197-214.
Little Bear, L. (2000). Jagged worldviews colliding. In M. Battiste (Ed.), Reclaiming Indigenous
        voice and vision (pp. 77-85). UBC Press.
Markides, J. (2017). Reconciling an ethical framework for living well in the world of research. In
        J. Markides & L. Forsythe (Eds.), Looking back and living forward: Indigenous research
        rising up (pp. 291-300). Brill Sense.
Markides, J. (2018). Being Indigenous in the Indigenous education classroom. In E. Lyle (Ed.),
        Fostering a relational pedagogy: Self-study as transformative praxis (pp. 35-44). Brill
        Sense.
McLaren, P. (2015). Life in schools: An introduction to critical pedagogy in the foundations of
        education. Routledge.
Mishler, E. (1990). Validation in inquiry-guided research: The role of exemplars in narrative
        studies. Harvard educational review, 60(4), 415-443.
Samaras, A. P., Hicks, M. A., & Garvey Berger, J. (2004). Self-study through personal history.
        In J. J. J. Loughran, M. L. Hamilton, V. K. LaBoskey, & T. Russell (Eds.), International
        handbook of self-study of teaching and teacher education practices (Vol. 1, pp. 905-
        942). Springer.
Samaras, A. P. (2011). Self-study teacher research: Improving your practice through
        collaborative inquiry. Sage.
Steinberg, S. R., & Kincheloe, J. L. (2018). About power and critical pedagogy. In J. L. Kincheloe
        & S. R. Steinberg (Eds.), Classroom teaching: An introduction (2nd ed., pp. 29-43). Peter
        Lang.
Sumara, D., Davis, B., & Laidlaw, L. (2001). Canadian identity and curriculum theory: An
        ecological, postmodern perspective. Canadian Journal of Education, 26(2), 144-163.
Tarc, M. A. (2011). Curriculum as difficult inheritance. Journal of Curriculum and Pedagogy,
        8(1), 17-19.

                                                                                                36


Tristán, J. M. B. (2013, February 6). Henry Giroux: The necessity of critical pedagogy in dark
       times. Global Education Magazine. https://truthout.org/articles/a-critical-interview-
       with-henry-giroux/
Tuhiwai Smith, L. (2012). Decolonizing methodologies: Research and Indigenous peoples. Zed
       Books.
Wagamese, R. (2016). Embers: One Ojibway's meditations. D & M Publishers.
Wagamese, R. (2019). One Drum: Stories and ceremonies for a planet. D & M Publishers.
Wilson, S. (2008). Research is ceremony: Indigenous research methods. Fernwood Publishing.
Winchell, M., Kress, T. M., & Tobin, K. (2016). Teaching/learning radical listening: Joe’s legacy
       among three generations of practitioners. In Practicing critical pedagogy (pp. 99-112).
       Springer.