The Role of School Management Committees and Head
teacher’s Effectiveness in Government-Aided Primary
        Schools in Luweero District– Uganda
          Dr. Serunjogi Charles Dickens (PhD)

American Journal of Leadership and Governance
ISSN 2519-0857 (online)
Vol.7, Issue 1, pp 62 - 69, 2022                                        www.ajpojournals.org

  The Role of School Management Committees and Head teacher’s
  Effectiveness in Government-Aided Primary Schools in Luweero
                         District – Uganda
                             Dr. Serunjogi Charles Dickens (PhD)
                    Dean, School of Education, Bugema University, Uganda
                             Email: serunjogichar@rocketmail.com
                                            Abstract
Purpose: The study focused on the role of School Management Committees (SMCs) and
headteacher effectiveness in government-aided primary schools in Luweero district, Uganda. The
objectives of the study were (i) To establish whether School Management Committees (SMCs)
monitored headteachers’ performance in the management of school academic programmes. (ii)To
examine whether School Management Committees (SMCs) effectively monitored how
headteachers utilized school funds. (iii) To assess whether School Management Committees
(SMCs) monitored how headteachers managed discipline in their schools.
Methodology: The study employed a cross-sectional study design using both quantitative and
qualitative approaches to data collection and analysis. A sample of 160 respondents comprising of
head teachers and School Management Committee (SMC) members was selected using purposive
and cluster sampling techniques. Data was collected using structured questionnaires and Focus
Group Discussion (FGD) guides.
Findings: The findings under the first objective revealed that SMC members did not effectively
monitor head teachers’ management of academic programmes as all the responses scored below
average(below 50%). As such the head teachers did not commit much of their time in ensuring
that school academic programmes were effectively managed. Findings under the second objective
revealed that SMCs’ performance in monitoring head teacher’s utilization of school funds was
above average in regard to the preparation of work plans, approval of budgets and cash withdrawals
while a dismal performance was reported in the approval of school expenditures and monitoring
of accountability of funds. Under the third objective, the findings revealed that the SMCs
performed above average in working collaboratively with the head teachers in attending to
disciplinary reports, sanctioning errant teachers /pupils and disseminating measures of managing
discipline to stakeholders while the performance was below average in the area of formulating
school rules and regulations. The dismal performance of SMCs in some areas was attributed to
capacity gaps, low motivation and conflicts within the school community.
Recommendations: The study recommended that the district local government needed to organize
workshops and seminars to equip SMC members with the requisite skills and knowledge in school
monitoring and sensitizing them about their roles and responsibilities. It was also recommended
that a minimum level of education and one’s integrity and contribution to community welfare be
tagged to selection of SMC members.
Keywords: Management, committee, primary, schools, policy, performance.



                                               62

American Journal of Leadership and Governance
ISSN 2519-0857 (online)
Vol.7, Issue 1, pp 62 - 69, 2022                                         www.ajpojournals.org

Introduction
After the attainment of Uganda’s independence in 1962, a series of attempts were made to
secularize and indigenize education to make it relevant to the people of Uganda. Subsequently, in
the 1964 Education Act, the Government of Uganda (GoU) set up School Management
Committees(SMCs) to consolidate full government control over the provision of basic education
in the country (Passi, 1995). Due to the pressing need for reforms in the delivery of education
services in the country, the National Resistance Movement (NRM) government in 1987 set up the
Uganda Education Review Commission chaired by Professor Senteza Kajubi to suggest a blueprint
for the relevant reforms in Uganda’s education system (Kamya, 2019). The Kajubi report of 1989
culminated in the commissioning of the Education White Paper of 1992 which recommended the
implementation of the Universal Primary Education in Uganda (GoU, 1992; MoE, 2001). Later,
the 2008 Education Act was enacted with provisions specifying the role of School Management
Committees (SMCs) at the primary school level (GoU, 2008).
A School Management Committee (SMC) is a statutory organ which serves as a governing body
of a primary school empowered by law to manage primary schools on behalf of the government
(GoU, 2007).The Government of Uganda (GoU) set up the School Management Committees
(SMCs) with a mandate to perform administrative, supervisory, monitoring and consultative roles
in the management of primary schools (GoU, 2007). Administrative roles of SMCs include
planning, financial control, maintaining discipline and implementing policies which are aimed at
creating stability to enhance effective teaching and learning in primary schools. Similarly, the
supervisory role of the SMC is hinged on monitoring and evaluation of school development plans
and performance related targets within their mandate. A school Development Plan (SDP) is a
practical document prepared by the school administrators and management with the aim of
enhancing physical development and learning in a school for a specific period.
Conversely, the consultative role refers to the process through which management and staff jointly
examine and discuss matters of concern. SMC members are mandated to hold regular meetings
with relevant stakeholders to ensure that there is harmony and proper coordination in the
implementation of school activities. The committee members are directly nominated by the
communities where they are located and appointed by the Education Committee in their respective
local governments to perform an oversight role on behalf of government (GoU, 2007).The
appointment of SMCs is guided by the Education Act of 2008 which spells out their condition of
appointment, tenure of office and their roles (GoU, 2008). Nonetheless, involving the School
Management Committees (SMCs) in the management of schools does not mean undermining the
role of the head teachers. It should be noted that head teachers need the support of SMCs to be
able to perform their roles effectively so as to meet the expectations of stakeholders (GoU, 2007).
Theoretical Framework
The study employed the transformational leadership theory as advocated by Yulk and Riggio
(2006). The concept of transformational leadership was first developed by Dowton in 1973 and
later adopted by James McGregory Burns in 1976 (Gomes, 2014). It became very popular in the
20th century because it was considered to be quite relevant in modern management. The theory
emphasizes the process of influencing major changes in the attitudes, beliefs and values of
followers to a point where goals of an organization and the vision of the leader are internalized

                                                63

American Journal of Leadership and Governance
ISSN 2519-0857 (online)
Vol.7, Issue 1, pp 62 - 69, 2022                                          www.ajpojournals.org

and followers achieve performance beyond expectation (Yulk, 1999; Gomes, 2024). In this
concept, leaders and followers raise one another’s levels of morality and motivation (Carlson &
Perrewe, 1995). This implies that the aims and aspirations of the two parties (leader and follower)
must be to develop one another in order to achieve organizational goals. This theory is indeed
relevant to this study because it provides a framework in which members of the School
Management Committee (SMC) and the head teacher agree to work together by empowering each
other to come up with the best alternatives of developing their institution. They should always be
willing to support one another through dialogue, training, benchmarking etc. As the SMC members
monitor and supervise the activities of the head teacher, they should ensure that there is a working
relationship where emphasis is focused on developing competences, capabilities and skills to
improve the performance of the school.
Research Objectives
   i.      To establish whether School Management Committee (SMC) members monitored head
           teachers’ performance in the management of academic programmes
   ii.     To examine whether School Management Committees(SMCs) monitored how the
           head teachers utilized school funds
   iii.    To assess whether School Management Committees(SMCs) monitored head teachers’
           ability to manage discipline in schools
Methodology
The study employed a cross-sectional survey design with both quantitative and qualitative
approaches to data collection and analysis. Cross-sectional studies analyze data from a population
or representative sub-set at a specific point in time and are reasonably in-expensive and time-
saving (Trochim, 2006).The target population comprised of 520 members of the SMCs from 40
schools in Luweero district in central Uganda. A sample of 160 participants was selected including
four SMC members purposively selected from 40 schools (10 schools from each cluster) in
Luweero district thus making a total of 160 participants. The four members including the
chairperson, the treasurer, the head teacher (secretary) and the PTA representative were selected
on the basis of the critical role they played in as far as the day to day activities of the School
Management Committees were concerned.
A structured questionnaire and Focus Group Discussion Guide (FGDG) were employed in the
collection of quantitative and qualitative data respectively. The questionnaire had two sections;
section A had the background information about the participants and section B had information on
the SMCs role in monitoring head teacher’s effectiveness in supervising teaching learning,
utilization of school finances and enhancement of discipline. The FGDG collected data from four
focus groups of head teachers and SMCs – each comprising of 10 members from the four clusters.
Quantitative data analysis was done using descriptive statistics such as frequency counts and
percentages while qualitative data was analyzed using content analysis where raw data was initially
organized by open-coding in order to make sense out it.




                                                64

American Journal of Leadership and Governance
ISSN 2519-0857 (online)
Vol.7, Issue 1, pp 62 - 69, 2022                                          www.ajpojournals.org

Results
Table 1: Demographic Characteristics of Participants
                                  Count                             Percentage
 Roles
 SMC chairpersons                 40                                25%
 Treasurers                       40                                25%
 PTA representatives              40                                25%
 Head teachers                    40                                25%
 Gender
 Male                             125                               78.1%
 Female                           35                                21.9%
 Education Level
 Diploma                          10                                6.2%
 Post O level certificate         35                                21.9%
 A level                          20                                12.5%
 O level                          40                                25%
 Primary                          55                                34.4%
Table 1 shows the demographic characteristics of participants in regard to their roles, gender and
educational level. Results show that the four categories i.e SMC chairpersons, treasurers, PTA
representatives and head teachers (secretaries) were equally distributed with each contributing
25% of the total number of participants. However, in terms of gender, 78.1% of the participants
were male while 21.9% were female – implying that SMCs in Luweero were male dominated.
Turning to the educational level of participants, majority (59.4%) were primary and O level
graduates with O level representing 25% and primary (34.4%). The remaining 40.6% was
distributed among those who had A level (12.5%), Post O level certificates (21.9%) and diploma
(6.2%). It should be noted that in Uganda, there is no requirement for a specific academic
qualification for one to be selected member of the School Management Committee (SMC).
Nonetheless, there is no doubt that academic qualifications have a strong bearing on ones analytical
ability in terms of ones contribution to quality debate, analysis of critical issues, taking informed
decisions, conceptualization and interpretation of specific policy guidelines.
Table 2: Whether SMC Members Monitored Head teacher’s Effectiveness in the
Management of Academic Programmes in Schools
 Response                                                               Counts         Percentage
 SMC regularly monitored H/teacher’s daily attendance to duty           74             46.2%
 SMC monitored H/teacher’s instructional leadership                     78             48.5%
 SMC discussed H/teachers’ academic performance reports                 50             31.2%
 SMC monitored H/teachers’ management of learning resources             65             40.6%
 SMC monitored H/teachers’ relationship with teaching staff             45             28.1%

                                                 65

American Journal of Leadership and Governance
ISSN 2519-0857 (online)
Vol.7, Issue 1, pp 62 - 69, 2022                                          www.ajpojournals.org

In table 2, the study sought to ascertain whether SMCs dutifully fulfilled their mandate of
monitoring academic programmes in their respective schools in regard to head teachers’ roles. As
the results showed, 74(46.2%) of the SMCs regularly monitored head teachers’ daily attendance
to duty, 78(48.5%) of the SMCs monitored head teachers’ instructional leadership, 50(31.2%) of
the SMCs discussed head teachers’ academic reports in their routine meetings, 65(40.6%) of the
SMCs monitored head teachers’ management of learning resources, and 45(28.1%) monitored
head teachers’ relationship with the teaching staff. The findings above reveal serious inadequacies
in regard to the role of SMCs in monitoring academic progress in schools. It should be noted that
all the areas assessed scored below 50% indicating that the SMCs’ performance was below
average. Whereas the results showed dismal performance by the SMCs in fulfilling their mandate
of monitoring academic programmes in schools, there was need to investigate further why such a
state of affairs had indefatigably subsisted in Luweero district. In a Focus Group Discussion (FGD)
with participants, it was reported that the low level of performance by the SMCs was due to a
number of limitations at the school level – key among them included low level of education by
some SMC members, lack of cooperation by some head teachers, SMCs’ lack of knowledge about
their roles and conflicts within the school community. Inadequate monitoring of academic
programmes by the SMCs implied that the head teachers were not under any pressure to supervise,
mentor and build the capacity of their staff to utilize the available resources to improve academic
performance in their schools.
Table 3: Whether SMC Members Effectively Monitored how the Head teacher Utilized
School Funds
 Response                                                               Counts         Percentage
 SMC approved work plans presented by head teacher                      81             50.6%
 SMC approved school budget presented by head teacher                   94             58.7%
 SMC approved the withdrawal of funds from school account               83             51.8%
 SMC approved school expenditure presented by the head teacher          78             48.7%
 SMC made sure head teacher accounted for school funds                  68             42.5%
In table 3, the study investigated whether the SMC monitored the utilization of school funds
specifically by the head teacher because by virtue of their appointment, head teachers in Uganda’s
public schools are accounting officers of their respective cost centres. This implies that the head
teacher is answerable in all matters regarding the safety of funds and other resources of the school.
The results above indicate that 81(50.6%) of SMCs were involved in the formulation of school
work plans, 94(58.7%) showed that they approved school budgets presented to them by the head
teacher, 83(51.8%) reported that they approved the withdrawal of school funds from the bank,
78(48.7%) indicated that they approved the expenditures made by the head teacher and 68(42.5%)
stated that they demanded for accountability of school funds expended by the head teacher.
Ostensibly, the findings divulge the fact that overall, the SMCs had performed above average
(above 50%) in the first three critical areas that were assessed except in the approval of
expenditures (48.7%) and demanding accountability (42.5%).The implication of the above results
is that even when the school annual work plans, budgets and withdrawals are approved by the
SMCs, there could still be certain leakages of some sort if a keen eye is not focused on monitoring
expenditures and demanding accountabilities from the head teacher. However, results from FGDs

                                                 66

American Journal of Leadership and Governance
ISSN 2519-0857 (online)
Vol.7, Issue 1, pp 62 - 69, 2022                                             www.ajpojournals.org

indicated that most of the SMCs had capacity gaps in matters related to the management of
finances. This explains why in certain cases, some SMCs are not able to detect and deter specific
cases of financial fraud in their schools. In such circumstances, the headteachers did not strictly
follow financial management guidelines and regulations as required by law. This comes at a time
when budgetary allocations to the primary education sector have remained stagnant for over a
decade –casting doubt as to whether the little that there is, if not efficiently utilized can lead to the
realization of quality education in Uganda (GoU, 2018; National Planning Authority, 2019).
Table 4: Whether the SMC Members Monitored the Management of Discipline by the Head
teacher
 Response                                                                   Counts        Percentage
 SMC and H/teacher formulated school rules/regulations                      60            37%
 SMC and H/teacher attended to reports from disciplinary committee          89            55%
 SMC and H/teacher passed resolutions on cases of indiscipline              90            56.2%
 SMC and H/teacher clarified to stakeholders ways of managing               91            56.8%
 discipline
Table 4 presents findings regarding whether SMCs monitored how the head teachers managed
issues of discipline in their schools. Results show that 60(37%) of the SMCs worked with the head
teacher to formulate school rules and regulations, 89(55%) reported that they discussed
disciplinary committee reports, 90(56.2%) met with the head teacher and passed resolutions on
disciplinary cases and 91(56.8%) took the initiative to brief stakeholders on measures of curbing
indiscipline in their schools. As already noted in the introduction, SMCs have an inexorable role
in ensuring that discipline is maintained in their schools. They back-up the head teacher to maintain
the most desirable and acceptable level of discipline among learners and the staff. The above
results reveal that SMCs had not done much to help the head teachers formulate school rules and
regulations as only 37% of the respondent’s reported to have done so. Results of FGDs showed
that there were serious discrepancies in the ability of most SMCs to handle complex issues that
required relatively a fair level educational attainment. Yet in most cases, community members
with better educational backgrounds were not always ready to take up such responsibilities that
are voluntary in nature. It was noted that most people who were willing to be nominated on such
committees especially in rural areas were those with low level of educational attainment. However,
the management of discipline remains as one of the pillars in educational practice especially at a
time when there is an increase in the reported cases of anti-social behaviours in schools (Blandford,
1998).
Recommendations
In light of the above findings, the following recommendations are suggested;
    i.      There is need to build and strengthen the capacity of SMCs to be able to perform their
            roles effectively. The District Local Government should ensure that regular workshops
            and seminars are organized to equip SMC members with the requisite knowledge and
            skills in monitoring school programmes.
    ii.     There should be minimum academic qualifications set for prospective members of
            School Management Committees (SMCs). This a considerable level of literacy is

                                                   67

American Journal of Leadership and Governance
ISSN 2519-0857 (online)
Vol.7, Issue 1, pp 62 - 69, 2022                                         www.ajpojournals.org

          needed for one to be able to analyze, interpret, conceptualize and understand critical
          issues that should lead to informed decision-making, quality debate and synthesis of
          government policies.
   iii.   To attract people of desirable quality on School Management Committees (SMCs),
          some kind of monetary allowance should be set aside to motivate members whenever
          there is a sitting.
   iv.    A clear criterion for vetting candidates on School Management Committees (SMCs)
          should be considered specifically on the attribute of one’s moral and social status in the
          community. Selection of members to the committee should be carefully done in view
          of one’s social integrity, moral standing and contribution to community welfare.
   Conclusion
   In conclusion therefore, it is important to note that School Management Committees (SMCs)
   play a central role in the day to day administration and management of primary schools. They
   anchor the school administration to effectively plan, coordinate, organize and communicate
   the school’s overarching strategies to enhance quality learning/teaching. In view of that
   consideration, members of SMCs should be people of acceptable integrity with desirable level
   of education. To be able to fulfill their mandate, SMC members need to be facilitated to in
   order to dedicate their time to perform their roles to the desired expectations.
   References
   Bass, B.M and Riggio, R.E (2006). Transformational Leadership, Mahwah, NJ: Lawrence
   Erbaum Associates Inc.
   Gomes, R (20014). Transformational Leadership: Theory, Research and Application to
   Sports. In c. Mohiyeddini (ed), Contemporary Topics and Trends in the Psychology of
   Sports, pp. 53-114.
   GoU (2007). School Management Committee Handbook, Kampala: MoES
   Government of Uganda. (1989).Report of the Education Review Commission, Kampala,
   MoE,
   Government of Uganda (1992). Government White Paper on Education; Education for
   National Integration and Development, Kampala, UPPC
   Government of Uganda (2008). Education Act of 2008, UPPC, Entebbe
   Government of Uganda (2018). Comprehensive Evaluation of UPE Policy Costing. Thematic
   Report 5, National Planning Authority
   Kamya, B (2019). Different Education Policy Reforms in Uganda (1922-2000).Research
   Association for Interdisciplinary Studies
   MoE (2001). The Development of Education in Uganda in the last ten years; Geneva, MoE
   National Planning Authority (2019). Comprehensive Evaluation of the UPE Policy; Synthesis
   Summary Report –A paper Presented by the Executive Director, National Planning
   Authority, Kampala


                                               68

American Journal of Leadership and Governance
ISSN 2519-0857 (online)
Vol.7, Issue 1, pp 62 - 69, 2022                                  www.ajpojournals.org

   Trochim W.M.K (2006). Research Methods Knowledge Base, Web Centre for Social
   Research Methods
   Yulk, G (1999). An Evaluation of Conceptual Weaknesses in Transformational and
   Charismatic Leadership: The Leadership Quarterly 10(2), 285-305




                                           69