School Librarians and Educational Leadership:
Productive Pedagogy for the Information Age School
                                              Dr Ross J. TODD, Director of Research,
                     Center for International Scholarship in School Libraries (CISSL),
                  School of Communication, Information and Library Studies, Rutgers,
                                            The State University of New Jersey, USA.




                                             Abstract

          Against a backdrop of emerging paradigms of educational leadership, this
research paper will explore and elaborate some of the fundamental dimensions of
quality teaching and learning in information age schools based on the framework of
Productive Pedagogy, and in the context of instructional interventions of school
librarians in partnership with classroom teachers. This exploration is based on an
analysis of extensive data collected during an extended school librarian-classroom
teacher collaboration at Gill St Bernards’ School Gladstone, N.J. in 2003-2004.
Underpinning productive pedagogy is the belief that high quality teaching and learning
should be the focus of professional learning communities and all stakeholders in the
school environment. This paper overviews the significant findings of this study, with
particular emphasis on an elucidation of the dimensions of productive pedagogy that
have enabled students to learn successfully in this collaborative inquiry learning
program.

           This paper acknowledges the input of Dr Carol Kuhlthau (Rutgers University), and Randi Schmidt,
                   (School librarian at Gill St Bernards’ School, Gladstone, New Jersey.

                                 Educational Leadership

          The concept of leadership in education is not new. However, a review of the
recent educational leadership literature shows a clear shift in focus from authority- or
role- or person-centered definitions to those that are cultural and learning-centered,
and which explicitly focus on the leading of learning. Lambert asserts that leadership
is not about a specific role enveloped in formal authority, rather, it is a “sacred alliance
among teaching, learning and leading” (Lambert, 2003, 425), where the emphasis is on
educative actions that create complex learning communities and high quality learning
outcomes, and a climate of continuous improvement. Oyinlade, Gellhaus & Darboe
(2003) highlight the centrality of learning-oriented leadership qualities, in particular
opportunities that focus on student learning and instructional leadership. In a similar
vein, Frost & Durrant (2003) assert that effective leadership in schools is learning-
centered leadership which integrates three critical dimensions - collaboration,

experimenting with practice, and gathering and using evidence – founded on a
framework support that involves reflection and critical discourse, planning and
strategic action about learning, rather than about the micro-political tensions of
professional authority and support (Frost & Durrant, 2003, 175-176). In essence,
educational leadership has three main facets – leadership of students, leadership of
operational tasks that move the school towards its learning goals, and leadership
through partnerships (Harris, 2003, p. 315).

                      Leadership and School Librarians

           The concept of educational leadership of school librarians is also not new. It
is articulated in terms of concepts such as “school librarian as teacher”, “partnerships”,
“collaborations”, “learning outcomes” and “evidence-based practice”. For example,
role statements typically state school librarians being:
    • “ knowledgeable about current research on teaching and learning and skilled in
         applying its findings to a variety of situations”
    • “committed to the process of collaboration”;
    • “works closely with individual teachers in the critical areas of designing
         authentic learning tasks and assessments and integrating the information and
         communication abilities required to meet subject matter standards”;
    • “an effective instructor of students”;
    • “provides leadership … in bringing an awareness of information issues into
         collaborative relationships with teachers, administrators, students, and others”
         (ALA, 1998)

           However, such leadership outcomes are seemingly difficult to obtain, and
often with disappointing setbacks along the way – budget and staffing cuts, and
reduced morale. These outcomes are predicated on a number of key assumptions
central to the leadership issue:
    • school librarians read research about teaching and learning, and incorporate
        findings of this research into their instructional practices;
    • school librarians do teach, and the teaching-instructional role is a clearly
        evident phenomena in schools;
    • school librarians have a strong and positive collaborative relationship with
        classroom teachers;
    • school librarians clearly articulate their learning leadership in terms of learning
        outcomes; and
    • instructional collaborations result in students achieving higher levels of
        literacy, reading, learning, problem-solving and technology skills.

          Some evidence suggests that these assumptions may not reflect current
reality. McClure & Bishop (1989) and Turner (2002) report that librarian’s use of
research is low, purportedly because of no time to read research, and because research
does not seem to resolve operational concerns. Lau’s survey of principals’ perceptions

of school librarians (Lau, 2002) found that while 80% of principals believe that the
school library and school librarian play a role in the school, only 37% of principals
said that the school librarian made them familiar with current research of library
programs and student achievement, and 35% were made familiar with current research
on library programs and reading development. In addition, only 50% of principals
saw their school librarian working in the classroom; indeed, 50% of principals saw the
role of the school librarian to be that of library “caretaker”.

           While there is research evidence linking the instructional role of school
librarians to student achievement, the extent to which this takes place is largely
undetermined, though a prevailing perception is that it is low. In a recent study of 154
public school libraries in the US state of Delaware, (100% of all public school libraries
in the state) undertaken by Todd (2005), school librarians were asked to identify the
nature of and extent of their instructional involvement in relation to English Language
Arts, Social Studies, Science and Mathematics. The following categories were used in
this study to identify the level of interaction:
    • Cooperation: The teacher and the school librarian may communicate
        informally about a short term project but work independently;
    • Coordination: The teacher and school librarian may meet together to discuss a
        lesson/unit of study. However, the individual goal setting, learning experience
        design, teaching, and evaluation are done independently;
    • Collaboration: The teacher and school librarian jointly set goals, design
        learning experiences, teach and evaluate a comprehensive unit of study.

           This study found that cooperations were the predominant mode of school
librarians’ interaction with the school community. The data on the number of
coordinations indicate that many school librarians do not engage in any level of formal
interaction with teaching faculty in relation to curriculum activities that involve the
library. Compared to the number of cooperations and coordinations, the number of
collaborations is low. Callison’s findings of surveys of school librarians in Indiana
shows similar results (2005). 48% of high schools, 44% of middle schools and 25% of
elementary schools reported that some teachers and the school librarian collaboratively
plan and teach curriculum units. Overall, available data show that the concept of
collaboration is more espoused than practised by school librarians.

            In the context of educational leadership and school libraries, a critical
question is: What constitutes effective shared pedagogy that enables learning
outcomes? There is considerable professional literature encouraging school librarians
to engage in classroom collaborations, and extensive documentation of exemplars of
collaboratively planned units integrating information literacy instruction and
curriculum content (see for example recent books by: Loertscher, D., Koechlin, C., &
Zwaan, S., 2004; Bishop, K., 2003; Johnson, M., 2003). However, there has been
little teasing out of what constitutes the effective dynamics, processes and strategies of
classroom teacher – school librarian collaborations, and articulating the pedagogical

basis on which effective teaching might be built. In addition, little research has also
explored one of the fundamental assumptions underpinning school librarian
collaborations, that is, that classroom teachers actually want to collaborate with school
librarians, and actually endorse the mutual planning, design, implementation and
evaluation of instructional interventions.

           This does not mean that principles of what might constitute appropriate
pedagogy have not been identified. Donham, Bishop, Kuhlthau, & Oberg (2001), in
documenting the outcomes of the Readers Digest Information Power Project for
example implicitly and explicitly identify that effective shared instruction centers on
principles of learning as a process of social and personal construction:
    • Learners actively searching for meaning and understanding;
    • learners constructing deep knowledge and deep understanding rather than
        passively receiving it;
    • learners directly involved and engaged in the discovery of new knowledge;
    • learners encountering alternative perspectives and conflicting ideas so that they
        are able to transform prior knowledge and experience into deep
        understandings;
    • learners transferring new knowledge and skills to new circumstances;
    • learners taking ownership and responsibility for their ongoing learning and
        mastery of curriculum content and skills;
    • learners contributing to social well being, the growth of democracy, and the
        development of a knowledgeable society.

          The issue of what constitutes effective shared school librarian-teacher
pedagogy raises a myriad of questions: Do teacher-school librarian collaborations
actually work, that is, do they enable students to achieve? Do they enable students to
achieve better and/or more than traditional instructional methods such as isolated
library lessons not linked to curriculum content? What is the nature of the
achievement enabled by teacher-school librarian collaborations? If collaborations do
work, why is participation in collaborations by school librarians seemingly low? Is
collaboration the most appropriate mode of instructional intervention? Should school
librarians focus on the individual and small group help rather than class room
collaborations? What are the key pedagogical processes that underpin the design and
implementation of successful collaborations?

            Productive Pedagogy: The Goal of Collaboration

          This paper seeks to understand some of the dynamics of successful teacher-
school librarian collaboration, through the lens of the Productive Pedagogy framework
developed by Gore, Griffiths, & Ladwig, (2002). Productive pedagogy is concerned
about what is being taught and the quality of learning produced. Based on a series of
research studies in Queensland, Australia in 2002, Gore, Griffiths, & Ladwig sought to
develop a model of productive pedagogy that results in high quality student learning

and improved outcomes. As a framework for quality teaching and learning, it is built
around four fundamental principles, namely Intellectual Quality, Relevance,
Supportive Environment, and Recognition of Difference. Intellectual quality centers on
the development of higher order thinking, depth of knowledge, depth of
understanding, ability to engage in substantive conversation, ability to recognize
knowledge as problematic, and reading literacy grounded in language, grammar, and
technical vocabulary. Relevance is about learning that is linked to students’
background knowledge, connected to real life contexts, and where students solve
intellectual and real world problems, and integrate knowledge from diverse fields to
develop new understandings. A supportive classroom environment is about providing
a socially supportive and positive learning environment where students have a say in
the pace, direction and outcome of their lessons, where they are engaged and on-task,
where performance criteria are made explicit, where diverse cultural backgrounds are
brought into play, and where a sense of community, identity and active citizenship are
fostered. Recognition of difference refers to the dynamics of learning as an inclusive
social and cultural process of community and identity building, where diversity and
difference are recognized and integrated as part of the teaching and learning process.
The dimensions of productive pedagogy are shown in Table 1.

           Table 1: Productive pedagogy dimensions, items and key questions
                                INTELLECTUAL QUALITY

 Higher order thinking           Are higher order thinking and critical analysis occurring?

 Depth of knowledge              Does the lesson cover central concepts and their complex relations
                                 in any depth, detail or level of specificity?

 Depth of students'              Do the work and response of the students provide evidence of
 understanding                   understanding of concepts or ideas?

 Substantive conversation        Does classroom talk break out of the initiation/ response/ evaluation
                                 pattern and lead to sustained dialogue between students, and
                                 between teachers and students?

 Knowledge as problematic        Are students critiquing and second-guessing texts, ideas and
                                 knowledge?

 Meta-language                   Are aspects of language, grammar, and technical vocabulary being
                                 foregrounded?

                                        RELEVANCE

 Knowledge integration           Does the lesson range across diverse fields, disciplines and
                                 paradigms?

 Link to background knowledge    Is there an attempt to connect with students' background
                                 knowledge?

 Connection to the world beyond the         Do lessons and the assigned work have any resemblance or
 classroom                                  connection to real life contexts?

 Problem-based curriculum                   Is there a focus on identifying and solving intellectual and/or real-
                                            world problems?

                                SUPPORTIVE CLASSROOM ENVIRONMENT

 Students' direction of activities          Do students have any say in the pace, direction or outcome of the
                                            lesson?

 Social support for student                 Is the classroom a socially supportive, positive environment?
 achievement

 Academic Engagement                        Are students engaged and on-task?

 Explicit quality performance criteria      Are criteria for student performance made explicit?

 Student self-regulation                    Is the direction of student behaviour implicit and self-
                                            regulatory or explicit?

                                         RECOGNITION OF DIFFERENCE

 Cultural knowledge values                  Are diverse cultural knowledges brought into play?
 cultures

 Public representation of Inclusive         Are deliberate attempts made to increase the participation of
 participation                              all students of different backgrounds?

 Narrative                                  Is the teaching principally narrative, or is it expository?

 Group identities in learning               Does teaching build a sense of community and identity?
 community

 Active Citizenship                         Are attempts made to foster active citizenship?


                           Research Questions and Approach
           The productive pedagogy framework provides the lens for examining
qualitative data sets derived from a study which focused on the instructional
interventions of school librarians in partnership with classroom teachers. This analysis
sought to answer the question: do school librarian-teacher collaborations contribute to
productive pedagogy, evidenced in intellectual quality, relevance, supportive
environment, and recognition of difference? In other words, is the productive
pedagogy framework useful for understanding the benefits collaborative instructional
process of school librarians and classroom teachers?

            Context and Sample: Gill St Bernards’ School, NJ

           The context for this research was the Grade 9 cohort at Gill St Bernards’
school, New Jersey. This school is an independent, non-sectarian, college preparatory,
elementary and secondary day school. The research involved 43 students (21 girls, 22
boys) undertaking a semester long course “Research Project” which focuses on
developing students’ critical skills in research, reading, writing and presentation of
ideas. Its central feature is the collaboration of 7 teachers and the school librarian to
develop complex research skills, strategic and deep information seeking, higher-order
information analysis and synthesis to represent new understandings as a result of the
research. The instructional program is built around the stages of Kuhlthau’s
Information Search Process (1984) and a series of carefully planned interventions
staged through the instructional program and targeted to the knowledge construction
process. The course has two phases: staged instructional intervention culminating in
major oral presentation (7 weeks); followed by a guided free-choice research paper (7
weeks) within the theme: “Celebration in Culture” in which students demonstrate
mastery of a range of research skills and generate a research paper that demonstrates
new knowledge and understanding. This research had several objectives:
        • to understand more fully the knowledge construction process of students
            as they engage in sustained use of a range of information sources;
        • to identify patterns of subject access during the search process – through
            digital, print and personal sources;
        • to identify patterns of cognitive intents / goals during the search process;
        • to identify the affective-emotional dimensions of engaging in a sustained
            research project, and
        • to identify some of the enablers and barriers to learning though shared
            instruction.


                         Data Collection and analysis

           Data were collected from multiple sources. The key data collection
instrument was a free generation written protocol administered at three stages in the
information search process undertaken by the students (Initiation, Formulation/Focus
and Presentation stage of research). Through this protocol we sought to uncover
students’ base knowledge, perceptions on levels of knowledge and their information
seeking and use experience in order to measure changes in the knowledge construction
process, and to examine how attitudes and behaviors changed from initiation to
presentation. In relation to intellectual quality, the protocol sought to measure
students’ changes in knowledge about their chosen topic in five ways:
   1. Substance of knowledge. The students were asked to state what they know about
   their topic on an open question “Take some time to think about your research topic.
   Now write down what you know about this topic.” The students were free to
   describe topics in their own words. The students completed this question at three

  stages of the project. Conceptual change in the students’ knowledge was tracked
  through classifying the statements students used to describe their topical knowledge.
  This classification was based on Graesser & Clark’s typology (1984) of statements
  based on the nature of relationships embedded in them. The statements were:
   -Properties:               statements describing characteristics
   -Manner:                    statements describing processes, styles, actions
   -Reason:                   statements of explanations of how and why
   -Outcome:                  statements providing end result
   -Causality:                statements showing some event causally leads to another
   -Set Membership:           statements about class inclusion
   -Implication:              statements showing predictive relations
   -Value judgment:            statements presenting personal position or viewpoint

  2. Amount of knowledge. This was measured by a count of the number of statements
  students used to describe their topical knowledge, as well a as the count of isolated
  concepts listed.

  3. Structure of knowledge. This was based on the way in which the students
  structured their descriptions of the topic. Students’ representations of their
  knowledge at each stage were examined and coded in terms of their coherence and
  structural centrality, and were categorized in terms of: (a) discrete ideas, unrelated,
  or (b) some coherent structure, interrelatedness, or (c) high level of coherence and
  structural centrality

  4. Perceptions of knowledge. The students were asked to indicate their own
  estimate of their topical knowledge, coded: Nothing, Not Much, Some, Quite a Bit,
  A Great Deal.

  5. Title of knowledge. The students were asked to give a title for their inquiry
  project, which was considered to reflect the degree of focus/specification of topical
  knowledge, and an overall conceptualization of their understanding.

In addition, some additional open questions were asked, including what they liked
most and least about the research process, and what they had learned doing the
research paper.

          The second data collection instrument was a structured search log kept by
students which recorded all the sources used in constructing their research papers. For
each source, students were also asked to list the words they used to look for
information; give its citation; give a rating of its usefulness in doing the topic (Very
useful; Somewhat useful; Not useful at all); and to establish how they perceived that
this information would help them in the knowledge building process. Students were
asked to identify the primary cognitive use of the source, based on Todd’s Information
Intents (1999). The intents were:

     • find some new facts about my             • sort out some vague ideas I have
       topic                                      about the topic
     • get some background information          • find some explanations for the
       on my topic                                ideas I have
     • develop my particular theme more         • find some different viewpoints
     • get more specific details about            about the topic
       facts I already know                     • clarify things I didn’t fully
     • help me find some connections              understand before
       between facts I already have             • help me work out what my
     • correct some ideas I know are              viewpoint is on the topic
       wrong                                    • help me form an opinion on the
     • change my mind about some of               topic
       my ideas                                 • come to some conclusion about
     • help me find out if some ideas I           these ideas
       already have are right or wrong          • work out if I agree or disagree
     • help me feel stronger about some           with the ideas I have
       of my ideas                              • find an argument to back up my
     • see if some guesses I have made            ideas
       are right
     • work out if I should stick with my
       ideas / viewpoint

          The third data collection instrument was Affective Domain / Next Task Log.
This log asked students in each class session to write one sentence about how they
were feeling at this stage of their research, and what they saw as their next task. It
sought to track the change of feelings associated with information seeking and use.
The coding was based on the predominant emotions expressed in Kuhlthau’s research
on the Information Search Process: confident, disappointed, frustrated, relieved,
confused, doubtful, optimistic, satisfied, uncertain, and sure.

                                   Some findings

                               Initiation of research task
          The initial representations of students’ knowledge of their topics were
primarily lists of unrelated concepts, and statements about the topics which listed a
number of properties, and language associations (such as alternative expressions or
labels). Overall, statements were primarily property (“is a” statements such as
“Valentine’s Day is red”), manner (describe how something happens, for example “the
food is cooked in an earth oven”); and generic descriptions of their topic that showed a
surface level of existing knowledge: “the moon glows at night”. The initial
representations had an average of 4 statements, with an overall range from 0-11
statements, indicating a low level of preexisting knowledge of their topics. Typically
the statements were randomly recorded - unstructured, with no clear sequence or

organization; and with an embedded guess work “I think that…” preceding some
statements, indicating some uncertainty or inaccuracy about the statements. When
some organizational structure was evident, this was primarily a chronological /
historical sequence of facts. Students overall indicated that they knew little about their
topics.

                      Midpoint of research task: focus formulation
           The midpoint of the project coincided with students writing and submitting a
100 word abstract to convey the scope and structure of their reports. This task was the
culmination of a process where students engaged in building background knowledge
of their topics, mapping out the scope and establishing the particular focus of their
research. Instructional interventions that facilitated this included: working with
appropriate sources to get background information; concept mapping and mind
mapping techniques to chart the scope of topics; advanced web searching techniques;
strategies for dealing with conflicting information in different sources; as well as
personal interviews with class teachers and school librarian to discuss resource needs,
barriers to searching, and other issues the students might be experiencing.

           The analysis of the students’ representations of their knowledge showed an
increase in number of propositional statements. The representations ranged from 6 to
34 statements; with the average number of 17 statements. Consistent with a focus on
building background knowledge, there was still a strong focus on properties, and
representations contained lists of facts describing characteristics; as well as manner
statements describing processes, styles, actions. However, there was also a strong
presence of reason statements – the provision of explanations of how and why - in
relation to factual statements For example, explaining why particular rituals take
place within African funerals, linking back to belief systems and social practices.
These explanations tended to be elaborative and inclusive rather than descriptive, that
is, the students did not just add list of facts, but made explanatory connections that
both expanded and integrated isolated facts listed in their initial representations.

          Unlike the initial representations, the mid-point representations showed
some evidence of organizational structure of ideas – that is, there was some attempt to
develop conceptual groupings of facts, rather than randomly listing them. For
example, with the chosen topic of “Celebrations in the Cambodian Culture”, a student
presented groupings around Cambodian New Year, Theravada Buddhism celebrations,
Water Festival, and Angkor Festival. Overall, focused themes were starting to shown
in their representations, evident by clusters of statements around distinct themes.
However, the themes were not often linked into any clear overall coherent and
integrated structure.

           The analysis of the cognitive intents linked to choice of sources showed that
the primary reason for selecting particular sources was getting a bigger picture
(building background knowledge) as was expected. Also evident were cognitive
strategies related to getting a changed picture, particularly in relation to correcting

personal misinformation, and getting a clearer picture, that is, finding more
information about a particular aspect in order to understand the ideas with greater
clarity. 37% of the students identified some attention to sorting out confusions with
facts encountered as they sought to build their background knowledge. This was
particularly in relation to conflicting facts discovered during the process of building up
background knowledge, for example, different dates for historical events, different
foods associated with a particular celebration in a country identified in different
sources, different styles of celebrating a particular event. This search for resolution
conveys an active engagement with the ideas, rather than a passive accepting of the
ideas as they were encountered. Students were actively engaging in information
seeking targeted to sorting out their own ideas so that they could move ahead with
some certainty. This also suggests that students were actually engaged in construction
of their knowledge - the transformation of information rather than the transport of
information. It also appears that the task of writing an abstract this point helped
students focus on the task. Students indicated that the abstract “kept me to the task”,
“made me get a big sense of what my overall topic was about”; “gave me a better idea
for what I wanted to concentrate on”. They also valued the detailed feedback provided
to each student either by the school librarian or the classroom teacher.

     Conclusion of Research Task: Submission of Research Paper

          Following the completion of the abstract, and consistent with Kuhlthau’s
stages of the Information Search Process, students engaged in collecting information
specific to their focus, and for constructing their papers. This collection stage was
supported by a number of instructional interventions which focused explicitly on the
analysis and synthesis of information. This included the compilation of a series of
note cards in the students’ own words, each recording central ideas with supporting
ideas based on the selection of information that the students considered highly
pertinent to their topic; the sequencing and grouping of the note cards to assemble
ideas into interrelated themes and to build an overall integrated and coherent structure.
The initial arrangement of these cards formed the outline of the paper and the first
draft. A week after the completion and submission of the paper, students were given
the third writing task, asking them to write down again what they knew about their
topic. As with previous writing protocols this was done from memory, with no
reference to the note cards or working manuscripts.

          The analysis of the knowledge representations showed that the average
number of statements was 31, with a range from 8 to 63. This is considerably more
than the initial representations. At this stage, there was no evidence of listing of
isolated concepts. The representations showed clearer and more precise listing of
properties and manner statements, as well as increased use of statements that presented
reasons, outcomes, causality, implications, predictive, reflective – all indicative of
increased complexity and specificity of topics. Four students showed a decrease in
number of statements when compared to the second representation, and on analysis,

these reflected higher levels of synthesis – that is, the students coalesced increasingly
long lists of properties and manners into conceptual categories, and simply presented a
more monceptual statement. The final representations also showed higher levels of
structural centrality and conceptual coherence to form an integrated whole – that is, an
overall integrated and interlinked structure, yet subgroups of ideas that were clearly
sequenced. For example, one student’s representation on Halloween showed a clear
organizational structure around history, central beliefs, processes, and celebration time
line. These were interlinked, with attention given to explanations and followed
through with implications.

           The analysis of the cognitive intents from midpoint to endpoint showed that
the cognitive strategies of getting a bigger picture and getting a clearer picture were
still important, however, these were associated with delving into the sub-themes of
their focused topics, and still getting more facts, clarifying aspects in process of
sorting and writing, rather than building more general background knowledge.
However, a distinctive feature of the final representations related to getting a position
in a picture, that is, developing personal reflections, expressing viewpoints, making
positional statements and drawing out comparisons, for example, “I think the religious
aspect of the holiday is fascinating. It is interesting because in the US our belief
system in religion doesn’t seem to be so powerful. In Cambodia it is their life”. In
relation to Korean Christmas and men being waited on by wives, one student wrote:
“in my culture that would never be thought of, I think it would be thought to be
wrong”.

           There was also some evidence of clearer focus on their topics through an
examination of the titles that students gave to their papers. These tended to move from
generic titles, to more narrowly focused topics, and more explicit of the content of
their papers. For example: Halloween ´Halloween in America and Mexico
´Halloween and the Day of the Dead; Funerals ´Egyptian Funerals ´Ancient
Egyptian Funerals. A few of the titles presented at the final stage show an interesting
development – expressing a final title in both a creative and a narrative way, for
example: World Cup ´World Cup Celebration ´World Cup soccer and its cult-like
following; Woodstock ´Woodstock and hippies ´Woodstock: The beginning of the
end. Perhaps the students have been able to distance themselves from the topic and
look at it from the outside, and more conceptually, which may imply a really inherent
understanding of the topic as opposed compiling a product for the sake of completing
the task.

                 Productive Pedagogy: Intellectual Quality

          The representations of students’ knowledge at the different stages suggest
that the collaborative program of instruction contributed to growth of intellectual
quality. The development of knowledge representations from simplistic, superficial
and disjointed structures to structures that embedded explanations, causal, predictive

and reflective statements reflected this change. Particularly noticeable was the
analysis and organization of ideas into structured conceptual groupings, which
conveyed a sense of knowledge coherence and depth. Knowledge depth was further
conveyed in the use of specific terminology associated with the celebrations, and the
explanatory details surrounding these. There was substantive evidence that students
were using the language specific to the topic domain, not just providing the terms, but
clarity of providing descriptions and explanations surrounding these terms. For
example, one student’s study of the Mexican celebration “Day of the Dead” made
increasing use of specific terminology in Spanish, Mexican Day of the Dead (Día de
los Muertos), the Aztec month of Miccailhuitontli, presided over by the "Lady of the
Dead" (Mictecacihuatl) with clear explanations of the relationship between these two.
Another student, whose topic was Kwanza (the African American celebration),
showed considerable depth of understanding when discussing the principles of
Kujichagulia (Self-Determination).

           Given that the knowledge representations in this study were constructed
from memory, the students progressed in developing deep understanding of their
topics, and this matched the cognitive strategies used when searching for information
in a range of sources. Overall, the choice of sources showed increasing complexity
and depth. The students’ search logs showed that background knowledge was
typically built through using encyclopedia references to the particular celebration, or
descriptions of the celebration in country-specific books, or information gathered from
country, travel or festival web sites. There was also some use made of compendiums
which listed and briefly described numerous festivals and celebrations around the
world. However, as students progressed, there was some change in the nature of the
sources used, particularly to print and electronic sources that dealt solely with the
particular celebration as a basis for building deeper knowledge.

           In terms of the intellectual quality dimension of substantive conversation,
the overall fluency and fluidity of the written representations indicate ability to
substantially communicate in writing about their topical knowledge. Students aslo
engaged in a number of interviews with their classroom teacher and school librarian as
they progressed with their research. Their written comments showed that they valued
the opportunity to talk about their projects – both in terms of substantive content, and
the research process. They saw that these conversations helped to clarify the direction
and scope of their research, and helped them determine what were the most pertinent
ideas for their topics. One student wrote: “I enjoyed the actual research and found it
helpful to talk about my topic to the librarian, which was easy to do because the
research helped me know the stuff really well”. Others commented: “We knew we
were expected to talk about our topics with our teachers, so it makes you concentrate
on the topic and know the details”, and “If I had to explain it to someone and give
good details, I could”.

         There was some evidence that students could deal with conflicting facts or
viewpoints. For example, a student encountered different customs about St Patrick’s

Day celebration, and it was not until she identified the origin of the information
sources (USA and Ireland) that she was able to resolve this confusion. Another
student exploring Kwanza encountered different descriptions of the historical origins
of this celebration, and in his second writing task acknowledged that she was “finally
enjoying reading the information from the different books; it was interesting to get
different ideas once I learned how to handle them – reading is the easiest part. Putting
the whole thing together was the hardest part”. Students showed evidence of
constructing arguments and explanations in relation to conflicting aspects of topics.
For example, one student acknowledged different sources that showed different
descriptions of Norwegian Christmas celebrations (encyclopedia versus book focusing
on Scandinavian celebrations), and said that “learning to get the right facts was hard to
do”.

      Productive Pedagogy: Supportive Classroom Environment
           Students’ responses to the open questions shed light on aspects of the
learning process and learning environment they valued during the program. An
analysis of the feelings experienced by students showed that the research was
somewhat of an emotional rollercoaster journey. There was a very distinctive ebb and
flow of emotions which followed the deadlines that were crafted by the teachers and
the librarian to guide the students effectively through the research process. Students
had to meet six separate deadlines in the process: a proposal identifying their focused
topic, note cards identifying central ideas for constructing their paper, bibliography,
outline, rough draft, and final paper. In addition, at the completion of the paper,
student has to write an abstract demonstrating their ability to succinctly summarize
their research.

          At the commencement of the research, the expressions of feelings varied
from a state of confidence about the task, to hesitation and uncertainty, for example;
“pretty good”, “a little nervous”, “very scared”, “worried”, “freaking out”, “in pain”.
There was an increase in optimism and confidence as they identified a general topic
and begin to investigate sources for relevant information to build their background
knowledge. As deadlines approached, particularly the abstract and note cards, most
students reported decrease in confidence, and increase in frustration and uncertainty.
As they passed these deadlines and had feedback on the scope and structure of their
papers, they typically began a slow climb back to being optimistic and confident,
although some frustrations with sources and deadlines and achieving focus clearly
continued to surface. It was at this point – the point where complex information
processing and knowledge construction takes place – analysis, synthesis, dealing with
conflict, structuring arguments, sequencing ideas – that there was an increase in
negative emotions – with “stress”, “pressure” and “brain strain” being reported. This
increased as deadlines for the outline and draft approached. At the time of submission
of the paper, students expressed relief and confidence (because of level of research
done), with a widespread acknowledgement that it was “hard work” but worthwhile,

because “I learned heaps”. This roller coaster of emotions was recognized by the
teaching team, and interventions implemented to support students.

           Individual meetings and feedback sessions encouraged students to talk about
their feelings, and students could provide examples of note cards or draft abstracts for
critique. Students clearly valued the supportive environment, particularly shown in
opportunities for dialogue, feedback, encouragement and enabling them to deal with
the emotional and intellectual demands of the task. The supportive environment was
evident in other ways: the instructional interventions explicitly targeted to the skills
requirements of the project, for example, the class activities that helped them impose
structure on their ideas and transform them into personal understanding, particularly
through the presentation of abstract, notecards and outline: “This was a very
exhausting process, but none the less, it was all worth it. I finally learned how to write
a proper paper, not only for research, but any paper in general. I got to spend quality
time with my teacher and librarian. The three things I enjoyed in writing and research
are reading the books, making an outline, and LEARNING. I definitely learned a lot –
both about my interesting topic, and the research to make it happen”. One student
commented: “A six page research paper scared … me, but with the help I got while
doing the project, I knew I could do it. This project opened me to new ideas, and how
to write my own ideas and thoughts based on them. I enjoyed recording my thoughts
because I like to express how I am feeling during the process. This allowed my
teachers and librarians to know my thinking throughout the course and to guide me
better”. Another student said that “my teacher and librarian were on the same page”.

           Students also valued the instructional intervention that modeled the
intellectual scaffolds for successfully completing the task. One student commented:
“I have learned many things about the research process after completing this project.
The tracking sheets showed me that organization is important when researching. It
helped me manage the time and showed me just how indepth my knowledge became.
Another good thing was that there was always help available from the teachers and
librarians”. The students did not feel abandoned during the research process,
particularly at the writing stage, when complex thinking process are required. For
example, one student said: “I knew what to do all along the way, and when I got stuck,
I could get help right away. I didn’t get the notecards at first, but I was shown how to
move them around in interesting ways”.

           Students also valued that the whole process was presented to them with
stages and milestones to be reached. They were provided with guidelines which
encompassed the whole learning process, clear expectations of tasks to be submitted,
criteria for assessment, dates, and feedback and support mechanisms. Some students
acknowledged that the expectations were high, as one student commented: “I
wondered if I would make it, but I did! YEAH. I liked being able to do it with the
deadlines and get to know where I was going”; and “keeping up with the deadlines
was stressful, but they helped me get it done”. The specification of stages,
expectations and criteria provided direction for the students. In the analysis of the

Affective Domain / Next Task Logs, there was some evidence to suggest that students
were making decisions about their next steps on the basis of the stages and deadlines
spelled out to them, for example “I must begin my notecards because they are due in a
week”. By providing direction and regulation, this appeared to keep students on task
and engaged, as well as able to manage all of the complexities of the task, which
initially were quite daunting to the students: “I learned to follow a set plan and be
organized”
                       Productive Pedagogy: Relevance

          Two aspects of relevance, particularly links to students’ background
knowledge and connection to the world beyond the classroom, came through in the
study. When students were asked to identify how much they new of the topic, there
was a definite and clear progression from very little to a great deal, with links made to
low levels of initial knowledge. Four categories emerged in the changes to the amount
of knowledge: (1) the students stated that they know “heaps” more; (2) they knew lots
more, and expressed surprise at the breadth and depth of their current knowledge; (3)
they knew lots more, but felt they still could learn more; and (4) they knew lots, but
mentioned some dissatisfaction about not knowing enough.

          Students were given free choice of topic within the theme “Celebration of
Culture”. When asked at the initiation of the research why they had chosen their
particular topic, they cited personal experiences (participating in a particular
celebration), personal connections (know someone who participates), knowledge of
intriguing facts or aspects about topic, or curiosity (typically based on having read or
viewed something), as the primary reasons for selecting their particular topic. For
example, in relation to “birthdays”, a student wrote “I enjoy exploring symbols and
understanding the meaning of these symbols, such as a birthday cake”; in relation to
choosing the Chinese Dragon Festival, one student wrote: “I remember the stories my
father told me about that”. These reasons primarily reflect connections made to
personal real life contexts, and these findings underscore the importance of embedding
learning in meaningful life contexts. However, as students progressed, there was a
change in the expressions of interest, initially coming from outside the research (that
is, the personal connection) to interests generated by the project itself. As students
learned more about their topic, the specific new knowledge they acquired generated
curiosity and motivation, encouraging them to dig deeper into their topic. For
example: from “Soccer is my favorite sport. I will get up during the night to watch
matches” to “I find it totally amazing that 5 billion watched the 2002 game and want
to find out some more about that”.

          Students also identified the long-term relevance of their learning. When
asked what had they learned in this project, the students identified both increase in
content knowledge, as well as acquiring a range of useful skills that would help them
further with their schooling: “help me through papers in high school, college and life
in general”; “learned the basics of writing a more professional research paper for my

senior year”; “extensive and organized research is essential for the writing of a good
paper. I learned to use information effectively and will do well in future papers”.

             Productive Pedagogy: Recognition of Difference
           The dimension of productive pedagogy focusing on recognition of
difference is supported in some of the data. Of course, the theme “celebration of
culture” provide an opportunity to explore a range of international cultural
celebrations, and only 19% of students chose USA centered celebrations: “I want to
research something in another country; I want to go and see how they live. I know
little about Asia so it would be good to learn”; “In Mexico, I find the idea of picnics in
cemeteries very interesting – and contrary to the popular view here of cemeteries” and
“I loved expanding my view of the world and this helped” In exploring a diverse range
of celebrations, some students made comparisons to events, values, circumstances and
behaviors in the USA.

          Perhaps the strongest evidence in relation to recognition of difference as a
dimension of productive pedagogy was provided in the comments made by some
students in relation to accommodation of individual needs. These students perceived
that they got individualized help on their resource needs, searching concerns and
dealing with individual things that cropped up unexpectedly, such as failed discs or
printing problems: “it was very frustrating when you work really hard to find a book
or a website and it is worth nothing and has no useful information. They [librarian and
classroom teachers] seemed to spot it right away and make suggestions which got you
going again”; “I liked coming into the library and they always seemed to be interested
in how I was doing as if I was the only one doing it”.

                                        Conclusion

This analysis sought to shed some light on whether school librarian-teacher
collaborations contribute to productive pedagogy, evidenced in intellectual quality,
relevance, supportive environment, and recognition of difference. It is evident in this
case study that the carefully planned collaboration, where students were guided in a
closely supervised way through the process of inquiry gradually lead to substantial
learning outcomes, evidenced in terms of deep knowledge and deep understanding of
their topics, in their ability to apply complex thinking skills to transform information
into knowledge, and to demonstrate their knowing This did not happen by the mere
fact of collaboration. A collaboration in and of itself may not necessarily result in
learning. It called for carefully structuring the learning environment in ways that
enabled students to be intellectually productive, that gave them choice in the scope and
direction of their learning, supported them in many ways, including instructional
interventions targeted to the knowledge construction process. It embedded into the
instructional design a range of mechanisms for supporting students throughout their
inquiry, dealing with affective, cognitive and behavioral demands of the research task.

This was clearly modeled on the Information Search Process, which provided an
instructional framework for guiding the students, and ownership of the learning was
turned over to the students, with specific interventions determined by the stage of the
search process, the affective, cognitive and behavioral needs of the learners, and the
curriculum standards and goals to be achieved.

The Productive Pedagogy framework elaborated here provides a useful set of questions
to guide the planning process for effective learning in collaborative inquiry units. Its
value comes through its focus not only on shaping the learning environment and
building a culture of meaningful, relevant learning for the students, but also thinking
about and planning for the learning outcomes to be achieved in terms of deep
knowledge and deep understanding of the curriculum topics being studied. This is the
educational leadership challenge for all school librarians. It is eloquently summed up
by the poet Edna St Vincent Millay, who provides a sense of the vision, the window of
opportunity for all school librarians:

                        “Upon this gifted age, in its dark hour
                        Rains from the sky a meteoric shower
                     Of facts, they lie unquestioned, uncombined.
                         Wisdom enough to leech us of our ill
                        Is daily spun, but there exists no loom
                                 To weave it into fabric.

                                    References
American     Association of School Librarians & Association for Educational
           Communications and Technology. (1998). Information Power: Building
           Partnerships for Learning. Chicago: American Library Association.

Bishop, K. (2003) Connecting Libraries with Classrooms: The Curricular Roles of the
         Media Specialist. Worthington, OH: Linworth Press, 2003.

Callison, D. (2005) Data from Indiana School Library Media Programs in 2004.
          Available at:
          http://www.ilfonline.org/Units/Associations/aime/Data/navigate.htm

Day, C. (2004). The passion of successful leadership. School Leadership & Management,
         24(4), 425-437.

Donham, J. K., Bishop, K., Kuhlthau, C, & Oberg, D. (2001). Inquiry based learning:
        Lessons from Library Power. Worthington, OH: Linworth.

Frost, D. & Durrant, J. (2003) Teacher Leadership: rationale, strategy and impact. School
          Leadership & Management, 23(2), 173-186.

Gore, J., Griffiths, T., & Ladwig, J. (2002). Productive Pedagogy as a Framework for
          Teacher Education: Towards Better Teaching. Newcastle: Faculty of Education,
          University of Newcastle. Available at:
          http://www.aare.edu.au/01pap/gor01501.htm

Graesser, A. & Clark, L. (1985). Structures and procedures of implicit knowledge.
         Norwood, N.J.: Ablex.

Harada, V. & Yoshina, J. (2004). Inquiry Learning Through Librarian-Teacher
         Partnerships. Worthington, OH: Linworth Press.

Harris, A. (2003). School Teacher Leadership as Distributed Leadership: heresy, fantasy
          or possibility? Leadership & Management, 23(3), 313-324

Johnson, M. (2003). Primary Sources in the Library: A Collaboration Guide for Library
         Media Specialists. Worthington, OH: Linworth Press.

Loertscher, D., Koechlin, C., & Zwaan, S. Ban Those Bird Units! 15 Models for Teaching
         and Learning in Information-rich and Technology-rich Environments. Hi Willow
         Research and Publishing, 2004

Kuhlthau, C. C. (2004). Seeking meaning: A process approach to library and information
         services. 2nd edition. Westport, CT: Libraries Unlimited.

Lambert, L. (2003). Leadership redefined: an evocative context for teacher leadership.
         School Leadership & Management, 23(4), 421-430.

Lau, D. (2002). What does you boss think about you? School Library Journal, 48(9), 52-
         55.

McLure, C. & Bishop, A. (1989). The status of research in Library and Information
        Science. College & Research Libraries, 40, 127-143.
Oyinlade, A., Gellhaus, M, & Darboe, K. (2003). Essential Behavioral Qualities for
         Effective Leadership in Schools for Students Who Are Visually Impaired: A
         National Study. Journal of Visual Impairment & Blindness, 97(7), 389-420.

Todd, R. (1999). Utilization of heroin information by adolescent girls in Australia: a
         cognitive analysis. Journal of the American Society for Information Science,
         50(1), 10-23.

Todd, R. (2005). Report of the Delaware School Library Survey2004. CISSL Unpublished
          report.

Turner, K. (2002). Do information professionals use research published in LIS journals?
         Paper presented at the 68th IFLA Council and General Conference August 18-24
         2002. Available at: http://www.ifla.org/IV/ifla68/papers/009-118e.pdf

Author Note
Ross J Todd is Associate Professor in the School of Communication, Information and
Library Studies at Rutgers, the State University of New Jersey. He is Director of Research
of the Center for International Scholarship in School Libraries (CISSL) at Rutgers. He
teaches courses in Human Information Behavior, Research Methods, as well as courses in
the School Library specialization. His current research focuses on the cognitive dynamics
of adolescent information seeking and utilization; how learners build personal
understanding in complex information environments; understanding how school libraries
contribute to student learning outcomes, and developing approaches to evidence-based
practice for school librarians.

Reproduced with permission of the copyright owner. Further reproduction prohibited without permission.