Leadership for Professional Learning towards Educational Equity: A
Systematic Literature Review

Philip E. Poekerta, Sue Swaffieldb, Ema K. Demirb, Sage A. Wrighta.
a
    University of Florida, United States b University of Cambridge, United Kingdom.


Corresponding Author: Sue Swaffield, University of Cambridge, Faculty of Education
184 Hills Road, Cambridge, CB2 8PQ, UK.
ses42@cam.ac.uk


Abstract: This systematic review of recent research explored the uncharted intersection
of literature on educational leadership, professional learning, and educational equity. It
investigated leadership approaches to shaping the professional development and on-
going learning of educators that supports more equitable outcomes for students. The
underlying motivation for the work is our concern for the educational experiences and
achievements of marginalised students, and for professional learning to address these
inequalities. Guided by the Preferred Reporting Items for Systematic Reviews and
Meta-Analyses (PRISMA) Statement, and iterative selection of literature based on
relevance and quality judged by weight of evidence assessments, we identified 41
empirical items for detailed analysis. The outcome was five themes: Critical framing of
social justice issues; Dialogue and enquiry; Learning and identity development;
Context, resources, and motivations; Normalising inclusion and shared leadership. A
further six articles informed a conceptual framework linking professional learning and
outcomes that developed existing models. Critique of linear conceptualisations of
learning, and affinity with the values and philosophy of the process model of education
championed by Lawrence Stenhouse, prompted proposing the themes as nascent
principles. These require further research, yet they have immediate practical utility for
educational leaders and teachers working in pursuit of educational equity.

Keywords: Professional Learning; Leadership; Educational Equity; Review of Research

Introduction
A significant consensus had been achieved on the characteristics of effective
professional learning by the advent of the new millennium (e.g. Desimone et al., 2002).
Yet, since then, teachers have continued to report ineffective or irrelevant professional
learning opportunities (Darling-Hammond et al., 2009). Worse still, the achievement
gaps and education debts between historically marginalised groups of students and their
more affluent peers persist (Ladson-Billings, 2006; Schleicher, 2019). Within this gap
between what we know and what we do (Pfeffer et al., 2000), this article surveys recent
literature connecting leadership with professional development and learning, examining
research that addresses issues of educational inequity in schools. This effort is
undertaken to identify how leaders of professional learning can employ particular
approaches in the ongoing support of educators that lead to more equitable outcomes for
students.
         For this article, educational equity is taken to mean a state in which dimensions
of privilege and oppression (e.g., race, ethnicity, socioeconomic status, gender, sexual
orientation, religion) are not predictive of or correlated with educational outcomes,
broadly defined, in any significant way, and where all learners are able to participate
fully in quality learning experiences. Leadership is understood as the exercise of
influence and can be undertaken formally or informally by anyone. Following the
reasoning of Opfer and Pedder (2011), we deliberately use the term professional
learning to avoid focus on specific professional development programmes, activities, or
individuals at the expense of context and the situatedness of learning which includes
continuous practices of interaction and reflection. The authors acknowledge that they
are privileged by virtue of race but offer this scholarship as allies (Patton & Bondi,
2015) working for social justice for historically marginalised groups.
         This literature review aims to address three research questions (RQs):

   1. What models are suggested by recent literature review and conceptual articles
      that include consideration of leadership, professional learning and educational
      equity?
   2. How can leadership advance professional learning toward educational equity?
   3. What are the challenges and proposed solutions concerning leadership for
      professional learning commonly identified in the literature?

Method
This review is guided by the Preferred Reporting Items for Systematic Reviews and
Meta-Analyses (PRISMA) Statement (Moher et al., 2009). The PRISMA Statement
consists of a 27-item checklist and a four-phase flow diagram (see Figure 1 below) that
sets out how to identify, select, and critically appraise relevant research, and how to
collect and analyse data from the studies included in the review. It also provides the
format for presenting information, which has guided this article. Further, this review
follows the extension of the PRISMA statement (Welch et al., 2012) for the
development of equity-focused systematic reviews. The PRISMA approach was chosen
to ensure rigour and minimise bias in the review process. Quality and relevance
appraisal was guided by the Weight of Evidence (WoE) framework developed by
Gough (2007), as explained in further detail below.

Identifying search terms
This review attempts to map the emerging field of research that addresses the
increasingly urgent issue of promoting educational equity and social justice through


                                                                                        1

leadership for professional learning. Synonyms to the concepts were identified using an
online thesaurus. Discussion of these synonyms led to the identification of the following
search terms:

   ● Leadership, educational leaders, school leaders, school leadership, teacher
     leaders
   ● Professional learning, professional development, career development
   ● Equity, egalitarian, equal, equality, equitable, fair, fairness, inegalitarian,
     inequity, inequality, injustice, just, justice, justness, unequal, unjust.

Search strategy
Step 1: A Boolean search phrase was used to combine the search terms and identify
relevant research outputs. An initial full-text search in electronic databases was
conducted within Scopus and Web of Science in November 2019. These databases were
chosen according to their relevance to the topic: Scopus (Social Sciences), and Web of
Science (Multidisciplinary Sciences, Education, Educational Research, Education
Scientific Disciplines, Educational Psychology). Synonyms were made interchangeable
and could appear anywhere in the text. This search generated 488 items of which 27
were review and conceptual articles. Of these, 20 were considered relevant for
answering RQ1 and underwent an in-depth review by the authors. A subset of six
articles was employed in developing a conceptual framework summarised in this article
because they spoke to the constructs addressed within it.
Step 2: In February 2020, a second search was carried out within Scopus and Web of
Science to generate empirical research with a more explicit focus on leadership for
professional learning towards equity. This time, search outputs were limited to subject
terms, meaning words had to appear as keywords, in the title, or in the abstract of
identified items. To avoid limitations of using pre-determined search terms and
controlled vocabulary (Brunton et al., 2012), additional hand-searches were carried out
for the period 2009 - 2020 in the key journal Professional Development in Education
Journal (PDiE) and searching the reference list of the bibliographical review by
Hallinger and Kulophas (2020). The process used to complete this second search, and
the results of the search, now follow.

Eligibility criteria
Publication type was limited to peer-reviewed, empirical studies. Items related to the
professional learning of in-service K-12 and early years educators were included.
Accordingly, items related to post-secondary or higher education were excluded as were
pre-service or student teachers. The time frame of the last 10 years was set to generate
recent empirical research outputs that could tell us about the direction and emerging
issues of future research. The inclusion and exclusion criteria are displayed in Table 1
below.




                                                                                       2

Table 1. Inclusion and exclusion criteria.



Inclusion criteria                               Exclusion criteria
Population                                       Population
In-service teachers                              Pre-service teachers
K-12 teachers                                    Teacher educators
School leaders                                   Student teachers
Principals                                       Context
School administrators                            Post-secondary education
(District) policy makers                         Higher education
Context                                          Vocational education
K-12 education                                   College education
Early years education                            Item type
Primary school                                   Reviews
Elementary school                                Conceptual articles
Middle school                                    Conference papers
Secondary school                                 Not in English
Upper secondary school                           No full text available
Item type
Empirical
Peer reviewed



Results

Study selection
The numbers of items identified per database were Scopus (36), and Web of Science
(80). Hand-searches in PDiE and the reference list of Hallinger and Kulophas (2020)
review article generated 50 items, which led to 166 identified items in total. The
removal of duplicates (16) and non-empirical items (19), and application of
inclusion/exclusion criteria (11 removed), generated 120 items.
         Each author read all 120 abstracts, checking for a clear focus on equity/social
justice. The authors’ few discrepancies regarding relevance were resolved through
discussion until consensus was reached. This process led to the removal of 77 items.
Two articles were removed on the basis of quality (1) and relevance (1) appraisal,
leaving a total of 41 empirical items to be included in the review for RQ2 and RQ3. The
selection process is outlined in the flow-chart below (Figure 1).




                                                                                       3

Figure 1. Flow-chart of study selection.




Descriptive statistics of included items
All but one of the included items in this review are journal articles (one is a book
chapter). Per PRISMA guidance, the following surface characteristics were gathered for
each empirical item: population, context, location, and research method.




                                                                                     4

Figure 2. Descriptive statistics of included items.




As shown in Figure 2, 34 of the studies’ participants were either teachers or school
leaders, or both teachers and school leaders. Eight studies took a wider approach,
looking at schools/school districts or include parents and external partners. Only one
study had students as the focus of analysis. Given the eligibility criteria for context,
most studies had been carried out in a K-12 school setting, while one study took place in
an early childhood setting and one in an online environment.
        The qualitative studies overwhelmingly outweigh the number of quantitative
studies, while a small number of studies employ a mixed methods approach. Sample
sizes range from only two participants in some of the qualitative studies to almost a
thousand in one of the quantitative studies.

Risks of bias
Most of the studies were carried out in North America, and of these 96 percent originate
in the US. A smaller number of studies was carried out in Europe and Asia, while only
one took place in Africa. This represents a risk of geographical and cultural bias. It can
also be interpreted as a result of the limitation to research outputs in English, which may
have led to an overrepresentation of studies from English-speaking countries. It also can
be a manifestation of the relative dominance of English-speaking countries in terms of
research outputs, rather than a result of the linguistic limitation per se. However, this
review does present examples from a number of national contexts.

Quality and relevance appraisal
All empirical articles were assessed according to the Weight of Evidence (WoE)
framework for the appraisal of the quality and relevance of evidence developed by
Gough (2007). This process guided the authors’ identification of key pieces in this
review.
        The Weight of Evidence framework employs three dimensions: Evidence A is a
non review-specific assessment of the coherence and integrity of the evidence in its own
terms; Evidence B assesses the appropriateness of that form of evidence for answering
the review question; and Evidence C is a review-specific judgement about the relevance
of the focus of the evidence for answering the review questions. Each is scored on a
scale of 0-3 considering the extent to which the criteria were met: 0 = not at all met, 1 =


                                                                                         5

      met to some extent, 2 = mostly met, 3 = fully met. An overall rating: high, mid or low,
      is then established for each item based on its average score, WoE D.
              After separate scoring for WoE A, B and C, pairs of authors discussed
      discrepancies and arrived at a joint WoE D. Special attention was paid to Evidence C
      for each article, as it assessed the relevance of the focus of the evidence for the RQs of
      this review. As shown in Table 2, which gives the rankings of articles according to WoE
      C and D, a large majority of included items scored high (18) or mid (20) while only
      three (3) scored low indicating that the overall quality, methodological rigour and
      relevance of included items was generally high.

      Table 2. Weight of Evidence C and D.



Senior Leadership Focus         WoE C      WoE D         Teacher Leadership Focus    WoE C     WoE D
Braaten et a. (2017)            3          3 (high)      Brown & Crippen (2017)      3         2.67 (high)
Galloway & Ishimaru (2019)      3          3 (high)      Deckman (2017)              3         2.67 (high)
Gannon-Slater et al. (2017)     3          3 (high)      Jacobs et al. (2014)        3         2.67 (high)
Hallinger & Liu (2016)          3          3 (high)      Szelei et al. (2019)        3         2.33 (mid)
Kose (2009)                     3          3 (high)      Ezzani (2019)               2         2.33 (mid)
Miled (2019)                    3          3 (high)      Nicholson & Kroll (2015)    2         2.33 (mid)
Park (2018)                     3          3 (high)      Hynds & McDonald (2010)     2         2 (mid)
Reed & Swaminathan (2016)       3          2.67 (high)   Bryan (2011)                2         1.67 (mid)
Anthony & Hunter (2017)         2          2.67 (high)   Yoon (2016)                 2         1.67 (mid)
Hynds (2010)                    2          2.67 (high)   Ali (2014)                  1         1.67 (mid)
Kohli (2019)                    2          2.67 (high)
Mansfield (2014)                2          2.67 (high)
Mistry & Sood (2015)            2          2.67 (high)
Theoharis & O’Toole (2011)      2          2.67 (high)
Gomez-Hurtado et al. (2018)     1          2.67 (high)
Bristol (2015)                  3          2.33 (mid)
Ashadi & Rice (2016)            2          2 (mid)
Fwu & Wang (2012)               2          2 (mid)
Nehring & Fitzsimons (2011)     2          2 (mid)
Payne & Smith (2018)            2          2 (mid)
Scanlan (2010)                  2          2 (mid)
Carpenter et al. (2017)         1          2 (mid)
DeMatthews & Izquierdo (2016)   1          2 (mid)
Hajisoteriou et al. (2018)      1          2 (mid)
Lazar & Reich (2016)            2          1.67 (mid)
Martinez et al. (2019)          1          1.67 (mid)
Murakami & Tornsen (2017)       1          1.67 (mid)
Stosich (2017)                  1          1.67 (mid)
Brinia (2012)                   1          1.33 (low)
Bristol & Ponte (2013)          1          1.33 (low)
Blank (2015)                    1          1 (low)




                                                                                              6

Identifying themes
Through the reading of all items by all four authors, two domains of literature emerged:
one focusing on senior leadership, both school and district, and the other focusing on
teacher leadership, both formal and informal. Thirty-one papers were identified as
taking a senior leadership view, while 10 papers were from the perspective of teacher
leaders. Pairs of authors focused on the respective strands. Recording key points and
ideas for papers within each domain, the authors independently proposed analytical
themes, then discussed them in pairs to arrive at a set of themes for each domain. These
were finally synthesised into the following themes identified as providing answers to
RQ2 and RQ3:

   1.   Critical framing of issues toward social justice
   2.   Dialogue and enquiry
   3.   Learning and identity development
   4.   Context, resources, and motivations
   5.   Normalising inclusion and shared leadership

In the following four sections we first present the conceptual framework developed in
response to RQ1, then a thematic analysis of empirical studies addressing RQ2 and
RQ3, leading to the discussion and conclusion.

A conceptual framework of professional learning
Surveying the conceptual literature and literature reviews linking leadership and
professional learning published in the last 10 years yielded few contributions to the
consensus view that had already surfaced by the early 2000s on the characteristics of
effective professional learning: (a) content focus, (b) active learning, (c) coherence, (d)
collective participation, and (e) duration (Desimone, 2002). Certainly, publications
reinforced prior work, illustrating and replicating common themes. What has emerged,
however, is a metasynthetic view of the literature that provides a refined framework of
professional learning. The framework synthesises models proposed in conceptual
articles by Coldwell and Simkins (2011) on professional learning and Hallinger (2018)
on leadership contexts, and has been enhanced by contributions from four additional
conceptual and review pieces attributed below.




                                                                                              7

Figure 3. A conceptual framework of professional learning.




The framework is organised as a linear progression from left to right with arrows
indicating how one construct influences another, acknowledging that cyclical
relationships exist between many of the constructs, resulting in feedback loops. These
constructs, and the outcomes they influence, operate within and are moderated by the
context of the school, the institution, and the community, as well as the larger
economic, political, and socio-cultural context. More detail on each area of the
conceptual framework follows below.

Programme interventions
The construct of programme interventions describes professional learning activities
themselves. Clearly, activities vary in their format, content, and duration. Those
activities which adhere to the characteristics outlined by Desimone and colleagues
(2002) are regarded as more effective because they may have a greater likelihood of
achieving the desired outcomes of improved teacher knowledge and practice, and
student learning.

Antecedents
Participant motivations and expectations influence how educators approach professional
learning and how their approach, in turn, influences their experience (Castanheira,
2016). Coldwell and Simkins (2011) illustrated this phenomenon by pointing to a study
of a leadership development programme in which the participants’ interest in promotion
affected the extent and quality of participants’ engagement, presumably influencing the
ultimate outcomes. Hallinger (2018, p. 7) referred to this as a ‘person-specific context’,
encapsulating how job knowledge, skills, attitudes, and experiences ‘act as a prism
through which information, problems, opportunities, and situations are filtered and


                                                                                         8

interpreted’.
         Sun (2015) added teacher efficacy as a variable that influences professional
learning outcomes, capturing the influence of belief systems. Optimistic beliefs about
one’s efficacy positively influence educators’ engagement in professional learning
activities and the outcomes of those efforts. Finally, Cruz-Gonzalez and colleagues
(2019) contributed professional identity as an influencer, noting the construction of
identity is a combination of internal experiences and the surrounding context. The larger
context is discussed below.

Moderating factors
Moderating factors capture the influences of organisational contexts independently from
the antecedents. Hallinger (2018, p. 7) called these factors the ‘widely shared context’,
referring to the features of the broader environment in which professional learning
operates, separating out three categories: the school context, the institutional context,
and the community context.
School Context. The school context refers to characteristics of the school environment,
including organisational structure and culture, time for professional learning, and
support available to participants (e.g., coaching; Coldwell & Simkins, 2011). Hallinger
(2018) added ‘school improvement context’ to refer to the ways a school’s historical
context influences its improvement trajectory. According to Hallinger (2018, p. 15), the
‘trajectory defines the nature of a principal’s leadership challenge’, which moderates the
experience of professional learning, and influences its outcomes.
Institutional Context. The institutional context includes the education system in which a
school operates, like a district, or national system. Hallinger (2018) pointed to empirical
research by Lee and Hallinger (2012), which found that institutional structures influence
the role definition and behaviour of principals, with principals in more structured
systems allocating less time for administration. The degree of system centralisation,
including accountability systems, also has a great influence on the role and practice of
school leaders, and thus shapes the context (Hallinger, 2018).
Community Context. The community context is the local environment immediately
surrounding an individual school. This context is shaped by the socioeconomic status of
the student population, family involvement in school activities, the urban or rural
character of the surrounding areas, and the presence of conflict in the community
(Hallinger, 2018). This context can vary widely and have profound influences on
leadership and professional learning.

Broader context
Hallinger (2018) captured macro-level features in three categories: socio-cultural,
economic, and political:
Socio-cultural context. Leadership is value driven, and the value sets and norms for
behaviours vary geographically. Socio-cultural values fundamentally influence
perceptions of what constitutes effective leadership. For example, the Lee and Hallinger
(2012) study is referenced to note that principals from less hierarchically organised
societies may allocate more time for instructional leadership and spend more time
interacting with families and the school community.
Economic Context. Economics fundamentally shape conditions in schools, including
teacher qualifications, class size, per-pupil expenditures, parental education and
involvement, school resources, and more. Furthermore, as societies develop
economically, the role of educators is more professionalised. For example, Lee and


                                                                                         9

Hallinger (2012, pp. 12–13) documented that ‘principals from societies with higher
GDP tended to spend more time on the job’, influencing the amount of time spent on
instructional leadership.
Political Context. Education policies reflect the prevailing power structures and
relationships within a society, thus influencing the practice of leadership for
professional learning through the beliefs, attitudes, and practices of educators.
Furthermore, the political context determines the national goals of education, which in
turn set expectations for which outcomes are of the highest priority. For example, Fry
and Bi (2013) noted that in Thailand, three goals are at the heart of national education
policy: the capability to apply knowledge; student morality; and student happiness.
Setting such goals politically shapes the context in which leadership for professional
learning is undertaken.

Intermediate outcomes
Intermediate outcomes are ‘outcomes of CPD [continuing professional development]
that are conceived to be pre-conditions for the achievement of the final outcomes,
particularly learning and changes in participant behaviour’ (Coldwell & Simkins, 2011,
p. 147). These include (1) participants’ reactions to professional learning, influenced by
antecedents (i.e., participants’ expectations and motivations, efficacy, and identity). In
turn, these reactions influence (2) the learning and personal development of educators,
an outcome which itself is influenced by the moderating context at the school,
institutional, and community levels as well as the broader context. As educators learn
and develop, this influences (3) behaviour and practice in the school and classroom.
Changes in practice are again moderated by contextual factors.

Final outcomes
Final outcomes are ‘the intended effects of the CPD activities, primarily relating to
effects on organisations, teachers, and students’ (Coldwell & Simkins, 2011, p. 147). Of
greatest relevance are (1) student outcomes, both short-term, including grades, and
longer-term outcomes, including standardised assessments and quality of life outcomes.
Final outcomes for individual educators (2) include advancing career development
(Coldwell & Simkins, 2011) as well as changes in identity formation (Cruz-González et
al., 2019; García-Martínez & Tadeu, 2018). Final outcomes at the school level (3)
include improvements in the capacity of individuals, teams, and the overall school
systems and processes (Coldwell & Simkins, 2011), as well as changes in school culture
(Sun, 2015). These influences on participants and schools give rise to larger feedback
loops that influence the antecedents, moderating factors, and broader context in which
future professional learning activities are implemented.
        With this framework built on the conceptual and review literature as
background, the following section explores the findings from our second search focused
on the empirical literature that addresses issues of educational equity.

Leadership practices, challenges, and solutions
Drawing on both senior and teacher leadership focused empirical studies, this section
addresses RQ2 - investigating the ways leadership can advance professional learning
toward educational equity, and RQ3 - exploring the challenges and solutions offered in
the literature. It is structured by the five themes that emerged through analysis; within
each theme senior leadership literature is considered first followed by teacher leadership
literature. Studies tended to focus one on form of inequality (e.g., racism); many were


                                                                                        10

relevant to more than one theme; and studies with a higher WoE tend to offer evidence
for multiple themes.

Critical framing of issues toward social justice
Framing is the first theme we address since it represents the way an issue is viewed and
interpreted, both individually and collectively and thus shapes leadership actions; it also
infuses the other themes.
        Galloway and Ishimaru (2019; high WoE) draw on a framework of
organisational leadership for equity they published in 2017 in which framing is a
prominent feature. They describe framing as a driver of equitable leadership practices
and as an analytical lens for exploring how school principals prioritised developing staff
capacity to address disparities for students in minority groups. Notably the principals
worked to establish ‘“equity” framing of disparities and solutions in relation to race and
racism’ (Galloway & Ishimaru, 2019, p. 14). Nevertheless, deficit-based orientations
remained, overshadowing systemic and historic understandings of inequitable student
outcomes. Other researchers refer to the deficit framing of social justice in oppositional
terms, contrasting it with a frame of disparity (Park, 2018) or the celebration of
difference (Gomez-Hurtado et al., 2018), and frame diversity as a strength rather than a
weakness (Theoharis & O’Toole, 2011).
        Another high WoE item by Braaten and colleagues (2017) spoke to critical
framing in a study that traced the translation of data-centric reforms into practice in US
secondary schools. District leaders sought manageability and coherence by ‘bundling’
together multiple initiatives, all measured by considering disparity between students’
interim assessments and later test scores. This framing affected how school principals
mediated the reforms and in turn affected teachers’ experiences and practice, all with
consequences for students’ equitable access to learning. The research raised concerns
that the narrow framing of school improvement seriously reduced the quality of
students’ learning opportunities.

Critical framing in the teacher-focused literature
For teachers, framing creates opportunities to engage in critical reflection on the
dynamic influences of class, culture, and politics, and the ways forms of oppression
intersect (Nicholson & Kroll, 2015; mid WoE) and compete within educational
contexts. Addressing these issues directly and intentionally within professional
development programmes equips teachers to enact curricular and pedagogical changes
that will disrupt structural inequities (Jacobs et al., 2014; high WoE) and promote
socially just outcomes for students.
        Critically framing leadership development with an equity mindset can help to
ensure that teachers develop a deeper awareness of their students and their cultural
diversity while disrupting homogenised perspectives that may otherwise have been
reinforced (Deckman, 2017; high WoE; Szelei et al., 2019; mid WoE). However,
Deckman (2017) cautions school and teacher leaders to be sensitive to novice educators,
who may equate the critical reflection process with being seen as less competent than
their peers.
        Brown and Crippen (2017; high WoE) recommend that professional
development programmes pair critical reflection with a guided critical examination of
intersecting inequities affecting students from marginalised populations. This open and
authentic dialogue (Jacobs et al., 2014) challenges deficit thinking and raises
sociocultural awareness and calls for educators to commit to enacting change


                                                                                        11

(Nicholson & Kroll, 2015). In Ezzani (2019; mid WoE) teacher leaders collaboratively
examined literacy assessments with a cultural gaze and were able to identify student
populations not benefiting from the current reading curriculum.
        Studies with lower WoE scores also contribute to the critical framing theme. A
professional learning programme for teacher leaders in Pakistan (Ali, 2014) directed
explicit attention to issues of gender inequity, helping participants to overcome beliefs
contributing to such inequities in schools. Additionally, a US ethnographic study (Yoon,
2016) explored ways in which white, middle class ideology can inform or derail
collaborative efforts through the act of storytelling in professional learning contexts.
Raising awareness of members’ positionalities through reflection, reframing stories,
telling counter-narratives, and examining institutional limitations and needs can
promote more equitable perspectives about students and parents from marginalised
populations.

Dialogue and enquiry
Dialogue and engaging in enquiry emerged as intertwined activities essential to
leadership for professional learning towards social justice. In one of the key empirical
articles focusing on dialogue and enquiry Bristol (2015; mid WoE) adopts the term
‘teacher talk’ from Hardy (2010), using it to refer to dialogue among educational
professionals at all levels. A case study of rural Australian primary schools revealed
‘the enormous potential of purposeful teacher talk in the creation of more inclusive
educational practices’ (Bristol, 2015, p. 817). Teacher talk was used as a source of data,
and to challenge established cultural practices and attitudes. Inclusive action was
promoted through dialogue and reflection in trustful ‘designed communicative spaces’.
The school principals facilitated dialogue characterised by shared responsibility, equity
of voice, critical listening, curiosity, affirmation, and the challenging of implicit
assumptions.
         Similarly, the leadership of data dialogue was studied by Gannon-Slater and
colleagues (2017; high WoE). They referred to ‘data talk’ as ‘the structure and content
of team conversations about interim student performance data’ (p. 361). Through their
US study of elementary school grade-level teams, they emphasised leaders shaping the
culture, focus and nature of data dialogue in professional learning communities (PLCs),
the prioritisation of equity focused teacher enquiry, and the use of enquiry routines. The
leadership of data dialogue, the use of routines, the integration of enquiry and data all
also feature in Galloway and Ishimaru’s (2019) depiction of an enquiry culture focused
on equity. Hynds (2010; high WoE) examined social justice reform from the
perspectives of both the majority and minority stakeholder groups in New Zealand. The
study revealed resistance as a developmental process as well as a construct, stressing
that leaders must involve everyone in collective enquiry and sustained dialogue
facilitated by inclusive protocols and principles.
         Finally, Park’s (2018; high WoE) analysis of dialogue, revealed approaches that
have the potential to foster more equity orientated thinking and actions. Key ‘data
conversation moves’ observed in a school’s PLCs and more informal settings were data
triangulation, reframing deficit thinking to building on student assets, pedagogical
linking, and student-centred positioning, extending, and confirming/disconfirming.
         Other studies (mostly with lower WoE) also speak to leadership for professional
learning towards social justice through PLCs and enquiry groups (Lazar & Reich,
2016), action research (Bristol & Ponte, 2013), and networks (Gomez-Hurtado et al.,
2018; Kohli, 2019; high WoE). Additionally, Fwu and Wang’s (2012) study reminds us
of the importance of equity and diversity in school-university collaborations.


                                                                                        12

Dialogue and enquiry in the teacher-focused literature
Teachers benefit from programmes featuring socially constructivist approaches like
engagement in online forums that facilitate sustained exchanges to disrupt patterns of
inequity (Nicholson & Kroll, 2015), and that foster the reframing of racial narratives
(Deckman, 2017). Additionally, developing an enquiry stance (Cochran-Lytle & Smith,
2009) and engaging in reflection (Nicholson & Kroll, 2015) can be critical components
for teacher leaders to work with complexity and uncertainty, offering mental space to
reflect upon praxis. The 2015 study’s leadership development offers support that
deepens dialogic connections about contextually-based inequities and the need to
disrupt them.
        Ezzani recommends ‘data-informed decision-making’ (2019, p. 4), utilising both
qualitative and quantitative information to drive professional development efforts
toward more equitable outcomes for marginalized students. Leadership programmes’
enquiries should be aligned with the issues and needs of everyday life that are
contextualised within the school (Szelei et al., 2019). This incisive approach is echoed
by Bryan’s (2011; mid WoE) observation         that programmes focusing on procedural,
bottom-line issues would achieve only partial reform; programmes must focus on
teacher attitudes for fundamental changes to take place.

Learning and identity development
Several studies with a high WoE point to the key role of senior leadership for
facilitating social identity development of teachers by encouraging self-reflection.
Galloway and Ishimaru (2019) call for school leadership that provide routines for
dialogue and self-reflection that can challenge biases and reveal racial assumptions and
issues of power. Kose (2009) suggests that principals need to cater for two interrelated
types of professional development: subject matter expertise and social identity
development. Access to subject matter expertise provides necessary scaffolding for
those with less subject expertise as well as support for social identity development, a
process that creates an on-going learning cycle that feeds back into both.
         Some studies argue the benefit of identity development in the early stages of a
teacher’s career. Kohli (2019) calls for culturally reflective and responsive teacher
education that prepares teachers for the socio-political realities of schooling. Explicitly,
this involves developing teachers’ racial literacy through offering access to critical
theory and creating racial affinity spaces for teachers of marginalised groups. Early
career teachers can be supported by school leaders and teacher mentors who encourage
self-reflection, personal growth, and awareness of issues of social justice (Lazar &
Reich, 2016; mid WoE).
         Carpenter and colleagues (2017; mid WoE) suggest that even though senior
leaders may be passionate about working towards equitable outcomes, they tend to take
an altruistic rather than ally position towards marginalised students.

Learning and identity development in the teacher-focused literature
Several articles with a high WoE advocate for identity development through critical
reflection to better understand the ways in which teachers’ socio-political positionalities
(Jacobs et al., 2014) inform beliefs about learning (Brown & Crippen, 2017). In
leadership programs seeking to engage novice teachers, critical reflection also can be
articulated ‘through the lens of identity’ (Deckman, 2017, p. 26). Offering teachers
structured opportunities to deepen self-awareness while promoting an equitable mindset



                                                                                          13

can help educators develop the resiliency to sustain their social justice agendas
(Nicholson & Kroll, 2015).
         Relationship-building, both among educators and between teachers and students,
drew repeated mention for its ability to catalyse authentic inclusivity and cultural
responsiveness in curriculum planning and pedagogy (Brown & Crippen, 2017), to
represent students and their lived experiences (Jacobs et al., 2014). When teachers
participate in leadership development that maintains a critical focus on social justice,
they can acquire the skills to empower and amplify student voice, rather than
reinforcing the structural inequities that have long marginalised students on the basis of
ability, race, language, or culture (Szelei et al., 2019).

Context, resources, and motivations
From a senior leadership perspective, the appreciation and understanding of context, the
deliberate use of resources, and tapping into the educators’ motivations stood out as
crucial to equity work.
         The importance of context is manifested by Reed and Swaminathan’s (2016) call
for ‘contextually responsive leadership’. School leaders have been encouraged to use
data to inform policy and practice and, more recently, equity work (Galloway &
Ishimaru, 2019). Similarly educational leaders are exhorted to follow research-based
practices, while being alert to the ‘inescapable, subjective element of best-practice’
(Reed & Swaminathan, 2016, p. 1097).
         Other high WoE studies also point to the danger in culturally-blind use of best
practice and performance data to inform teaching. Without a culture of enquiry to
‘surface and redress the problematic and deeply-rooted structures and practices that
maintain outcome disparities for minoritised groups’ (Galloway & Ishimaru, 2019, p.
17) opportunities to capitalise on student-generated ideas, foster sense-making and
pursue meaningful and equitable learning outcomes will be missed (Braaten et al., 2017;
Gannon-Slater et al., 2017; Park, 2018).
         Along the same line of argument we find studies with mid or low WoE that
show how performance grouping of students will fuel disadvantage and contribute to
marginalisation of students (Anthony & Hunter, 2017), and how the use of high stakes
testing and accountability contributes to and reinforces disadvantage (Ashadi & Rice,
2016; Carpenter et al., 2017). High quality teachers are more likely to be allocated to
year groups that will undergo high stakes tests, which leads to unequal allocation of
resources within the school. Moreover, these teachers are also given more professional
development opportunities (Ashadi & Rice, 2016).
         Theoharis and O’Toole (2011) suggest that school leadership take a more
holistic approach to resources within the school. An often neglected resource that can
inform leadership and professional development is listening to student voice
(Hajisoteriou et al., 2018; Mansfield, 2014). ‘Too often, youth - especially those
historically marginalised due to race/ethnicity, gender, and socioeconomic status - are
the subject of policies rather than actors in shaping policy’ (Mansfield, 2014, p. 398).
Becoming aware of the contextual complexities of students, including how their school
is situated in the larger community and political context is therefore crucial to inform
leadership (Mansfield, 2014).
         Finally, a number of articles point to the deliberate use of ‘external resources’ to
promote social justice. These include teacher recruitment (DeMatthews & Izquierdo,
2016), as well as collaboration with the wider community (Blank, 2015), early
childhood educators (Mistry & Sood, 2015), and private schools (Scanlan, 2010).



                                                                                          14

Context, resources, and motivations in the teacher-focused literature
In articles ranking both high and low on the WoE scale, teacher development
programmes appear to achieve more equitable outcomes when the school’s culture
embraces and values professional learning. School cultures promoting professional
learning are characterised by a supportive school leadership, trust between leadership
and teachers, and opportunities for teachers to engage in structured dialogue and
reflection about equity, which can empower teachers to enact transformative change
(Jacobs et al., 2014). In less supportive school communities, establishing these
conditions is a prerequisite to engaging in dialogue about equity. Without a supportive
school culture, dialogue may be more likely to focus on stabilising existing narratives
that reinforce structures of oppression, which can have a chilling effect on attempts to
adopt more expansive and equitable views (Yoon, 2016).
         Several high WoE studies suggest that teacher-leaders seeking to facilitate
context-driven professional development work align their programs with the needs of
the school or district to maximise the benefit to the populations they hope to serve. A
programme should be contextualised to the particular school (Hynds & McDonald,
2010; mid WoE), and programme goals should prioritise ‘contribution to society’ and
‘enhancing quality of life’ over standards and accountability (Ezzani, 2019, p. 8).
Professional learning needs to align with the school and demography, and teachers
should engage in a deeper examination of socioeconomic issues to achieve meaningful
learning and to avoid reifying existing oppressive structures (Bryan, 2011).
         Hynds and McDonald’s (2010) study explored teacher motivation to improve
the learning experiences and academic achievement of Māori and Pasifika students. In
addition to intrinsic and extrinsic motivators (such as salary, certifications, employment,
and training), teachers’ desire to promote socially just educational opportunities and
their eagerness to enact pedagogical changes positively influenced students’ academic
outcomes. Potential obstacles to teachers’ goal fulfilment included inconsistent support,
theory-praxis gap, and pedagogical challenges. School leaders who form deeper
relationships with faculty can overcome teachers’ initial resistance to school change
efforts (Ezzani, 2019). A relational approach also assists     teachers in bridging
temporary obstacles and accomplishing their program goals.

Normalising inclusion and shared leadership
The final theme highlights approaches to embedding cultures of educational equity
while also considering issues and challenges. Five articles with high WoE addressed
this theme.
        Galloway and Ishimaru (2019) wrote about school principals who ‘normalise
and centre conversations around race/racism and inclusion/exclusion’ and referred to
normalising an equity framing of educational inequalities (p. 17). The principals also
‘implemented practices and routines to spread leadership across the teams, increasing
shared power and decision-making and allowing for multiple perspectives’ (p. 15). In a
study that drew on Ishimaru and Galloway (2014), Park’s (2018) work bridging
organisational leadership and data-informed decision-making points to the role of
informal leaders, and promotes normalising equity-focused conversation routines.
        It is important to note that Park (2018) found that some common conversation
moves (specifically confirming and disconfirming) ‘can reinforce deficit assumptions
about student abilities’ (p. 642). Miled (2019) also identified practices and attitudes that
were far from normalising inclusion and diversity: indeed participants denied the
existence of racism in the district. While expressing moral commitment to
multiculturalism they engaged in tokenistic approaches, either being unaware or

                                                                                          15

unwilling to challenge systematic barriers that stood in the way of a critical
transformation. Miled’s study, involving not only school-based leaders but also district
leaders and academics, proposed greater collaboration among leaders across different
levels as part of the necessary response.
        In a three-year study of an urban school with many challenges Reed and
Swaminathan (2016) explored the distributed leadership, professional learning
communities and social justice leadership approaches used by the principal that led to
improved student achievement and school climate. Involving staff at all levels and
sharing leadership were normal practices throughout this integrated approach. Kohli’s
(2019) recommendation for teacher education was to apply a sense of collectivism, as
bringing teachers together supports their professional growth, enabling them to
challenge inequalities.
           Two articles with mid WoE surface resistance to professional development
that would help normalise inclusion and shared leadership. Nehring and Fitzsimmons
(2011) argue that teachers habitually participating in PLCs for professional
development (rather than viewing them as optional) would assist systemic change.
Payne and Smith (2018) found that leaders’ resistance to LGBTQ-focused professional
development formed a particular barrier to normalising inclusion since school leaders
are gatekeepers to change.

Normalising inclusion and shared leadership in teacher-focused literature
Ezzani (2019) stresses a ‘shift in leadership distribution’ that involved teachers and
school leaders collaborating in PLC meetings as a means to build solidarity among
school faculty and to foster a culture of equity for students and teachers alike (p. 5).
Such steps can lead to goal setting across grade levels, differentiating instruction to
address student needs, and prioritising the needs of students within professional
development contexts. According to Jacobs and colleagues (2014; high WoE), part of
this ‘re-culturing process’ (p. 579) involves teacher leaders moving beyond individual
classrooms to ensure students have opportunities to achieve successful outcomes. The
authors acknowledge the difficulty of balancing these goals against schools’ current
standards-based accountability requirements.
         The teacher-focused literature envisions a re-cultured, inclusive school
environment that culminates in inclusive and equitable experiences shared by students
as well as teachers. Within the context of early childhood education, Nicholson and
Kroll (2015) note that communities of professional learning in which administrators and
teacher leaders collaborate can promote cultures of learning in schools that both inform
instructional approaches and ensure more equitable outcomes for students. Yoon (2016)
demonstrates the value of school leaders structuring professional learning groups so that
equity remains the focus of dialogue.

Discussion
This review of research was conceived to reveal contemporary knowledge about
leadership for professional learning that included a specific focus on promoting
educational equity. Through the search, selection and analysis processes detailed above,
studies were identified that addressed the guiding questions about leadership models,
practices, and challenges relating to professional learning towards educational equity. In
this section we critique the field of research, summarise what has been learned from the
studies, challenge the hegemonic model of ‘leaders’ actions → teacher development →
student outcomes’, propose an alternative principled approach illustrated by a visual
diagram to guide decision-making and practice in the field, and suggest further


                                                                                       16

developments and implications. First though, an acknowledgement of limitations.

Limitations
All reviews of literature are partial (Hammersley, 2001), delimited by multiple
parameters including search terms and sources as made explicit above; moreover, the
interpretation of research is influenced by the perspectives of the authors (and readers).
When synthesising the literature, it is impossible to do full justice to each item or to the
body of work. These limitations are common to all such endeavours, hence the
transparency of our process and positions included earlier. Reviews are also limited by
the state of the field being studied.

The field
Research specifically addressing leadership for professional learning towards
educational equity is a rigorous but very small field, located within the huge territory
that encompasses all aspects of the three constituent parts as well as their connections.
The field’s knowledge base to date has been developed predominantly from US
qualitative studies of small-scale interventions. Notable by their under-representation or
near absence are studies from other countries, the use of quantitative and to a lesser
extent mixed-methods approaches, and the student perspective. There is little evidence
of causal relationships between leadership for professional learning and the actual
achievement of more equitable outcomes for under-served and marginalised student
groups. Rather, research to date offers more in terms of expanding and deepening
knowledge about leadership for professional learning with the intention of enhancing
educational equity, and about inhibiting factors. Race and ethnicity are a focus for much
of this work, with little if any attention to other dimensions of difference associated with
educational inequity (for example sex and gender, learning needs and disabilities,
socioeconomics).

Models, practices, and challenges
In this section we summarise and discuss findings addressing the three research
questions that related to models, practices, and challenges of leadership for professional
learning towards equity.
         The conceptual framework for professional learning presented above is based on
models by Coldwell and Simkins (2011) and Hallinger (2018), and elaborated through
contributions from four other conceptual and review articles. The figure and
explanatory text include antecedents, contextual moderating factors, outcomes, and
feedback relationships, all relevant to leadership. The framework is a theoretical model
with the potential to inform policy and practice, increasing the likelihood of enhancing
teacher knowledge and practice such that more equitable student outcomes are
achieved. Further details about leadership and professional learning practices and
challenges complement the framework. These were arrived at through analysis of
empirical articles and are now discussed with reference to the five analytical themes.
         In their conceptual discussion of framing, Braaten and colleagues (2017) cite
Goffman (1974), Schon and Rein (1994), and Weick (1995) to emphasise the sense-
making processes of naming and prioritising that are behind the presentation of
situations and the decisions about actions to be taken. Empirical studies in this review
provided examples of school leaders deliberately and habitually framing issues in terms
of equity (e.g., Galloway and Ishimaru, 2019), and of educators at all levels scrutinising
social justice issues during professional learning activities (e.g., Jacobs et al., 2014).


                                                                                          17

Critical reflection and explicit discussion that develop leaders’ and teachers’ capacity to
make schools more equitable are key ways to address educators’ lack of awareness
about students’ experiences and issues of inequity and to counter ingrained deficit-based
orientations. Another challenge to educational equity is that recent accountability
measures, particularly in the US and England, have severely narrowed what is most
officially valued in students’ learning to the easily testable aspects of a few core
subjects. In this review, it is the work of Braaten and colleagues (2017) that explicitly
addresses the framing of school improvement efforts and argues for ‘expansive
definitions of equity…[and to focus on] qualities of daily learning experiences’ (p. 429).
The thinking and communication inherent to the framing of social justice issues rest on
dialogue and enquiry.
         The close etymological connection between the two words ‘dialogue’ (stemming
from the Greek for conversation and meaning ‘through speech and reason’) and
‘enquiry’ (from the Latin ‘to ask a question’) is mirrored in the practice of collaborative
knowledge development. In such desired practices, school leaders, teachers and
researchers ask questions of themselves and each other, about issues and situations,
interrogating many forms of data. They talk respectfully in a collaborative search for
understanding a shared focus, in both informal unplanned exchanges and in
purposefully structured meetings. Such features were identified in studies included in
this review, echoing in many ways reasoning that goes back to Dewey’s (1933)
reflective thinking grounded in investigation, and are central to the contemporary
approaches of action research (Carr & Kemmis, 1986; Pring, 2000) and lesson study
(Dudley, 2015).
         Reflective dialogic enquiry stimulates learning, and when purposefully framed
has the potential to develop educators’ identity towards educational equity. The career-
long evolution of school leaders’ and teachers’ professional identities can be associated
with Huberman’s (1993) classic stages of teachers’ lives. However, rather than
accepting a pre-determined natural order, the findings of studies in this review (e.g.,
Kose, 2009; Deckman, 2017) endorse engineering early and sustained professional
learning so as to strengthen teachers’ identity development as champions of social
justice.
         ‘Context’ encompasses many factors that influence the leadership of
professional learning towards educational equity. Internal school cultures may be more
or less supportive of professional learning particularly when it challenges the status quo
(Jacobs et al., 2014). The multiple complexities of external contexts require critical,
creative, empowering and sustained leadership responses characterised by informed,
reflective decision-making, as illustrated in Reed and Swaminathan’s (2016) case study.
Accompanying the very many relevant socio-economic and cultural influences are
aspects of the political context, notably high-stakes test-based accountability systems.
These have become deeply established yet have wide-ranging pernicious consequences
(Darling-Hammond, 2004; Mansell, 2007) including educational disadvantage for
minority students as discussed by studies in this review (e.g., Galloway & Ishimaru,
2019; Ashardi & Rice, 2016; Anthony & Hunter; 2017; Carpenter et al., 2017). To
temper these and other challenges for social justice, educators have their own and
colleagues’ equity-orientated motivations, as well as other resources. Research provides
valuable knowledge, approaches and programmes to address disadvantage, though these
must be approached critically and with regard to specific situations. Arguably the most
valuable resources of all are the students themselves, their families and communities –
yet, as Mansfield (2014) and Hajisoteriou and colleagues (2018) indicate, they are often
neglected or overlooked.


                                                                                        18

         Involving students fully in all aspects of their education, including through
student leadership, has the potential to transform education (Cook-Sather, 2010; Hill,
2019). Normalising inclusion and shared leadership in all forms are both desired
outcomes and necessary on-going processes of socially-just education. While the items
in this review provide examples of positive approaches (e.g., Ezzani, 2019; Nicholson
& Kroll, 2015), there was also evidence of substantial challenges (Miled, 2019; Nehring
& Fitzsimmons, 2011). Much rests on, and must be addressed through, school and
organisational cultures. Normalising inclusion and shared leadership will always be
work in progress, requiring continued activity and critical attention.

An alternative principled approach
Thus far, we have synthesised recent conceptual and review articles to present a revised
framework, and analysed empirical articles with a focus on educational equity to
generate knowledge about leadership for professional learning practices. The model
presented in Figure 1 elaborates the hegemonic input-output model, providing
additional knowledge and guidance. This and similar ‘pathway’ models are well
grounded in research and literature, appear rational, and have a strong hold
internationally. However, as Boylan and colleagues (2018) point out, all models are
partial, and could be considered as ‘tools to be deployed’ (p. 138). While we hope the
elaborated model developed through this review is useful, our fundamental unease with
the linear model prompted an alternative approach as discussed below.
         Half a century ago Lawrence Stenhouse was troubled by the gaps he observed
between teachers’ plans and what occurred in practice. This led him to develop a
process model of education, valuing teachers’ and students’ learning as the growth of
understanding through critical enquiry, and a broad conception of outcomes that
included knowledge not as facts to be memorised but as ‘facts so structured by theory
that they acquire meaning’ (Stenhouse, 1975, p. 17). Stenhouse was influenced by
philosophical, sociological, and psychological sources not only from the UK but also
the US and Scandinavia (James, 2012). He emphasised key elements of his thinking in a
summary sentence: ‘A curriculum is an attempt to communicate the essential principles
and features of an educational proposal in such a form that it is open to critical scrutiny
and capable of effective translation into practice’ (Stenhouse, 1975, p. 4).
         The notion of principles of procedure (derived from Peters, 1959) has been
applied to other educational endeavours, including Leadership for Learning (MacBeath
& Dempster, 2009; MacBeath et al., 2018), Assessment for Learning (Klenowski, 2009;
Swaffield, 2011; Swaffield et al., 2016), and to summarise the findings from a ten-year
Teaching and Learning Research Programme of many projects across the UK involving
learners of all ages and in different contexts (James & Pollard, 2011). These precedents,
and the value stances that can be traced from Stenhouse’s work, led us to conceive of
the identified themes in our review in terms of principles for the leadership of
professional learning towards educational equity.
         We illustrate these nascent principles and the relationships among them in
Figure 4 below. Firstly, the five principles are presented within a circular diagram to
suggest that the relationship among them is cyclical and ongoing, rather than linear with
beginning and end points. Secondly, the dotted lines around and between the principles
indicate that permeable boundaries as each of the principles are interrelated and meld
into one another. Finally, we have organised the principles to orient the reader to our
current understanding of their interrelationships. ‘Critical framing of issues toward
social justice’ is fundamental to the other principles and is thus situated at the centre of
the diagram, with the other principles – ‘Dialogue and enquiry’, ‘Learning and identity


                                                                                         19

development’, and ‘Normalising inclusion and shared leadership’ - orbiting around it.
These are seen both as activities intentionally undertaken toward social justice and
educational equity, and as the results of that intentionality. The remaining principle is
presented as the largest of the concentric circles because it forms the circumstances that
the principles are influenced and moderated by: ‘Context, resources, and motivations’.

Figure 4. Nascent principles of leadership for professional learning towards educational
equity.




Implications and future development
The suggested principles need to be tried and tested in practice, exploring their
applicability to different contexts, and their utility for guidance and formative
evaluation. Their conceptualisation requires further work. There is huge potential to
expand the knowledge base of leadership for professional learning toward educational
equity, adding to the empirical studies included in this review, particularly with a
greater variety of research approaches. Most pressing of all is the inclusion of students,
especially from marginalised groups, as equal collaborators in dialogue and enquiry to
develop the field further.




                                                                                        20

Conclusion
While acknowledging limitations and trusting it will be read with these in mind, we
suggest that this study’s significance is four-fold.
         Firstly, it addresses Hallinger and Kulophas’ (2020, p 14) ‘high priority
recommendation’ for reviews of research that explicitly target leadership and teacher
learning, while focusing on research also concerned with social justice.
         Secondly, it elaborates the common, linear model of professional development
activities leading to teacher learning, and thus to the final outcome of student learning,
particularly with additional moderating factors, lines of influence and feedback, and
contexts.
         Thirdly, it summarises (some of) what is known about leadership for
professional learning towards educational equity and acts as a resource for researchers,
policymakers, and practitioners.
         Finally, it proposes five nascent principles, supported by an aide memoire
illustration, that can be used to plan, guide, and evaluate leadership for professional
learning toward educational equity. Leaders and teachers can use the principles as
mental tools to inform their in-the-moment decisions, shaping their speech and actions
to make education more socially just. We are already beginning to use and further
develop this alternative principled approach, and hope that others will join the
endeavour, with the ultimate aim of serving all learners more equitably.
         As a last but important note, this paper was finalised as racial justice protests
erupted across the world in the wake of the unjust killings of numerous Black people,
including George Floyd, which underscores the urgency toward achieving this goal.

Acknowledgements
The authors would like to thank the journal’s anonymous reviewers and editor for their
feedback, as well as Anna Vignoles, Thomasenia Adams, and David Lawrence Jr. for
their comments on previous versions of this paper.

References
Ali, T. (2014). Development of teacher leadership: A multi-faceted approach to
        bringing about improvements in rural elementary schools in Pakistan.
        Professional development in education, 40(3), 352–375.
        https://doi.org/10.1080/19415257.2013.828238
Anthony, G., & Hunter, R. (2017). Grouping practices in New Zealand mathematics
        classrooms: Where are we at and where should we be? New Zealand journal of
        educational studies, 52(1), 73–92. https://doi.org/10.1007/s40841-016-0054-z
Ashadi, A., & Rice, S. (2016). High stakes testing and teacher access to professional
        opportunities: Lessons from Indonesia. Journal of education policy, 31(6), 727–
        741. https://doi.org/10.1080/02680939.2016.1193901
Blank, M. J. (2015). Building sustainable health and education partnerships: Stories
        from local communities. Journal of school health, 85(11, SI), 810–816.
        https://doi.org/10.1111/josh.12311
Boylan, M., Coldwell, M., Maxwell, B., & Jordan, J. (2018). Rethinking models of
        professional learning as tools: A conceptual analysis to inform research and
        practice. Professional development in education, 44(1), 120–139. DOI:
        10.1080/19415257.2017.1306789
Braaten, M., Bradford, C., Kirchgasler, K. L., & Barocas, S. F. (2017). How data use for
        accountability undermines equitable science education. Journal of educational
        administration, 55(4), 427–446. https://doi.org/10.1108/JEA-09-2016-0099


                                                                                         21

Brinia, V., 2012. Men vs women; educational leadership in primary schools in Greece:
        an empirical study. International journal of educational management, 26(2),
        175-191. doi: 10.1108/09513541211201988.
Bristol, L. (2015). Leading-for-inclusion: Transforming action through teacher talk.
        International journal of inclusive education, 19(8), 802–820.
        https://doi.org/10.1080/13603116.2014.971078
Bristol, L., & Ponte, P. (2013). ‘Muddying the space’: Social justice, action research
        and professional learning. Professional development in education, 39(4), 513–
        530. https://doi.org/10.1080/19415257.2013.797007
Brown, J. C., & Crippen, K. J. (2017). The knowledge and practices of high school
        science teachers in pursuit of cultural responsiveness. Science education, 101(1),
        99–133. https://doi.org/10.1002/sce.21250
Brunton, G., Stansfield, C., & Thomas, J. (2012). Finding relevant studies. In: Gough,
        D., Oliver, S., & Thomas, J. eds.. An introduction to systematic reviews.
        Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage, 107–134.
Bryan, C. (2011). Professional development during a period of change: A small-scale
        case study exploring the effect of context on practice in a South African rural
        school. Professional development in education, 37(1), 131–141.
        https://doi.org/10.1080/19415257.2010.499302
Carpenter, B. W., Bukoski, B. E., Berry, M., & Mitchell, A. M. (2017). Examining the
        social justice identity of assistant principals in persistently low-achieving
        schools. Urban education, 52(3), 287–315.
        https://doi.org/10.1177/0042085915574529
Carr, W. & Kemmis, S. (1986). Becoming critical: Knowing through action research.
        London: Falmer.
Castanheira, P. S. P. (2016). Mentoring for educators’ professional learning and
        development: A meta-synthesis of IJMCE volumes 1-4. International journal of
        mentoring and coaching in education, 5(4), 334–346.
        https://doi.org/10.1108/IJMCE-10-2015-0030
Cochran-Smith, M. and Lytle, S., 2009. Inquiry as stance: Practitioner research for the
        next generation (Practitioner inquiry series). New York: Teachers College.
Coldwell, M., & Simkins, T. (2011). Level models of continuing professional
        development evaluation: A grounded review and critique. Professional
        development in education, 37(1), 143–157.
        https://doi.org/10.1080/19415257.2010.495497
Cook-Sather, A. (2010). Students as learners and teachers: Taking responsibility,
        transforming education, and redefining accountability. Curriculum inquiry,
        40(4)), 555-575.
Cruz-González, C., Domingo Segovia, J., & Lucena Rodriguez, C. (2019). School
        principals and leadership identity: A thematic exploration of the literature.
        Educational research, 61(3), 319–336.
        https://doi.org/10.1080/00131881.2019.1633941
Darling-Hammond. L. (2004) Standards, accountability and school reform. Teachers
        College record, 106(6), 1047-1085.
Darling-Hammond, L., Wei, R. C., Andree, A., Richardson, N., & Orphanos, S. (2009).
        Professional learning in the learning profession: A status report on teacher
        development in the U.S. and abroad. (p. 36). National Staff Development
        Council. https://edpolicy.stanford.edu/sites/default/files/publications/
        professional-learning-learning-profession-status-report-teacher-development-us-
        and-abroad.pdf


                                                                                       22

Deckman, S. L. (2017). Managing race and race-ing management: Teachers’ stories of
        race and classroom conflict. Teachers College record, 119(11), 1-40.
DeMatthews, D., & Izquierdo, E. (2016). School leadership for dual language
        education: A social justice approach. Educational forum, 80(3), 278–293.
        https://doi.org/10.1080/00131725.2016.1173152
Desimone, L. M., Porter, A. C., Garet, M. S., Yoon, K. S., & Birman, B. F. (2002).
        Effects of professional development on teachers’ instruction: Results from a
        three-year longitudinal study. Educational evaluation and policy analysis, 24(2),
        81–112. https://doi.org/10.3102/01623737024002081
Dewey, J. (1933). How we think: A restatement of the relation of reflective thinking to
        the educative process. Chicago: Henry Regnery.
Dudley, P. (Ed.) (2015). Lesson study: Professional learning for our time. Abingdon:
        Routledge.
Ezzani, M. D. (2019). Principal and teacher instructional leadership: A cultural shift.
        International journal of educational management. https://doi.org/10.1108/IJEM-
        02-2019-0071
Fry, G. W., & Bi, H. (2013). The evolution of educational reform in Thailand: The Thai
        educational paradox. Journal of educational administration, 51(3), 290–319.
        https://doi.org/10.1108/09578231311311483
Fwu, B., & Wang, H. (2012). Bridging the gap between and beyond school science
        through collaboration: Promoting science teachers’ professional development
        through diversity and equal partnership. Asia-Pacific educational researcher,
        21(3), 464–473.
Galloway, M. K., & Ishimaru, A. M. (2019). Leading equity teams: The role of formal
        leaders in building organizational capacity for equity. Journal of education for
        students placed at risk. https://doi.org/10.1080/10824669.2019.1699413
Gannon-Slater, N., La Londe, P. G., Crenshaw, H. L., Evans, M. E., Greene, J. C., &
        Schwandt, T. A. (2017). Advancing equity in accountability and organizational
        cultures of data use. Journal of educational administration, 55(4), 361–375.
        https://doi.org/10.1108/JEA-09-2016-0108
García-Martínez, I., & Tadeu, P. (2018). The influence of pedagogical leadership on the
        construction of professional identity. Systematic review. Journal of social
        studies education research, 9(3), 145–162. https://doi.org/10.17499/jsser.90982
Goffman, E., 1974. Frame Analysis: An essay on the organization of experience,
        Cambridge, MA: Harvard Educational Press.
Gomez-Hurtado, I., Gonzalez-Falcon, I., & Coronel, J. M. (2018). Perceptions of
        secondary school principals on management of cultural diversity in Spain. The
        challenge of educational leadership. Educational management administration &
        leadership, 46(3), 441–456. https://doi.org/10.1177/1741143216670651
Gough, D. (2007). Weight of Evidence: A framework for the appraisal of the quality
        and relevance of evidence. Research papers in education, 22(2), 213–228.
        https://doi.org/10.1080/02671520701296189
Hajisoteriou, C., Karousiou, C., & Angelides, P. (2018). Successful components of
        school improvement in culturally diverse schools. School effectiveness and
        school improvement, 29(1), 91–112.
        https://doi.org/10.1080/09243453.2017.1385490
Hallinger, P. (2018). Bringing context out of the shadows of leadership. Educational
        management administration & leadership, 46(1), 5–24.
        https://doi.org/10.1177/1741143216670652



                                                                                      23

Hallinger, P., & Kulophas, D. (2020). The evolving knowledge base on leadership and
         teacher professional learning: A bibliometric analysis of the literature, 1960-
         2018. Professional development in education, 46(4), 1-20.
         https://doi.org/10.1080/19415257.2019.1623287
Hallinger, P. & Liu, S., 2016. Leadership and teacher learning in urban and rural
         schools in China: meeting the dual challenges of equity and
         effectiveness. International journal of educational development, 51, 163-173.
         doi: 10.1016/j.ijedudev.2016.10.001.
Hammersley, M. (2001). On 'systematic' reviews of research literatures: A 'narrative'
         response to Evans & Benefield. British educational research journal, 27(5),
         543–554.
Hardy, I. J. (2010). Teacher talk: Flexible delivery and academics’ praxis in an
         Australian university. International journal for academic development, 15(2),
         131–142. https://doi.org/10.1080/13601441003738277
Hill, S. (2019). Softening the hierarchy: the role of student agency in building learning
         organisations. Journal of professional capital and community, 4(2), 147-162.
Huberman, M. (1993) The lives of teachers. London: Cassell.
Hynds, A. (2010). Unpacking resistance to change within-school reform programmes
         with a social justice orientation. International journal of leadership in
         education, 13(4), 377–392. https://doi.org/10.1080/13603124.2010.503282
Hynds, Anne, & McDonald, L. (2010). Motivating teachers to improve learning for
         culturally diverse students in New Zealand: Promoting Māori and Pacific Islands
         student achievement. Professional development in education, 36(3), 525–540.
         https://doi.org/10.1080/19415250903319275
Ishimaru, A. M., & Galloway, M. K. (2014). Beyond individual effectiveness:
         Conceptualizing organizational leadership for equity. Leadership and policy in
         schools, 13(1), 93–146. https://doi.org/10.1080/15700763.2014.890733
Jacobs, J., Beck, B., & Crowell, L. (2014). Teacher leaders as equity-centered change
         agents: Exploring the conditions that influence navigating change to promote
         educational equity. Professional development in education, 40(4), 576–596.
         https://doi.org/10.1080/19415257.2014.896272
James, M. & Pollard, A. (2011) TLRP’s ten principles for effective pedagogy:
         Rationale, development, evidence, argument and impact. Research papers in
         education, 26(3), 275-328.
James, M. (2012) An alternative to the objectives model: the process model for the
         design and development of curriculum. In: N. Norris & J. Elliott, eds..
         Curriculum, pedagogy and educational research: The work of Lawrence
         Stenhouse. Abingdon: Routledge: 61-83.
Klenowski, V. (2009). Assessment for learning revisited: an Asia-Pacific perspective.
         Assessment in education: principles, policy & practice, 16(3), 263- 268.
Kohli, R. (2019). Lessons for teacher education: The role of critical professional
         development in teacher of color retention. Journal of teacher education, 70(1),
         39–50. https://doi.org/10.1177/0022487118767645
Kose, B. W. (2009). The principal’s role in professional development for social justice:
         An empirically based transformative framework. Urban education, 44(6), 628–
         663. https://doi.org/10.1177/0042085908322707
Ladson-Billings, G. (2006). From the achievement gap to the education debt:
         Understanding achievement in U.S. schools. Educational researcher, 35(7), 3–
         12. https://doi.org/10.3102/0013189X035007003



                                                                                      24

Lazar, A.M. & Reich, L.M., 2016. What school leaders and teacher mentors can do to
       support teachers for social equity. In: A.M. Lazar & L.M. Reich, eds.. New
       teachers in urban schools: journeys toward social equity teaching. Cham:
       Springer, 121–139. doi:10.1007/978-3-319-26615-2_8.
Lee, M., & Hallinger, P. (2012). National contexts influencing principals’ time use and
       allocation: Economic development, societal culture, and educational system.
       School effectiveness and school improvement, 23(4), 461–482.
       https://doi.org/10.1080/09243453.2012.678862
MacBeath, J. & Dempster, N. (Eds.) (2009). Connecting leadership and learning:
       Principles for practice. London: Routledge.
MacBeath, J., Dempster, N., Frost, D., Johnson, G. & Swaffield, S. (2018).
       Strengthening the connections between leadership and learning. Abingdon:
       Routledge.
Mansell, W. (2007). Education by numbers: The tyranny of testing. London: Portico’s
       Publishing.
Mansfield, K. C. (2014). How listening to student voices informs and strengthens social
       justice research and practice. Educational administration quarterly, 50(3), 392–
       430. https://doi.org/10.1177/0013161X13505288
Martinez, M. A., Rivera, M. & Marquez, J., 2019. Learning from the experiences and
       development of Latina school leaders. Educational administration quarterly. 1-
       19. doi: 10.1177/0013161X19866491.
Miled, N. (2019). Educational leaders’ perceptions of multicultural education in
       teachers’ professional development: A case study from a Canadian school
       district. Multicultural education review, 11(2), 79–95.
       https://doi.org/10.1080/2005615X.2019.1615249
Mistry, M., & Sood, K. (2015). Permeating the social justice ideals of equality and
       equity within the context of early years: Challenges for leadership in multi-
       cultural and mono-cultural primary schools. Education 3-13, 43(5), 548–564.
       https://doi.org/10.1080/03004279.2013.837944
Moher, D., Liberati, A., Tetzlaff, J., Altman, D. G., & Group, T. P. (2009). Preferred
       reporting items for systematic reviews and meta-analyses: The PRISMA
       statement. PLOS medicine, 6(7), 1–6.
       https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pmed.1000097
Murakami, E. T. & Törnsen, M., 2017. Female secondary school principals: Equity in
       the development of professional identities. Educational management
       administration and leadership, 45 (5, SI), 806-824. doi:
       10.1177/1741143217717273.
Nehring, J., & Fitzsimons, G. (2011). The professional learning community as
       subversive activity: Countering the culture of conventional schooling.
       Professional development in education, 37(4), 513–535.
       https://doi.org/10.1080/19415257.2010.536072
Nicholson, J. M., & Kroll, L. (2015). Developing leadership for early childhood
       professionals through oral inquiry: Strengthening equity through making
       particulars visible in dilemmas of practice. Early child development and care,
       185(1), 17–43. https://doi.org/10.1080/03004430.2014.903939
Opfer, V. D. & Pedder, D., 2011. Conceptualizing teacher professional learning. Review
       of educational research, 81(3), 376-407. doi: 10.3102/0034654311413609.
Park, V. (2018). Leading data conversation moves: Toward data-informed leadership
       for equity and learning. Educational administration quarterly, 54(4), 617–647.
       https://doi.org/10.1177/0013161X18769050


                                                                                    25

Patton, L. D., & Bondi, S. (2015). Nice white men or social justice allies? Using critical
        race theory to examine how white male faculty and administrators engage in ally
        work. Race ethnicity and education, 18(4), 488–514.
        https://doi.org/10.1080/13613324.2014.1000289
Payne, E. C., & Smith, M. J. (2018). Refusing relevance: School administrator
        resistance to offering professional development addressing LGBTQ issues in
        schools. Educational administration quarterly, 54(2), 183–215.
        https://doi.org/10.1177/0013161X17723426
Peters, R. S. (1959). Authority, responsibility and education. London: Allen & Unwin.
Pfeffer, J., & Sutton, R. I. (2000). The knowing-doing gap: How smart companies turn
        knowledge into action. Harvard Business School Press.
        https://books.google.se/books?id=MeY5hdgj1bAC. Accessed 27 May 2020.
Pring, R. (2000). Philosophy of educational research. London: Continuum.
Reed, L. C., & Swaminathan, R. (2016). An urban school leader’s approach to school
        improvement: Toward contextually responsive leadership. Urban education,
        51(9), 1096–1125. https://doi.org/10.1177/0042085914553675
Scanlan, M. (2010). Slogging and stumbling toward social justice in a private
        elementary school: The complicated case of St. Malachy. Education and urban
        society, 42(5), 572–598. https://doi.org/10.1177/0013124510366224
Schleicher, A. (2019). PISA 2018: Insights and interpretations. Paris, France:
        Organization for economic cooperation and development. Available at
        https://www.oecd.org/pisa/PISA%202018%20Insights%20and%20Interpretation
        s%20FINAL%20PDF.pdf. Accessed 25 May 2020.
Schön, D.A. & Rein, M., 1994. Frame reflection. New York: Basic Books.
Stenhouse, L. (1975). An introduction to curriculum research and development.
        London: Heinemann.
Stosich, E. L., 2017. Leading in a time of ambitious reform: principals in high-poverty
        urban elementary schools frame the challenge of the common core state
        standards. Elementary school journal, 117 (4), 539-565. doi: 10.1086/691585.
Sun, J. (2015). Conceptualizing the critical path linked by teacher commitment. Journal
        of educational administration, 53(5), 597–624. https://doi.org/10.1108/JEA-05-
        2013-0063
Swaffield, S. (2011) Getting to the heart of authentic assessment for learning.
        Assessment in education: Principles, policy and practice, 18(4), 433-449.
Swaffield, S., Rawi, R. & O’Shea, A. (2016). Developing assessment for learning
        practice in a school cluster: Primary and secondary teachers learning together.
        In: D. Laveault & L. Allal, eds.. Assessment for learning: Meeting the
        challenge of implementation. Rotterdam: Springer: 119-217. DOI 10.1007/978-
        3-319-39211-0_12
Szelei, N., Tinoca, L., & Pinho, A. S. (2019). Professional development for cultural
        diversity: The challenges of teacher learning in context. Professional
        development in education, 1–17.
        https://doi.org/10.1080/19415257.2019.1642233
Theoharis, G., & O’Toole, J. (2011). Leading inclusive ELL: Social justice leadership
        for English Language Learners. Educational administration quarterly, 47(4),
        646–688. https://doi.org/10.1177/0013161X11401616
Weick, K., 1995. Sensemaking in organizations, Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage.
Welch, V., Petticrew, M., Tugwell, P., Moher, D., O'Neill, J., Waters, E., et al., (2012)
        PRISMA-Equity 2012 Extension: Reporting Guidelines for Systematic Reviews



                                                                                       26

       with a Focus on Health Equity, PLoS medicine 9(10): e1001333.
       doi:10.1371/journal.pmed.1001333
Yoon, I. H. (2016). Trading stories: Middle-class white women teachers and the
       creation of collective narratives about students and families in a diverse
       elementary school. Teachers College record, 118(2), 1-54.




                                                                                    27