Amanda da Silva
           Head Organizer




   Perspectives and
Analyses of Educational
      Research




     Editora Studies Publicações
                2026

                    Copyright © Editora Studies Publicações
                      Text Copyright © 2026 The Authors
             Edition Copyright © 2026 Editora Studies Publicações
                               Layout: Publisher
                             Art Editing: Publisher
                          Proofreading: The Authors




The content of the articles and their data, in terms of form, accuracy, and
reliability, are the sole responsibility of the author. Downloading and sharing of
this work are permitted provided that credit is given to the author, but without any
possibility of modification or commercial use.


Editorial Board:

Maria Lucia Teixeira Guerra de Mendonça – Pontifical Catholic University of Rio
de Janeiro, Rio de Janeiro, Brazil.
Fernando Busato Ramires – University of Passo Fundo, Rio Grande do Sul,
Brazil.
Halley Ferraro Oliveira
Federal University of Sergipe, Sergipe, Brazil.
Nelson Barrelo Junior – University of Sao Paulo, São Paulo, Brazil.
Adriane Aparecida de Souza Mahl Mangaroti – State University of Mato Grosso
do Sul, Mato Grosso do Sul, Brazil.
Educélio Gaspar Lisbôa – State University of Pará, Pará, Brazil.
Aldalúcia Macêdo dos Santos Gomes – State University of Amazonas,
Amazonas, Brazil.
Educélio Gaspar Lisbôa – State University of Pará, Pará, Brazil.
Aldalúcia Macêdo dos Santos Gomes – State University of Amazonas,
Amazonas, Brazil.
Paula Wiethölter – Faculdade Especializada na Área de Saúde do Rio Grande
do Sul, Rio Grande do Sul, Brazil.
Andréa Cristina Marques de Araújo – Fernando Pessoa University, Porto,
Portugal.
Fernando Busato Ramires – University of Passo Fundo, Rio Grande Sul, Brazil.
Sérgio Eustáquio Lemos da Silva – Paulista State University, São Paulo, Brazil.
Lucas Araújo Ferreira – Universidade Federal do Pará, Pará, Brasil.
Shirleide Pereira da Silva Cruz – Universidade de Brasília, Brasília – DF, Brasil.
Ronaldo Salvador Vasques – Universidade Estadual de Maringá, Paraná,
Brasil.
Francisca das Chagas Gaspar Rocha – Universidade Federal do Piauí, Piauí,
Brasil.
Nayara Kelly Felix Ferreira – Centro Universitário Tabosa de Almeida –
ASCES/UNITA, Pernambuco, Brasil.
Wenderson Gomes dos Santos – Universidade Federal do Amazonas – UFAM,
Amazonas, Brasil.

 International Cataloguing-in-Publication Data (CIP)


Perspectives and Analyses of Educational Research / Amanda da
Silva. Curitiba. Editora Studies Publicações, 2026.

Format: PDF
System requirements: Adobe Acrobat Reader
Access mode: World Wide Web
Includes: Bibliography
ISBN: 978-65-83309-62-4
DOI: 10.54033/stebook.978-65-83309-62-4

1. Methodology. 2. Learning. 3. Evaluation.
I. Silva, Amanda da. II. Title.




              Editora Studies Publicações
               Curitiba – Paraná – Brasil
           www.studiespublicacoes.com.br
          editora@studiespublicacoes.com.br

                                PRESENTATION


      The book Perspectives and Analyses of Educational Research stands as
a relevant contribution to understanding the different approaches and
interpretations in the field of educational research. With a broad perspective, the
work brings together reflections that support theoretical and methodological
development, considering the complexity of educational processes.


      By emphasizing the connection between theory and practice, the book
encourages the development of critical and well-grounded analyses, which are
essential for knowledge production in education. The work includes multiple
perspectives that enrich academic debate and promote the development of more
consistent and contextualized research.


      This book is recommended for professors, students, and professionals in
the field of education and related areas, as well as for anyone interested in
expanding their knowledge of educational research. It is a work that fosters
learning, reflection, and the improvement of investigative practices.

SUMMARY

CHAPTER 1 ..................................................................................................... 11
CHALLENGES AND PRACTICES IN PEDAGOGICAL COORDINATION IN A PUBLIC
SCHOOL: A CASE STUDY AT PINTO MARQUES STATE SCHOOL
     Denys da Cunha Silva
     Marília do Socorro Oliveira Araújo
     Alessandra Luz da Silva
     Jhonata Souza Paula
     Bárbara de Nazaré da Silva Paes
     Gardenia da Silva Frazão
     DOI: 10.54033/stebook.978-65-83309-62-4_1

CHAPTER 2 ..................................................................................................... 30
AFFECTIVE PATHS IN THE PROCESS OF BUILDING KNOWLEDGE
     Josivaldo Constantino dos Santos
     Edneuza Alves Trugillo
     Alcione Bom Despacho Teixeira Costa
     Andreia Maria Neri Ecco
     Agnaldo Machado dos Santos
     Sandra Regina Braz Ayres
     José Aldair Pinheiro
     Edvaldo Sant’Ana Lourenço
     DOI: 10.54033/stebook.978-65-83309-62-4_2

CHAPTER 3 ..................................................................................................... 43
THE FOUCAULDIAN NOTION OF APPARATUS AND THE NATIONAL HIGH SCHOOL
EXAM: A DISCURSIVE ANALYSIS OF THE PARTICIPANT'S GUIDE
     Daniella Silva Araújo Clara
     Natália Costa Azevedo de Faria
     Wesley Luis Carvalhaes
     DOI: 10.54033/stebook.978-65-83309-62-4_3

CHAPTER 4 ..................................................................................................... 64
ORGANIZATION AND MEMORIES OF PEDAGOGICAL SPACES IN PROFESSIONAL
AND TECHNOLOGICAL EDUCATION (EPT)
     Silvana Maria Aparecida Viana Santos
     Ana Luzia dos Santos da Silva
     Anderson César Ramos da Luz Carvalho
     Hermócrates Gomes Melo Júnior
     Liliane Inácia da Silva
     Renato Machado
     Tatiani Bonfim Bianchini
     Thiago Souza de Oliveira
     DOI: 10.54033/stebook.978-65-83309-62-4_4

CHAPTER 5 ..................................................................................................... 82
TEACHING QUADRATIC EQUATIONS WITH GOLD BEADS: REFLECTIONS ON A
PEDAGOGICAL PRACTICE
     Laine Silva Ramos
     Thamires Silva Soares
     Deuseliane Patrícia Oliveira Leal Leal
     Yara Letícia Pereira Serra
     Mauro Guterres Barbosa
     Rayane de Jesus Santos Melo
     Quesia Guedes da Silva Castilho
     Jackson Martins Reis
     DOI: 10.54033/stebook.978-65-83309-62-4_5

CHAPTER 6 ................................................................................................... 101
PERSONAS: THEORY AND PRACTICE IN TEACHING ACTION
     Rita de Cássia Spréa
     DOI: 10.54033/stebook.978-65-83309-62-4_6

CHAPTER 7 ................................................................................................... 113
STORIES BETWEEN THE LINES OF SCHOOL NOTEBOOKS
     Eliane Küster
     Alboni Marisa Dudeque Pianovski Vieira
     DOI: 10.54033/stebook.978-65-83309-62-4_7

CHAPTER 8 ................................................................................................... 131
TEACHING TISSUE ENGINEERING THROUGH PROJECT-BASED LEARNING: AN
EXPERIENCE REPORT FROM A TEACHING AND PEER-TUTORING PROJECT
     Caroline Medeiros Laffitte
     Isabella de Souza Pires
     Emanoel Alves Cabral
     Alison Gessinger Guedes Morais
     João Victor Freire de Paula
     Marcos Vinicius de Carvalho Sousa Rosado
     Carlos Augusto Galvão Barboza
     DOI: 10.54033/stebook.978-65-83309-62-4_8

CHAPTER 9 ................................................................................................... 146
MOLECULAR STRUCTURES IN ACTION: USING GAME TO ASSIST IN LEARNING
THE FUNDAMENTALS OF ORGANIC CHEMISTRY
     Karlos Alexandre Martins
     Alexandre Rossi
     Evandro Roberto Alves
     DOI: 10.54033/stebook.978-65-83309-62-4_9

CHAPTER 10 ................................................................................................. 160
THE UNTIED KNOT IN THE CLASSROOM: A HYBRID NEUROPSYCHOANALYTIC
PERSPECTIVE ON EMOTIONAL REGULATION IN BORDERLINE PERSONALITY
DISORDER
     Mário Cesar dos Santos Bersaline
     Márcio Bersaline
     Leila Cleuri Pryjma
     Karina Moniz Tavares
     Gabriel Felipe Pryjma Cardeal Vieira
     Diana Andrade dos Santos
     Lino Batista de Oliveira
     Arielle Cristine de Jesus
     Valmir Xavier de Oliveira
     Gilberto Prado Silvano
     Edilaine Cristina Brizola Brenzan
     DOI: 10.54033/stebook.978-65-83309-62-4_10

CHAPTER 11 ................................................................................................. 172
A POSITIVE CLASSROOM CLIMATE AS A CONTEMPORARY PEDAGOGICAL
STRATEGY: IMPACTS ON LEARNING, ENGAGEMENT, AND STUDENT WELL-BEING
     Ricardo Luiz Alves
     Marcelo Damião Amoras Nascimento
     Ana Clara de Sousa Meirelles
     Jennifer Nascimento da Silva
     Ronaldo Pereira da Silva
     Michel dos Reis da Silva
     Micilandia Pereira de Sousa
     Lucas Gabriel Pereira da Silva

     DOI: 10.54033/stebook.978-65-83309-62-4_11

CHAPTER 12 ................................................................................................. 190
THE MEASUREMENT OF PROFESSIONAL BURNOUT AMONG ALGERIAN
UNIVERSITY TEACHERS: THE CASE OF THE UNIVERSITY OF CONSTANTINE1,
ALGERIA
     Amrani Mourad
     Bouzerara Ramdane
     Chaib Rachid
     Ion Verzea
     DOI: 10.54033/stebook.978-65-83309-62-4_12

CHAPTER 13 ................................................................................................. 209
PREVENTIVE SCHOOL COEXISTENCE FACILITATED BY ICT: A PATH TOWARD A
SOCIAL ENVIRONMENT OF COEXISTENCE AND PEACE
     Jairo Soledad
     Alex Puertas González
     Ariel-Adolfo Rodriguez-Hernandez
     DOI: 10.54033/stebook.978-65-83309-62-4_13

CHAPTER 14 ................................................................................................. 227
MANAGEMENT OF EDUCATIONAL TECHNOLOGY IN HIGHER EDUCATION: THE
CASE OF INTEGRATING SIMULATORS INTO EDUCATION
     Ariel Adolfo Rodriguez-Hernández
     Fanny Avella-Forero
     Juan Sebastián Rodríguez Avella
     DOI: 10.54033/stebook.978-65-83309-62-4_14

CHAPTER 15 ................................................................................................. 247
MOBILE PLANETARIUMS AS A SCIENTIFIC LITERACY TOOL FOR PEOPLE WITH
VISUAL IMPAIRMENTS
     Thiago de Oliveira Borges
     Celi Corrêa Neres
     Edmilson de Souza
     DOI: 10.54033/stebook.978-65-83309-62-4_15

CHAPTER 16 ................................................................................................. 264
LITERATURE AND LITERACY IN BRAZIL: HISTORICAL AND PEDAGOGICAL
TRAJECTORIES IN THE FORMATION OF THE STUDENT READER
     Giovanna Carvalho Arantes
     Cristiane Camilo Miranda Dias
     Clara Borges Japiassú Rodrigues
     Elisângela Ferreira Rodrigues
     Elisângela Rodrigues Prado
     Maria Santana dos Santos Lucena
     Susana da Silva Karwowski
     Viviane de Oliveira da Rocha
     DOI: 10.54033/stebook.978-65-83309-62-4_16

CHAPTER 17 ................................................................................................. 275
ETHOS OF SCHOOL MANAGEMENT IN CIEJAS IN SÃO PAULO: A POLYPHONIC
ANALYSIS OF POLITICAL-PEDAGOGICAL PROJECTS
     Renato Melo Ribeiro
     DOI: 10.54033/stebook.978-65-83309-62-4_17

CHAPTER 18 ................................................................................................. 293
BIOSTATISTICS AND EVIDENCE-BASED MEDICINE: PEDAGOGICAL CHALLENGES
AND THE NEED FOR CURRICULUM REFORM IN LIGHT OF THE 2025 NATIONAL
CURRICULUM GUIDELINES

     Alan Aldrin Lobão Corrêa Feitosa
     Nelson Agapito Brandão Rios
     Antonio Carlos Leal Cortez
     Jéssica Danielle da Costa Nascimento Barradas
     Marcélia Karoline da Silva Raiol
     Marilene Siqueira Silva
     Nilmara Mousinho Mendes
     DOI: 10.54033/stebook.978-65-83309-62-4_18

CHAPTER 19 ................................................................................................. 315
THE FOCUS GROUP AS A SPACE FOR TEACHER TRAINING TO DEVELOP
CRITICAL TRINKING
     Ruth Cristina Soares Gomes Araújo
     Evandro Ghedin
     Clodoaldo Pires Araújo
     DOI: 10.54033/stebook.978-65-83309-62-4_19

CHAPTER 20 ................................................................................................. 335
THE ORAL POETRY OF MARACATU DE BAQUE SOLTO: STRATEGY FOR
EXPANDING THE LITERARY LITERACY OF STUDENTS IN THE 4TH PHASE OF EJA
     Joseane do Nascimento Rocha
     Josivaldo Custódio da Silva
     Maria do Rosário da Silva Albuquerque Barbosa
     DOI: 10.54033/stebook.978-65-83309-62-4_20

CHAPTER 21 ................................................................................................. 372
ACTIVE METHODOLOGIES IN UNDERGRADUATE HEALTH EDUCATION WITH A
FOCUS ON THE TEACHING OF EPIDEMIOLOGY
     Íris Nascimento Freitas
     Felipe Souza Dreger Nery
     Mona Gizelle Dreger Nery
     Anna Carolina Souza Silva
     DOI: 10.54033/stebook.978-65-83309-62-4_21

CHAPTER 22 ................................................................................................. 391
VIOLENCE AT SCHOOL: A PRELIMINARY STUDY INDICATIVE OF PUBLIC POLICIES
FOR EDUCATING CITIES
     Maria Sílvia Bacila
     DOI: 10.54033/stebook.978-65-83309-62-4_22

CHAPTER 23 ................................................................................................. 409
HISTORICAL TRACES: MEDICAIS DIAGNOSES GO TO SCHOOL
     Michele Luciana Petersen
     Cláudia Rodrigues de Freitas
     DOI: 10.54033/stebook.978-65-83309-62-4_23

CHAPTER 24 ................................................................................................. 426
THE BODY IN PHYSICAL EDUCATION CURRICULA: TRENDS AND APPROACHES IN
ACADEMIC RESEARCH
     Guilherme Ferreira Pereira
     Jessica Pontes Nóbrega
     Isabel Porto Filgueiras
     Bruna Gabriela Marques
     DOI: 10.54033/stebook.978-65-83309-62-4_24

CHAPTER 25 ................................................................................................. 444
EDUCATIONAL ROBOTICS: TEACHER TRAINING TO TACKLE RESISTANCE TO
TECHNOLOGICAL ADVANCES
     Maria Vanilza Rodrigues da Silva

     Alberto da Silva Franqueira
     Christiane Diniz Guimarães
     Marco Antonio Silvany
     Rodolfo Gonçalves da Silva
     Sandra de Oliveira Botelho
     Silvana Maria Aparecida Viana Santos
     Yara Kirya Brum
     DOI: 10.54033/stebook.978-65-83309-62-4_25

CHAPTER 26 ................................................................................................. 461
ENVIRONMENTAL EDUCATION IN HIGH SCHOOL: AN ANALYSIS OF POLITICAL-
PEDAGOGICAL PROJECTS FROM EIGHT PUBLIC SCHOOLS IN JUAZEIRO-BA
     Gilberto Araújo Reis
     Vivian Alves Pamponet
     Vinícius Dias de Carvalho
     Bianca Moraes Dantas Reis
     Edivaldo Xavier da Silva Júnior
     Tarcísio Fulgêncio Alves da Silva
     Paulo César Marques de Andrade Santos
     Maria da Conceição Ferreira da Silva
     Icaro Kleysson de Souza Carvalho
     Ricardo Kenji Shiosaki
     DOI: 10.54033/stebook.978-65-83309-62-4_26

CHAPTER 27 ................................................................................................. 482
THE PROFILE OF THE SCHOOL MANAGER UNDER THE VIEW OF A DEMOCRATIC
MANAGEMENT
     Olmira Bernadete Dassoler
     Carlos Kanzler
     Priscilla Garcia Zilio
     Poliana Steffany de Almeida
     Sirley Terezinha Filipak
     DOI: 10.54033/stebook.978-65-83309-62-4_27

CHAPTER 28 ................................................................................................. 497
SEE, REFLECT, AND TRANSFORM: SHORT FILMS AS A TOOL FOR
ENVIRONMENTAL EDUCATION
     Gisele Keise Junges
     Maristela Rosso Walker
     DOI: 10.54033/stebook.978-65-83309-62-4_28

CHAPTER 1
 CHALLENGES AND PRACTICES IN
 PEDAGOGICAL COORDINATION IN A
 PUBLIC SCHOOL: A CASE STUDY AT PINTO
 MARQUES STATE SCHOOL


Denys da Cunha Silva
Master of Education
Universidade Federal do Pará (UFPA)
E-mail: denys.silva@ifpa.edu.br

Marília do Socorro Oliveira Araújo
Master's Degree in Cities, Territories, Identities, and Education
Instituto Federal de Educação, Ciência e Tecnologia do Pará (IFPA)
E-mail: marilia.araujo@ifpa.edu.br

Alessandra Luz da Silva
Specialist in Educational Management and Teaching in Primary and Higher
Education
Secretaria Municipal de Educação de Ananindeua (SEMED)
E-mail: alessandraluzufpa@gmail.com

Jhonata Souza Paula
Specialist in Indigenous School Education
Secretaria de Educação do Estado do Pará (SEDUC - PA)
E-mail: jhonatadepaulaoficial@gmail.com

Bárbara de Nazaré da Silva Paes
Specialist in Inclusive Education
Secretaria Municipal de Educação (SEMEC)
E-mail: b.nazaré2016@gmail.com

Gardenia da Silva Frazão
Master's Degree in Vocational Education
Instituto Federal de Roraima (IFRR)
E-mail: gardenia.frazao@ifpa.edu.br


ABSTRACT: This article critically analyzes the experience of a supervised
internship in pedagogical coordination carried out at Pinto Marques State School
in Belém, Pará, Brazil. Based on field observations, document analysis, and
conversa-tions with school professionals, structural, administrative, and relational
as-pects that directly influence school management were identified. The chal-
lenges faced, such as lack of resources, centralized management, and teacher
demotivation, are discussed in light of contemporary educational literature. The


                                                                                 11

study highlights the importance of democratic management, active listening, and
collaborative work as strategies to promote quality public education. The
methodology adopted was qualitative, with an emphasis on critical analysis of the
lived experience. The conclusion is that, despite adversities, there are sig-nificant
experiences of resistance and commitment to social transformation within the
school context.

KEYWORDS: pedagogical coordination, democratic management, supervised
internship, public education.

RESUMO: Este artigo analisa criticamente a experiência de estágio
supervisionado em coordenação pedagógica realizada na Escola Estadual Pinto
Marques, em Belém-PA. A partir de observações de campo, análise documental
e conversas com profissionais da escola, identificaram-se aspectos estruturais,
administrativos e relacionais que influenciam diretamente a gestão escolar. As
dificuldades enfrentadas, como a escassez de recursos, a gestão centralizada e
a desmotivação docente, são discutidas à luz da literatura educacional
contemporânea. O estudo destaca a importância de uma gestão democrática, da
escuta ativa e do trabalho colaborativo como estratégias para a promoção de
uma educação pública de qualidade. A metodologia adotada foi qualitativa, com
ênfase na análise crítica da prática vivenciada. Conclui-se que, apesar das
adversidades, há experiências significativas de resistência e compromisso com
a transformação social no contexto escolar.

PALAVRAS-CHAVE: coordenação pedagógica, gestão democrática, estágio
supervisionado, educação pública.




                                                                                  12

1 INTRODUCTION


       The reality of Brazilian public schools, especially those located in
peripheral urban areas or socially vulnerable contexts, reveals a complex
landscape    in   which      pedagogical   resistance,   structural   precariousness,
institutional conflicts, and constant challenges to democratic management
coexist. In this context, the pedagogical coordinator plays a central role as a
liaison between the school’s political-pedagogical project, the guidelines of the
Department of Education, and everyday teaching practices (Lück, 2009; Paro,
2012). However, this professional does not always find adequate conditions to
perform their role, frequently being subjected to overwork, improvisation, and
institutional devaluation.
       The supervised internship in pedagogical coordination, as a mandatory
component of teacher and educational administrator training, constitutes a
unique opportunity for the articulation of theory and practice, fostering critical
observation of school dynamics and the experience of the real challenges that
permeate everyday educational life. According to Freire (1996), there is no
transformative pedagogical practice without a critical reading of reality, and the
internship, in this sense, must transcend the logic of mere technical application,
taking on the character of a formative, investigative, and political experience.
       This article presents and analyzes the results of the supervised internship
experience conducted at the Pinto Marques State School, located in the city of
Belém (PA), in 2016. Through immersion in the daily school routine, it was
possible to observe structural, administrative, and cultural tensions that directly
impact the performance of pedagogical coordination and school management as
a whole. Among the most evident elements are: the centralization of decision-
making by the administration, the marginalization of strategic functions such as
the school office, the precarious state of teaching and learning resources, the
overburdening of coordinators, episodes of gender discrimination, and practices
of explicit religiosity in public educational spaces.
       The choice of a qualitative approach is justified by the investigative nature
of the internship, whose objective was to understand, describe, and problematize
lived situations from a critical and formative perspective. Participant observation,
document analysis, and informal interviews with teachers, coordinators, and


                                                                                   13

school staff were employed. Through this, the study sought to analyze not only
pedagogical practices but also the meanings and values that permeate the
institution’s daily life.
        This study is grounded in the perspective that the internship should not be
a passive rite of passage, but rather a moment for questioning school structures,
actively listening to those engaged in the practice, and producing knowledge
about the actual functioning of public schools. We start from the understanding
that schools are not mere spaces for normative reproduction, but contested
territories where antagonistic visions of society and education coexist (Freire,
1996; Dubet, 2004; Lück, 2000).
        Thus, the central objective of this article is to critically analyze the
experience of the supervised internship in pedagogical coordination, identifying
the limits and possibilities of this professional’s role in a public school
environment marked by material, symbolic, and political challenges. The intention
is, thereby, to contribute to the debate on initial , and continuing teacher
education, the valorization of educational work, and the urgency of implementing
democratic management practices within Brazilian public schools.


2. THEORETICAL FRAMEWORK


2.1 DEMOCRATIC MANAGEMENT AS A POLITICAL AND PEDAGOGICAL
PRINCIPLE


        Democratic management of public schools constitutes one of the pillars of
quality education, as provided for in Article 3 of the Law on Guidelines and Bases
for National Education (LDB – Law No. 9,394/96), which establishes “the
democratic management of public education” as one of the principles of
education in the country. However, despite its centrality in law and discourse, the
implementation of democratic practices in schools faces historical resistance
related to the hierarchical culture of public administration, the inadequate training
of administrators, and the persistence of authoritarian structures in everyday
school life (Ferreira; Oliveira, 2010; Paro, 2012).
        According to Paro (2012), democratic management is not limited to the
direct election of principals or the creation of school councils, but requires a


                                                                                  14

profound change in the power relations that structure the educational
environment. It involves understanding the school as a public space, where
decisions must be shared among its stakeholders—teachers, coordinators,
students, families, and staff—within a framework of shared responsibility and
effective participation. Although many schools espouse the rhetoric of
democracy, their practices reveal a concentration of power in the hands of the
administration, fragmentation among sectors, and a lack of genuine mechanisms
for listening and dialogue.
      Lück (2009) reinforces this understanding by arguing that democratic
management implies not only the decentralization of decisions but also the
formation of an organizational culture guided by ethics, cooperation, and
collective commitment. However, the author warns that this construction depends
on processes of ongoing training and the willingness of administrators to be open
to criticism, to a diversity of perspectives, and to ongoing negotiation with the
school community . Democratic management, therefore, is not a ready-made
model, but a political and pedagogical process in constant construction.


2.2 PEDAGOGICAL COORDINATION AS MEDIATION BETWEEN PROJECT
AND PRACTICE


      The role of the pedagogical coordinator occupies a strategic position within
the school’s structure: it is the coordinator who links the Political-Pedagogical
Project (PPP) with teaching practices, monitors teaching-learning processes,
mediates conflicts, and promotes teachers’ continuing professional development.
However, as Oliveira (2007) and Lück (2000) point out, this role is often stripped
of meaning in public schools, being confused with bureaucratic tasks or the
supervision of teaching work.
      In Brazil, the role of pedagogical coordination has been constructed in an
ambiguous manner. On the one hand, it is recognized as essential to the
educational process, but on the other, it faces obstacles such as a lack of
autonomy, an overload of duties, and institutional ambiguity regarding its role.
Often, coordinators are appointed on an ad hoc basis due to functional
restructuring or administrative convenience, without the proper training to perform
the role (Lück, 2009).


                                                                                15

       In this regard, Libâneo (2001) argues that the school’s pedagogical
function cannot be fully realized without a body for critical and dialogic
coordination that promotes systematic monitoring of teaching work and collective
reflection on the school’s objectives and methods. The author argues that the
pedagogical coordinator should be a training agent, capable of fostering research
within the school, articulating knowledge, and contributing to overcoming the
pedagogical difficulties faced by teachers and students.
       This view is corroborated by Veiga (2008), who understands coordination
as a space for collective construction, rather than supervision. For the author,
pedagogical coordination must break away from technical formalism and position
itself as a space for listening, collaboration, and the construction of transformative
practices. This function gains even greater relevance in contexts of social
exclusion and the deterioration of school conditions, in which the coordinator can
serve as a fundamental link between pedagogical aspirations and the concrete
reality of school stakeholders.


2.3   THE       PRECARITIZATION      OF    EDUCATIONAL         WORK      AND     THE
CONTRADICTIONS OF PUBLIC SCHOOLS


       Another fundamental aspect for understanding the reality experienced
during the internship is the precariousness of working conditions faced by
education professionals. Esteve (1999) uses the term “teacher malaise” to
describe the sense of frustration and discouragement that afflicts teachers and
coordinators in the face of the system’s demands, the lack of institutional
recognition, and the daily difficulties in performing quality work.
       In the case of Brazilian public schools, this malaise is exacerbated by
factors such as the lack of teaching and pedagogical resources, the dilapidated
state of school buildings, low salaries, an overload of duties, and the symbolic
violence that permeates the daily lives of education professionals. According to
Dubet (2004), schools today face a crisis of legitimacy, as they are held
accountable for results they cannot achieve on their own, and professionals, in
turn, are blamed for structural problems that go beyond their individual
capabilities.



                                                                                   16

         The imposition of administrative, pedagogical, and social demands on
coordinators and teachers without adequate institutional support characterizes a
neoliberal accountability model that shifts the blame for the system’s failure onto
individuals (Shiroma; Campos; Garcia, 2005). In this model, the pedagogical
coordinator ceases to be a facilitator and becomes an executor of fragmented
and poorly implemented policies.
         Despite these difficulties, authors such as Freire (1996) insist on the
possibility of reinventing public schools based on educators’ ethical commitment
to social transformation. For the author, even under the most adverse conditions,
the educational act can be a space for hope, dialogue, and resistance. This
perspective is essential for thinking about initial teacher education and the role of
the internship as a critical experience, and not merely as a way to fulfill required
hours.


3. METHODOLOGY


         The research underlying this article falls within the qualitative approach,
grounded in the critical-reflective perspective of the supervised internship as a
space for investigation, training, and analysis of the educational context.
According to Bogdan and Biklen (1994), qualitative research seeks to understand
the meanings that subjects attribute to their experiences, based on the premise
that the social world is constructed through daily interactions and practices. This
approach proves particularly suitable when the objective is to interpret complex
phenomena, such as the dynamics of management and pedagogical coordination
in public schools.
         The supervised internship was conducted at the Pinto Marques State
School, located in the city of Belém, PA, from June 22 to September 28, 2016,
totaling 49 hours and 30 minutes of in-person activities. During this period, it was
possible to directly observe the school routine during the morning shift (from 7:30
a.m. to 12:00 p.m.), under the supervision of Professor Dr. M. S. Coelho, from
the Federal University of Pará (UFPA). The school is situated in a historic and
central neighborhood of the city, featuring a diverse physical structure, but with
evident signs of disrepair and lack of maintenance.



                                                                                  17

       Data collection was carried out through three main strategies: (1)
participant observation, (2) document analysis, and (3) informal interviews.
Participant observation allowed the intern to become part of the school’s daily life,
experiencing formal and informal moments of interaction among administrators,
coordinators, teachers, staff, and students. This mode of observation is not
restricted to the passivity of an external gaze but involves direct and reflective
engagement with the observed reality (André, 1995). School events, meetings,
conflict situations, and daily practices were recorded, which enabled an
understanding of the institutional culture and the school’s modes of operation.
       The documentary analysis consisted of examining the school’s Political-
Pedagogical Project (PPP), internal regulations, pedagogical plans, and
administrative documents. The critical reading of these materials aimed to verify
the alignment between the school’s formal principles and the practices actually
carried out in daily life. It was found, for example, that the PPP had been outdated
since 2012, which already indicates a disconnect between planning and
pedagogical implementation.
       Finally, informal interviews and spontaneous conversations were
conducted with members of the school community, including pedagogical
coordinators, teachers, administrative assistants, and a special education
teacher. These conversations, though unstructured, revealed relevant aspects of
the professionals’ perceptions regarding school management, the role of
coordination, working conditions, and the challenges faced in daily life. The
statements were recorded in a field journal and organized by thematic themes for
subsequent analysis.
       The triangulation of these sources—observation, documents, and
statements—allowed for a more consistent understanding of the school’s reality,
highlighting the contradictions between institutional discourse and lived practices.
Rather than presenting a static portrait of the school, the methodology adopted
sought to interpret the processes, tensions, and disputes that permeate the
educational environment, based on the involved perspective of the intern-
researcher.




                                                                                  18

4. RESULTS AND DISCUSSIONS


       The data collected throughout the supervised internship reveal the
complexity of public school dynamics, marked by contradictions between legal
principles and the actual mechanisms of management and pedagogical practice.
Based on the analysis of observations, institutional documents, and informal
conversations with professionals at Pinto Marques State School, four major
analytical categories were organized to account for the main tensions and
possibilities identified: (1) centralized school management and the crisis of
participation; (2) pedagogical coordination under conditions of overload and the
erasure of institutio ; (3) exclusionary practices and challenges to democratic
culture; and (4) solidarity and micro-resistance as educational potential.


4.1 CENTRALIZED SCHOOL MANAGEMENT AND THE CRISIS OF
PARTICIPATION


       During the supervised internship, direct observation and staff reports
revealed a school management model excessively centered on the principal, with
visible traits of authoritarianism and low adherence to democratic principles of
leadership and collegiality. Although the principal’s personal dedication and her
frequent presence on campus are acknowledged, these characteristics do not
automatically translate    into   effective   pedagogical leadership or broad
participatory processes.
       The accounts gathered indicate that decisions of a pedagogical,
administrative, or disciplinary nature are concentrated exclusively with the
principal, without prior consultation with other departments. Pedagogical
coordinators, for example, reported that they are often not consulted in the
development of the school calendar, the organization of institutional events, or
the definition of internal guidelines, and are frequently informed only afterward,
once the actions have already been decided. This practice relegates the
pedagogical team to a role of execution rather than conception, undermining the
collegial nature of school management advocated by Brazilian educational
legislation.



                                                                               19

       The LDB (Law No. 9,394/96, Art. 14) establishes that education systems
must ensure democratic forms of management in public schools, involving the
participation of the school and local community in decision-making processes.
However, this guideline often fails to materialize in the concrete reality of
institutions. As Paro (2012) analyzes, democratic management requires a shift
from authority as imposition to authority as mutual recognition. This means that
school leadership should not be based on unilateral orders, but on continuous
processes of listening, negotiation, and collective decision-making.
       The model observed in the analyzed school still appears to be strongly
influenced by the logic of technocratic school administration, inherited from the
bureaucratic-corporate paradigm of the 1990s, in which the principal assumes
the role of a manager, and the other school stakeholders become operational
staff, often without a voice or active participation. This vertical structure also
contradicts the views of Lück (2009) and Ferreira and Oliveira (2010), who assert
that democratic management implies the strengthening of dialogic and horizontal
practices among school segments, allowing individuals to recognize themselves
as co-authors of the educational project.
       Another indication of the participatory crisis is the absence of institutional
channels for listening and debate. During the observation period, no regular
meetings of the school council, student council, or collective planning forums
involving all school sectors were identified. The lack of time allocated to joint
planning and the informality in communication between administration,
coordination, the school office, and teachers reinforce the fragmentation of
management. According to Libâneo (2001), this fragmentation hinders the
construction of a solid institutional identity and compromises coordination among
the different levels and functions of school work.
       There is also a relevant symbolic dimension: silence as a management
tool. Some staff members avoid expressing disagreements or making
suggestions because they fear subtle retaliation, such as the non-renewal of
certain assignments or the public exposure of mistakes. This creates an
institutional climate of passivity and conformity, where dissent is viewed as a
threat rather than a contribution. Such practices resemble what Dubet (2004)
defines as institutionalized symbolic violence, in which individuals are led to
accept the rules of the institutional game as if they were natural or inevitable.


                                                                                    20

       This authoritarian culture, as it perpetuates itself, tends to discourage the
active involvement of various school stakeholders, particularly teachers and
coordinators, who end up limiting their roles to the mechanical fulfillment of
operational duties. As a result, the pedagogical dimension of management—
which should serve as a cross-cutting axis linking educational practices—is lost.
       The lack of opportunity for the intern to gain a comprehensive
understanding of management practices is also telling. The intern’s lack of
involvement in administrative activities—not even as a close observer—
reinforces the logic of information control and restricted access to certain aspects
of the institution, as if there were off-limits zones of power that could not be
touched. This not only compromises the initial training of future professionals but
also violates the principle of transparency and the collective construction of
educational knowledge.
       Thus, the school management of the observed unit presents serious
limitations regarding the promotion of a participatory, horizontal, and formative
culture. Such limitations cannot be attributed solely to the individual figure of the
administrator but are also the result of an authoritarian tradition and an
institutional culture that still resists the full realization of democracy within public
schools. Overcoming this logic requires more than just changing individuals: it
requires modifying structures, establishing permanent spaces for dialogue, and
investing in the ethical, political, and pedagogical training of all school
stakeholders.


4.2 PEDAGOGICAL COORDINATION UNDER CONDITIONS OF OVERLOAD
AND INSTITUTIONAL MARGINALIZATION


       The school’s pedagogical team consists of three coordinators: two who
have been reassigned from other roles and one resource room teacher. Although
these professionals play fundamental roles in organizing the pedagogical routine,
their work is frequently undervalued, rendered invisible, or misunderstood within
the institution. In informal conversations, they reported feeling overburdened,
working without support from the administration, lacking even minimal material
resources, and frequently covering basic expenses to keep projects running.



                                                                                     21

      The role of pedagogical coordination, as argued by Lück (2000) and Veiga
(2008), should be understood as a space for articulating the school’s political-
pedagogical project with teaching practice—a place for training, listening, and
mediation. However, in the observed practice, coordinators accumulate
bureaucratic functions, disciplinary responsibilities, and tasks that go beyond
their role, without formal recognition or adequate working conditions.
      In material terms, the lack of resources is alarming: there is a shortage of
paper, printer ink, basic materials for teaching activities, and minimal
infrastructure in support rooms. According to reports, part of the pedagogical
projects relies on donations or voluntary contributions from the staff members
themselves. This situation constitutes what Esteve (1999) called “teacher
malaise,” a feeling of frustration and helplessness that emerges when the
educator’s commitment is systematically hindered by the objective conditions of
the system.
      The precarious nature of pedagogical work, as pointed out by Shiroma,
Campos, and Garcia (2005), is part of the process of the state shirking its
responsibilities, transferring to frontline professionals the task of keeping the
school running, even without adequate resources. In this model, coordinators
cease to be strategic agents of pedagogical transformation and come to play an
almost technical-administrative role, focused on resolving urgent issues.
      Despite this, it was possible to observe practices of everyday resistance
and emotional engagement among the coordinators, especially in their
relationships with students. These micro-resistances, as described by Dubet
(2004), do not negate institutional suffering, but demonstrate that the school
remains a place of meaning, where bonds, memories, and hopes are built.


4.3 EXCLUSIVE PRACTICES AND CHALLENGES TO DEMOCRATIC
CULTURE


      During the supervised internship, it was observed that daily life at Pinto
Marques State School, although governed by an institutional discourse of
commitment to inclusion and citizenship, reproduces exclusionary practices and
values that contradict the foundations of a democratic and pluralistic school.
Participant observation revealed instances of gender discrimination, signs of


                                                                               22

religious intolerance, and symbolic exclusion of certain individuals and groups
within the school, demonstrating that building a democratic culture goes far
beyond drafting official documents or formal adherence to legislation.
       One of the most emblematic incidents occurred when a student was
addressed by a teacher in a harsh tone, hearing the phrase: “Go sweep a house,
do the laundry.” This statement, laden with sexist content, normalizes the
association between the female figure and domestic work, devaluing the
student’s presence in the school setting and revealing a conservative and sexist
view of gender roles. Such an attitude, in addition to being offensive, reproduces
what Saffioti (2004) and Louro (1997) call institutionalized patriarchy, in which the
school, instead of combating, ends up reinforcing stereotypes and inequalities.
       The reproduction of discriminatory discourse in the school environment
directly undermines the right to quality education and the full development of
individuals. The school, as a public space for ethical, intellectual, and civic
education, has a duty to act in confronting society’s structural inequalities,
including those related to gender, race, sexual orientation, and religion (BRASIL,
2012). When practices such as the one observed are ignored or downplayed, the
symbolic exclusion of historically marginalized groups is legitimized, undermining
the principle of equity.
       Another critical aspect observed was the conspicuous presence of
religious symbols in administrative offices, hallways, and educational settings.
Even though the majority of the staff professes the same faith, the public display
of Catholic religious icons in a public educational space contradicts the
constitutional principle of the secular nature of the State (CF, Art. 19, item I). As
Saviani (2008) argues, public schools must guarantee universal access to
knowledge and ensure that no belief or doctrine takes precedence over the right
to learn and coexist in diversity.
       This symbolic imposition, even when unintentional, can cause discomfort
and subjective exclusion among students and staff who do not share the same
religious orientation, reinforcing what Dubet (2004) calls forms of silent
institutional violence—those that manifest in absences, silences, and everyday
normalizations.
       In parallel with this, there was a lack of systematic training initiatives on
human rights, diversity, and the culture of peace. Although the school participates


                                                                                  23

in specific projects, such as environmental initiatives or prevention and “ ”
campaigns, there is no institutionalized program that promotes critical discussion
of prejudice and discrimination. The absence of an educational policy in this
regard undermines the progress established by legal frameworks such as
Resolution CNE/CP No. 1/2012 (National Guidelines for Human Rights
Education), which establishes the need for these themes to be integrated across
all stages of basic education.
       Building a democratic culture in schools requires more than the
formalization of school councils or the existence of internal elections. It demands
a daily pedagogy of listening, respect for differences, and the active promotion of
social justice. As argued by Veiga (2008) and Freire (1996), the school must be
a space of emancipation rather than domination, a place where individuals feel
recognized in their multifaceted humanity.
       Finally, it is important to highlight that, in contrast to these exclusionary
practices, it was possible to observe the actions of individuals—particularly
special education teachers and pedagogical coordinators—who seek to
challenge these logics and create spaces of welcome and care. These actions,
though still scattered and lacking effective institutional support, demonstrate that
resistance to exclusion and the normalization of inequality also manifests itself in
small, everyday gestures and commitments, as we will see in the following
section.


4.4 SOLIDARITY AND MICRO-RESISTANCE AS EDUCATIONAL POTENTIAL


       Despite the countless challenges faced by the school staff—ranging from
a scarcity of material resources to the rigidity of authoritarian structures—the
supervised internship also revealed significant manifestations of commitment,
affection, and solidarity in the daily life of Pinto Marques State School. These
actions, though often overlooked by institutional discourse, function as forms of
micro-resistance and a reaffirmation of the ethical meaning of educational
practice.
       During school events such as the June festival, Student Day, and the
environmental project, the involvement of various segments of the school
community was notable. Teachers, coordinators, administrative staff, students,


                                                                                 24

and even local merchants actively participated in the organization, donating
materials, time, and volunteer labor to ensure the activities took place. On these
occasions, the school seemed to suspend—albeit temporarily—the structural
tensions that mark its daily life, becoming a space for collective celebration,
belonging, and cultural expression.
       Far from being trivial, these experiences represent what Dubet (2004)
refers to as forms of moral commitment on the part of individuals to the school
institution. According to the author, even in contexts where the organizational
structure is fragile and working conditions are precarious, individuals find ways to
maintain a symbolic bond with the school, engaging in actions that reaffirm its
social legitimacy. These are everyday gestures that sustain the public school not
merely as a structure, but as a collective life project.
       Pedagogical coordinators, in particular, stood out as central figures in this
process of mobilization and care. In informal conversations, they reported that
even in the face of a recurring sense of professional devaluation and task
overload, they find motivation in interacting with students, especially when
witnessing the success stories of former students who now hold positions in
higher education or the formal labor market. This type of symbolic recognition—
though often not institutionalized—serves as an element of re-enchantment in
educational work, as Esteve (1999) highlights.
       Such practices demonstrate that public schools endure, in large part,
thanks to the ability of their professionals to sustain relationships of care, trust,
and affection, even in environments marked by precariousness. Freire (1996) had
already warned that hope is not passive waiting, but an active stance in the face
of reality. In the case of the school, this takes the form of an education that does
not give up on others, that believes in the potential of each individual, and that
refuses to accept exclusion or failure as inevitable.
       Another aspect observed was the role of affection in pedagogical
mediation. In many situations, teachers and staff compensated for the lack of
resources with creative strategies, improvised materials, and, above all,
empathetic listening. The pedagogical coordination office, for example, was
frequently occupied by students seeking emotional support, guidance, or simply
a place to be heard. This informal space of welcome contrasts with the



                                                                                  25

bureaucratic model that often organizes public schools and reveals a subjective
and ethical dimension of pedagogical work that cannot be overlooked.
       Finally, the continuation of these practices depends on an institutional
policy that goes beyond the goodwill of individuals. Although resistance and
innovation can be found in everyday life, it is essential that the state ensure
objective conditions so that the commitment to public education is
sustained in a structured manner. These micro-resistances need to be
recognized, valued, and strengthened by public policies that ensure adequate
funding, continuing professional development, democratic management, and the
recognition of education professionals.
       It can thus be concluded that the power of public schools lies in the
people who build them daily, in the small gestures and everyday commitments
that keep their social function alive. In times of institutional discredit, this daily life
of solidarity and resistance reaffirms the school as one of the last spaces for the
collective construction of the future


5. CONCLUSION


       The supervised internship in pedagogical coordination at Pinto Marques
State School provided an intense, critical, and formative experience, allowing for
a concrete understanding of the complexity involved in pedagogical work in public
schools. Far from being a mere curricular requirement, this experience proved to
be a powerful space for investigation, reflection on educational practices, and
awareness— —of the structural, political, and subjective challenges that
permeate school management.
       Throughout the process, it was possible to identify four major axes of
analysis that structured the reflection: (1) the centralization of power in school
management and the fragility of democratic participation; (2) the institutional
overload and marginalization of pedagogical coordination; (3) the reproduction of
exclusionary practices, particularly regarding gender and religiosity; and (4) the
forms of solidarity and micro-resistance that sustain the public purpose of the
school. These categories are not watertight but are continuously intertwined and
in tension within the school’s daily life, revealing profound contradictions between



                                                                                        26

official educational norms and the concrete practices experienced by those within
the school.
        The analysis demonstrated that, although Brazilian legislation establishes
clear guidelines on democratic management, teacher training, and equity, the
implementation of these principles in public schools still faces historical and
structural obstacles. The absence of mechanisms for listening, the authoritarian
institutional culture, the lack of material resources, and the lack of professional
recognition create an environment hostile to the development of emancipatory
educational practices. At the same time, the resistance of the participants, the
daily dedication of the professionals, and the emotional bond with the students
show that the public school remains a space of contestation, invention, and
potential.
        It is essential to recognize that pedagogical coordination plays a strategic
role in mediating between the intent of the pedagogical project and the concrete
reality of the classroom. To this end, it is necessary to ensure not only adequate
training but also objective working conditions, institutional time for planning,
management support, and active participation in the school’s decision-making
processes. Without this, the pedagogical coordinator risks being reduced to a
technical-administrative agent, distanced from their role as an educator and
facilitator.
        From the perspective of teacher training, the internship demonstrated that
it is essential to move beyond a technical and passive view of educational
practice. The intern should not merely be an observer but a subject involved in
the process— —capable of critically interpreting reality, engaging in dialogue with
school stakeholders, and constructing knowledge through experience. As Freire
(1996) states, teaching requires courage, ethics, and hope—qualities that must
also be present in initial teacher training.
        Finally, this article reaffirms the importance of valuing public schools as
spaces for social transformation, but warns of the urgency of public policies that
ensure dignified conditions for their operation. Quality education cannot depend
solely on the resilience of professionals but must be a collective responsibility of
the state and society. May this internship report contribute, albeit modestly, to the
strengthening of a public, democratic, and socially grounded education system.



                                                                                  27

                                  REFERENCES


ANDRÉ, Marli E. D. A. Estudo de caso em pesquisa e avaliação educacional.
Brasília: Líber Livro, 1995.

BOGDAN, Robert; BIKLEN, Sari. Investigação qualitativa em educação: uma
introdução à teoria e aos métodos. Porto: Porto Editora, 1994.

BRASIL. Constituição (1988). Constituição da República Federativa do Brasil.
Brasília, DF: Senado Federal, 1988.

BRASIL. Lei nº 9.394, de 20 de dezembro de 1996. Estabelece as diretrizes e bases
da educação nacional. Diário Oficial da União: seção 1, Brasília, DF, 23 dez. 1996.

BRASIL. Ministério da Educação. Secretaria de Educação Continuada,
Alfabetização, Diversidade e Inclusão. Diretrizes Nacionais para a Educação em
Direitos Humanos. Brasília: MEC/SECADI, 2012.

BRASIL. Ministério da Educação. Secretaria de Educação Especial. Política Nacional
de Educação Especial na Perspectiva da Educação Inclusiva. Brasília: MEC/SEESP,
2008.

DUBET, François. O que é uma escola justa? Da igualdade das oportunidades à
justiça educativa. São Paulo: Editora 34, 2004.

ESTEVE, José María. O mal-estar docente: a sala de aula e a saúde dos
professores. Bauru: EDUSC, 1999.

FERREIRA, Nadir Zago; OLIVEIRA, João Ferreira de. Gestão democrática da
educação: desafios e perspectivas. Campinas: Papirus, 2010.

FREIRE, Paulo. Pedagogia da esperança: um reencontro com a pedagogia do
oprimido. 12. ed. Rio de Janeiro: Paz e Terra, 1996.

LIBÂNEO, José Carlos. Organização e gestão da escola: teoria e prática. Goiânia:
Alternativa, 2001.

LOURO, Guacira Lopes. Gênero, sexualidade e educação: uma perspectiva pós-
estruturalista. Petrópolis: Vozes, 1997.

LÜCK, Heloísa. Gestão educacional: uma questão paradigmática. Petrópolis: Vozes,
2000.

LÜCK, Heloísa. Gestão escolar e qualidade da educação: uma abordagem baseada
na escola como organização do conhecimento. Petrópolis: Vozes, 2009.

OLIVEIRA, Dalila Andrade. Gestão da educação: impasses, desafios e perspectivas.
São Paulo: Cortez, 2007.

PARO, Vitor Henrique. Gestão democrática da escola pública: o que é e como se
faz. 9. ed. São Paulo: Ática, 2012.

SAFFIOTI, Heleieth Iara Bongiovani. Gênero, patriarcado, violência. São Paulo:
Fundação Perseu Abramo, 2004.


                                                                                   28

SAVIANI, Dermeval. História das ideias pedagógicas no Brasil. 3. ed. Campinas:
Autores Associados, 2008.

SHIROMA, Eneida Oto; CAMPOS, Rosângela G. S.; GARCIA, Rosalina D. Políticas
educacionais: questões e dilemas. 2. ed. São Paulo: Cortez, 2005.

VEIGA, Ilma Passos Alencastro. Projeto político-pedagógico da escola: uma
construção possível. 24. ed. Campinas: Papirus, 2008.




                                                                                 29

CHAPTER 2
 AFFECTIVE PATHS IN THE PROCESS OF
 BUILDING KNOWLEDGE


Josivaldo Constantino dos Santos
Doctor in Education
Universidade do Estado de Mato Grosso
E-mail: josicultura@unemat.br

Edneuza Alves Trugillo
Doctor in Environment and Regional Development
Universidade do Estado de Mato Grosso
E-mail: edneuza.trugillo@unemat.br

Alcione Bom Despacho Teixeira Costa
Master’s student in Sociology, Professional Master's Program in Sociology in a
National Network (PROFsocio)
Universidade do Estado de Mato Grosso
E-mail: costa.alcione@unemat.br

Andreia Maria Neri Ecco
Master’s student in Sociology, Professional Master's Program in Sociology in a
National Network (PROFsocio)
Universidade do Estado de Mato Grosso
E-mail: andreia.ecco@unemat.br

Agnaldo Machado dos Santos
Master's student in Sociology, Professional Master's Program in Sociology in a
National Network (PROFsocio)
Universidade do Estado de Mato Grosso
E-mail: agnaldo.machado@unemat.br

Sandra Regina Braz Ayres
Doctor in Education
Universidade do Estado de Mato Grosso
E-mail: ayres.sandra@unemat.br

José Aldair Pinheiro
Doctor in Environmental Sciences
E. E. Professora Edeli Mantovani
E-mail: jpinheiral@gmail.com

Edvaldo Sant’Ana Lourenço
Master of Education
Universidade do Estado de Mato Grosso
E-mail: edvaldo.lourenco@unemat.br


                                                                            30

ABSTRACT: This article explores ““Caminhos Afetivos no Processo de
Construção do Sa-ber” and highlights the importance of sensitive research and
sensitivity in hu-man interactions. The proposal is to recognize that the
construction of knowle-dge transcends the mere collection of data,
encompassing the emotions, stori-es and relationships that shape the
experiences of individuals. By integrating affective elements into the research,
we promote a space for listening and res-pect, which is essential for the formation
of more collective and transformative knowledge. We have tried to detail the
experience of entering the Professional Master's in Sociology, highlighting the
welcoming faculty and the importance of research methodology as a field of
exploration. Research is presented not just as a technical process, but as a
practice that involves the subjectivity of the researcher and the participants,
highlighting the need for an empathetic and inclusive approach. Finally, we
consider that sensitive research transforms the construction of knowledge into a
relational act, where affectivity plays a crucial role. This approach not only sheds
light on human experiences, but also pro-motes a more meaningful and
welcoming learning environment, emphasizing the importance of cultivating
sensitivity in investigative processes.

KEYWORDS: construction, knowledge, affectivity, reception.

RESUMO: Este artigo explora os “Caminhos Afetivos no Processo de
Construção do Sa-ber”, e destaca a importância da pesquisa sensível e da
sensibilidade nas inte-rações humanas. A proposta é reconhecer que a
construção do conhecimento transcende a mera coleta de dados, englobando as
emoções, histórias e rela-ções que moldam as experiências dos indivíduos. Ao
integrar elementos afeti-vos na pesquisa, promovemos um espaço de escuta e
respeito, essencial para a formação de um conhecimento mais coletivo e
transformador. Procuramos detalhar a experiência de ingresso no Mestrado
Profissional em Sociologia, ressaltando a acolhida do corpo docente e a
importância da metodologia de pesquisa como campo de exploração. A pesquisa
é apresentada não apenas como um processo técnico, mas como uma prática
que envolve a subjetividade do pesquisador e dos participantes, ressaltando a
necessidade de uma abor-dagem empática e inclusiva. Por fim, consideramos
que a pesquisa sensível transforma a construção do conhecimento em um ato
relacional, onde a afeti-vidade desempenha um papel crucial. Essa abordagem
não apenas ilumina as experiências humanas, mas também promove um
ambiente de aprendiza-gem mais significativo e acolhedor, enfatizando a
importância de cultivar a sensibilidade nos processos investigativos.

PALAVRAS-CHAVE: construção, saber, afetividade, acolhimento.




                                                                                 31

1. INTRODUCTION


                                                                            THE STEPS
                                                Don’t walk down the steps of the dream
                                                         Lest you awaken the monsters.
                                                    Do not climb into the attics—where
                                                          The gods, behind their masks,
                                                                 Hide their own enigma.
                                                       Don’t go down, don’t go up, stay.
                                                            The mystery lies in your life!
                                                And this world of ours is a mad dream...
                                                                          Mário Quintana


      We begin this writing with a poem by Mário Quintana, which makes us
reflect on our dreams and the steps we will take to achieve them. We live
dreaming of many things, and often, as we dream and strive to make them a
reality, we think only of the joys they might bring us. But does this pursuit bring
only joy? Of course not! Soon come the setbacks; after all, the path of
knowledge—just like any quest for something we wish to be or do—is full of
challenges: sometimes linear, sometimes winding."
      This article is titled “Affective Pathways in the Process of Knowledge
Construction” and aims to engage in a dialogue with the references presented to
us throughout the research methodology course in the Professional Master’s
Program in Sociology within the National Network—PROFSOCIO—at UNEMAT
(Mato Grosso State University).
      We must be willing to overcome the difficulties that may arise, for it is a
journey requiring great self-sacrifice, focus, and determination, overcoming fears
and anxieties. It is part of a teacher’s professional journey to be in constant
motion in their development. Along this path, we encounter people with different
ways of being, acting, and thinking, who build knowledge and affective memories
with us. The importance of this professional development lies in the fact that
society is in a state of constant transformation, which directly impacts the
educational landscape.
      New knowledge, discoveries, and innovations emerge regularly, requiring
teachers to stay up to date to better meet students’ needs, integrate new
pedagogical approaches, and utilize new teaching methods that promote
meaningful learning consistent with current reality. Thus, as Freire tells us:
“Teaching requires conscious decision-making” (1996, p. 122).



                                                                                       32

       Seeking new knowledge is a conscious decision-making process. At some
point in our lives, a sense of restlessness arises that drives us to seek something
more to enhance our professional development, and this search involves various
participating actors, since “the search is an internal desire, a unique movement,
and at the same time, one that provokes interference in the environment, for the
mobilization of one will always involve the other; hence the importance of
relationships” (Oliveira and Silva, 2016, p. 50). Every movement in search of
something new— —generates another, in everything and everyone around us.
       Through this approach, we aim to highlight the value of sensitivity in
research, demonstrating how emotions and affections can enrich and transform
educational practice. The support of friends, the understanding of coworkers, and
the patience and affection of family are essential. All are part of a vast web of
relationships that are absolutely necessary for the learning and improvement
process to unfold as smoothly as possible.


2. THEORETICAL FRAMEWORK


       When we entered the Professional Master’s Program in Sociology
Education in the National Network (PROFSOCIO), our expectations of what we
would encounter and experience were intense and worrisome, as we were
beginning to explore an unknown world of scientific knowledge—one that,
according to what many had told us, would be very difficult, tense, stressful, and
lonely, potentially even leading to mental health issues.
       The first meeting of the 2024/01 class, held in March of this year, shattered
several paradigms by welcoming us so warmly. The professors, with their
distinguished doctoral degrees, demonstrated humility and warmth in every
gesture, word, and even in the way they dressed. This warm welcome made us
feel instantly part of that world, as if we had been there for a long time.
       Within the complexity of the academic world, the discipline of research
methodology emerges as a fertile field for exploring the diverse facets of
knowledge. The tireless work of artists of the word—as our professor of this
discipline says, deeply rooted in the tradition of cordel literature—invites us to a
sensitive and poetic reflection on the practice of educational research.
       The integration of sensitivity into educational research requires a paradigm


                                                                                 33

shift that goes beyond traditional methodologies. The texts compiled by Débora
Alves Feitosa et al. in the work *O Sensível e a* *Sensibilidade na Pesquisa em
Educação* (2016) point to paths for this transformation, as they propose
sensitivity and affectivity as legitimate and necessary components of the
investigative process. By incorporating these dimensions, research becomes a
space where subjectivity is valued, promoting a richer and more multifaceted
understanding of educational phenomena:


                      The gaze that scrutinizes produces the world that produces it. What is
                      seen of the world is perceived by a gaze, already informed by the
                      (re)connection and relationship with the world seen, steeped in
                      cognitive and intellectual reasons, emotions, sensations, and intuitions.
                      It is a gaze overflowing with ethical, aesthetic, and affective dispositions
                      (Dorneles, 2003, p. 32, cited in Dorneles; Arenhaldt, 2016, pp. 31–32).


       In our journey through “Investigative Paths III: Risks and Possibilities of
Researching at the Frontiers” (2005), a work edited by Marisa Vorraber Costa
and Maria Isabel Edelweiss Bujes, we encounter the urgency of recognizing
subjectivity as an ally in the construction of knowledge. In contemplating the
nuances of affective paths, we highlight the importance of an investigative stance
that values both feeling and thinking, and that promotes an epistemology that
embraces the wholeness of the human being in the construction of knowledge.
In this way, we hope to contribute to a more holistic and humanized
understanding of educational research, where sensitivity is not merely an
accessory but an essential guide on this journey in search of knowledge.
       Research is not limited to a mere technical process, but extends into a
practice that incorporates the hearts, thoughts, and experiences of both
researchers and research participants. Becoming emotionally engaged with the
subject of study fosters a deeper and richer relationship, in which knowledge is
constructed within a web of multiple, interconnected meanings. Thus, the
researcher becomes not merely an observer, but an active participant, whose
emotional and intellectual journey intertwines with their field of research.
       The texts we explored during the Research Methodology course,
especially the works “The Sensible and Sensibility in Qualitative Research in
Education” (2016) and “Investigative Paths III: Risks and Possibilities of
Researching at the Frontiers” (2005), serve as pillars in this theoretical



                                                                                               34

framework, offering us a unique perspective on the relationship between research
and affect. These readings inspire us to reevaluate our methodologies and to
recognize the value of affect, personal histories, and human connections as
fundamental elements in the production of knowledge.
       As we embark on affective paths in the process of knowledge construction,
we discover the possibility of proposing a methodology that is more inclusive and
representative of the diverse dimensions of human experience. It is an invitation
to recognize the richness that comes from vulnerability, empathy, and sensitivity,
creating a research space where emotional and intellectual bonds mutually
reinforce one another, which enables a deep and transformative understanding
of the world around us.


2.1 THE INTEGRATION OF SENSITIVITY INTO EDUCATIONAL RESEARCH


       But after all, what motivates academic research in the humanities,
particularly in the teaching of Sociology? All research stems from a sense of
unease, which propels us toward an undefined path, for to research is to immerse
oneself in an infinite universe of possibilities, bringing new meaning to the specific
object of study; there is a starting point, and the paths are unpredictable; and on
this journey of discovery, research may present itself in a less pragmatic way.
The sensitivity of the scientific gaze brings multiple possibilities that go beyond
what is presented to it.
       The researcher must shed prejudices and predefined notions to extract
from the depths a new facet, a new perspective on what, a priori, seemed
immutable. Following solid and well-established theoretical frameworks becomes
necessary to lend credibility and robustness to the concepts that will become the
pillars of future research. The researcher must leave their mark on the research
with their identity so that it does not become a mere reproduction of previously
researched writings, for “reality can be understood through phenomenology in
diverse forms, as many as there are understandings and interpretations, and
thus, innumerable” (Gil, 2008, cited in Almeida, 2021, p. 15). A solid foundation
serves to consolidate what one proposes to reinterpret, for times change,
concepts evolve, and writing must be dynamic, not static.



                                                                                   35

                      When we use an author in academic writing, we in a way rewrite them;
                      we appropriate them and continue their work; we challenge the concept
                      they created; we subject a theory to discussion, because we immerse
                      it in the empirical, in the study of an object we have selected, which
                      goes beyond the objects the chosen author selected, precisely because
                      our history is different, our places and times are different. To rewrite an
                      author, to appropriate them, is to sift through their theoretical
                      formulations, a meeting point with ourselves, with what we have chosen
                      as our object, with what we have invested in—our life, our work, our
                      thought—has to do with a commitment, our commitment to a theme, to
                      an object, to a way of thinking, which we embrace as researchers
                      (Fischer, 2005, p. 120).


      Writing, in this context, becomes an art, for through words the researcher
reinvents themselves, questions, agrees, and disagrees, recording their
existence and essence. This process is an intentional search for answers to the
concerns that trouble them. Thus, “this is the great challenge, this is the great
exercise of what I here call the conversion of the gaze in academic writing,
understood as self-care, a writing of the self, and an expression of the art of
existence” (Fischer, 2005, p. 125).
      Academic discourse can be seen as a defense of an existential discourse,
reflecting our beliefs and aspirations to transform both our personal reality and
the world around us, observed through a particular lens. We mobilize the
concerns that drive us to become researchers, using science to deepen our
investigations. This process allows us to rediscover our own trajectory, fostering
critical self-reflection on the reality we seek to understand. What motivates us to
engage in research can stem from various factors: pain, violence, abuse,
repression, neglect, among many other possibilities. How can we address such
themes without being carried away by passion and personal feelings? It is
precisely at this moment that we must approach the subject with lightness and
remain open to listening, attentive to every detail within the complexity that
surrounds our object of study. In Ficsher (2005), we read that:


                      When we write and think, we separate ourselves from ourselves, from
                      our origins, from our legacies; we die a little, and in that very instant we
                      appear, we reveal, we cast a fleeting light on something that concerns
                      us, on something that pains us in our time, on something that is beautiful
                      in these times and places and perhaps is not being sufficiently spoken
                      of (Fischer, 2005, p. 131).


      Research can be conducted with a light touch; we are thus invited to
understand the importance of methods in the scientific realm, filled with


                                                                                               36

challenges, experiments, evaluations, and intense learning. In this universe, we
are driven by a constant search for answers, experiences, and challenges that
lead us to the new. As historical agents, we are biographical bodies, and our
bodies speak for us through everything we have stored in our life journey (Oliveira
e Silva, 2016); we produce an ethical-affective learning process, where we are
our own object of study, seeking to understand who we are, how we became who
we are, and what we can still become.


                      Our researched-researcher bodies bring forth/speak of trajectories,
                      choices, energies, lacks, absences, and images of imaginary states. It
                      is also in this group space, as a training device, that biographical
                      bodies—understood as the matter in which human memories resulting
                      from lived experiences are imprinted—meet and amplify energies,
                      negatively or positively [...] (Oliveira and Silva, 2016, p. 58).


      The meaning of the gaze—the way we approach our concerns—provides
new perspectives. Through research and inquiry, including experiments,
challenges, impartiality, and impersonality, we enter the field of the humanities
and social sciences, transforming desires and fostering a reinterpretation of
ourselves. The lightness of research guides us toward a deep understanding of
differences and diversities, allowing for a critical exploration of reality. It is
essential to analyze the contexts in which these take shape within the various
forms of human relations; thus, academic constructs become drivers of change
in the issues under investigation.
      One of the main challenges in adopting this approach is the need to
reconnect reason with emotion. In the positivist tradition, there is a tendency to
value objectivity and measurability, often excluding affective and subjective
nuances. However, it is precisely this richness of human experiences that can
offer deeper and more transformative insights.
      By approaching the methodology with sensitivity, the researcher is invited
to create an empathetic and inclusive research environment. This can be seen in
the way interviews are conducted, in interactions with participants, and in the way
data is interpreted. For example, in research investigating the impact of
pedagogical practices on students’ emotional development, attention to personal
accounts, narratives, and life stories offers a more complete understanding of the
context and experiences of the individuals involved.



                                                                                         37

       The research process should be viewed as a dynamic and evolving
journey, where the researcher and the subject of study interact continuously and
reciprocally. This implies an ethical commitment to participants, where
confidentiality, respect, and active listening play fundamental roles. By respecting
and valuing the experiences and voices of participants, we create a space for
dialogue where knowledge is collaboratively co-produced.
       In addition, sensitivity in research requires constant self-reflection on the
part of the researcher. This means being aware of one’s own emotions, biases,
and perspectives, and how these elements can influence both the research
process and the interpretation of data. This critical self-analysis is vital to ensuring
that observation remains authentic and respectful of human complexities and
diversities.
       Adopting a sensitive and affective approach also leads us to reconsider
traditional forms of knowledge dissemination. Academic writing can benefit from
a more narrative and poetic style that reflects the depth and richness of the
human experiences involved. Such an approach not only makes knowledge more
accessible but also more engaging and meaningful to a broader audience.
       By exploring affective pathways in the construction of knowledge, we are
not only broadening our methodological horizons but also reaffirming the
importance of an education that is, at its core, human and holistic. By valuing
sensitivity and emotion in research, we contribute to a more inclusive, empathetic,
and transformative field of inquiry, where knowledge is a collaborative and
effectively engaged construction, though one that may, perhaps, give rise to
conflicting situations. Carlos Drummond de Andrade, in his poem “Pedras No
Meio do Caminho,” tells us:


                       In the middle of the road there was a rock. There was a rock in the
                       middle of the road. There was a rock. In the middle of the road there
                       was a rock. I will never forget that moment. In the life of my weary eyes.
                       I will never forget that in the middle of the road. There was a rock. There
                       was a rock in the middle of the road. In the middle of the path there was
                       a stone (Andrade, 1967, p.16).


       The poem “In the Middle of the Road” offers a powerful metaphor about
the obstacles and discoveries along that journey. The stones described in the
verses can symbolize life’s obstacles, prompting us to reflect on what we choose



                                                                                               38

as our goal from a professional perspective. It is up to us to decide whether we
will use the stones as excuses to give up, or whether we will move forward with
persistence and resilience, overcoming the various challenges and obstacles a
researcher may encounter. Just as in Drummond’s poem, these obstacles cannot
be ignored or underestimated. In fact, it is often these “stones” that define the
trajectory and depth of the research. This brings us to Bedin (2016), who states
that “poets always have something to say, with new expressions that prompt us
to feel and rethink recurring questions” (Bedin, 2016, p.71).
       Sensitive research is an approach that values empathy, ethics, and
attention to the subjective and emotional nuances of participants. This method is
particularly suited to capturing human complexities and challenges, going beyond
numbers and statistics to understand what truly matters to the people involved.
       For a sensitive researcher, every stumbling block represents an
opportunity for learning and reflection. It may be a methodological challenge,
such as adapting a questionnaire to respect the cultural diversity of participants,
or an emotional barrier, such as dealing with the painful personal stories that
emerge during interviews. Attention to these difficulties, and the way the
researcher interacts with them, can transform ordinary research into a profound
and meaningful study.
       Drummond shows us that the stone is not merely an obstacle, but also an
indelible mark on the memory: “I will never forget this event in the life of my weary
retinas.” Similarly, a sensitive researcher must never forget the challenging
moments that shaped their research. These difficulties are not meant to be
forgotten, but rather remembered and analyzed, for it is through them that true
growth occurs.
       “In the Middle of the Road” teaches us that it is our relationship with
obstacles—the stones—that defines the journey. In sensitive research, the way
challenges are faced and understood can lead to profound and valuable
discoveries, both for the researcher and for the study participants. The stones,
then, become not only difficulties to be overcome, but also significant milestones
that enrich our understanding of the world and human experiences.




                                                                                  39

3. CONCLUSION


      “Affective Pathways in the Process of Knowledge Construction” reminds
us that knowledge is the result of complex human interactions, shaped by
affections, experiences, and individual histories. Throughout this article, we have
explored how sensitive research stands out as a fundamental approach in this
construction, recognizing that emotional and empathetic relationships between
researchers and participants are central to a deep and truly meaningful
understanding.
      Sensitivity is an essential element in this context: it invites us to pay
attention not only to quantitative data and objective analyses, but also to the
subjective narratives and emotions that permeate each interaction. The
commitment to sensitive research implies a conscious effort to listen to, welcome,
and reflect on the experiences of others, fostering a space where all voices can
be heard and respected.
      By integrating affectivity into the process of knowledge construction, we
are able to transform the way we understand and interpret human experiences.
Sensitive research not only illuminates these experiences but also enriches the
epistemological repertoire, allowing us to address complex issues with greater
ease and new perspectives. In this process of knowledge construction, affectivity
plays a crucial role because it refers to the emotions, feelings, and bonds that
permeate the entire path of knowledge construction, fostering a more welcoming
and safe learning environment and more meaningful and lasting learning.
      By adopting an approach that integrates sensitivity, ethics, and critical
reflection, we are not only broadening the methodological horizon but also
reaffirming the importance of research that acknowledges the complexity of
human experience. This commitment not only enriches the field of the humanities
but also invites us to be more conscious, empathetic, and transformative
researchers, capable of constructing knowledge that resonates with the realities
and aspirations of society.
      The affective paths we have taken and/or will take throughout our research
reveal that the pursuit of knowledge is, in fact, a relational act. By adopting a
sensitive and affective stance, we not only broaden our theoretical understanding
but also become agents of social transformation, capable of recognizing and


                                                                                40

valuing the differences that enrich our journey. Therefore, as we look toward the
future of research, may we always remember the importance of cultivating
sensitivity in research processes, for it is in this that the true essence of
knowledge construction resides.




                                                                              41

                                    REFERENCES


ALMEIDA, Italo D'Artagnan. Metodologia do trabalho científico. Recife: Ed. UFPE,
2021. (Coleção Geografia).

ANDRADE, C. Drummond. Uma pedra no meio do caminho: Biografia de um poema,
Rio de Janeiro; Editora do autor, 1967.

BEDIN, Silvio Antonio. Por uma razão aberta e sensível na pesquisa em Educação:
aportes e reflexões. In: FEITOSA, Débora Alves.; DORNELES, Malvina do Amaral.;
BERGAMASCHI, Maria Aparecida. (orgs.). O sensível e a sensibilidade na pesquisa
em educação. Cruz das Almas/BA: UFRB, 2016.

DORNELES, Malvina do Amaral. ARENHALDT, Rafael. Disposições ético-estético –
afetivas na pesquisa em educação. In: FEITOSA, Débora Alves.; DORNELES, Malvina
do Amaral.; BERGAMASCHI, Maria Aparecida. (orgs.). O sensível e a sensibilidade
na pesquisa em educação. Cruz das Almas/BA: UFRB, 2016.

FISCHER, Rosa Maria Bueno. Escrita acadêmica: arte de assinar o que se lê. In:
COSTA, Marisa Vorraber; BUJES, Maria Isabel Edelweiss (org.). Caminhos
investigativos III: riscos e possibilidades de pesquisar nas fronteiras. Rio de Janeiro:
DP&A, 2005.

FREIRE, Paulo. Pedagogia da autonomia: saberes necessários à prática educativa.
São Paulo: Paz e Terra. 1996.

OLIVEIRA, Valeska Fortes de; SILVA, Monique da. Em defesa da leveza, do sensível e
da sensibilidade na pesquisa em educação. In: FEITOSA, Débora Alves.; DORNELES,
Malvina do Amaral.; BERGAMASCHI, Maria Aparecida. (orgs.). O sensível
sensibilidade na pesquisa em educação. Cruz das Almas/BA: UFRB, 2016.




                                                                                       42

CHAPTER 3
 THE FOUCAULDIAN NOTION OF
 APPARATUS AND THE NATIONAL HIGH
 SCHOOL EXAM: A DISCURSIVE ANALYSIS
 OF THE PARTICIPANT'S GUIDE


Daniella Silva Araújo Clara
Master's student in Education
Universidade Estadual de Goiás (UEG)
E-mail: daniellasac03@gmail.com

Natália Costa Azevedo de Faria
Master's student in Education
Universidade Estadual de Goiás (UEG)
E-mail: nazevedof1838@gmail.com

Wesley Luis Carvalhaes
Doctor em Linguistics
Universidade Estadual de Goiás (UEG)
E-mail: wesley.carvalhaes@ueg.br


ABSTRACT: This study investigates the Foucauldian concept of apparatus and
its applica-tion to the analysis of the National High School Exam (Enem),
understood as a mechanism of control within the educational environment.
Established by the Ministry of Education (MEC) in 1998, the exam has become a
fundamental tool for accessing public and private higher education in Brazil,
especially after the implementation of educational policies such as SiSU, ProUni,
and FIES. The objective is to analyze Enem as a dispositif of power that regulates
and disci-plines the educational process. Based on bibliographic and
documentary re-search, the analysis is grounded in Michel Foucault’s notion of
apparatus, supplemented by the contributions of Giorgio Agamben and Gilles
Deleuze. The study also considers official documents and uses as its corpus the
Partici-pant’s Guide – Understand Your Score in the Enem (Brasil, 2021). Based
on the idea of the apparatus as a set of discourses, practices, and institutions
that shape subjectivities and regulate behaviors, it is argued that Enem, beyond
its evaluative function, materializes as a technology of power. Its adaptive as-
sessment model adjusts to individual and social differences, mobilizing subtle
forms of control that directly affect the constitution of subjects. In this sense, the
configuration of Enem as an apparatus makes it possible to understand the exam
as an essential instrument in the maintenance and reproduction of pow-er and
exclusion dynamics within Brazilian education.

KEYWORDS: education, discourse, apparatus, enem, higher education.



                                                                                   43

RESUMO: O estudo investiga o conceito de dispositivo foucaultiano e sua
aplicação na análise do Exame Nacional do Ensino Médio (Enem),
compreendido como um mecanismo de controle no ambiente educacional.
Instituído pelo Ministério da Educação (MEC) em 1998, o exame consolidou-se
como uma ferramenta fundamental para o acesso ao Ensino Superior público ou
privado no Brasil, principalmente após a implementação de políticas
educacionais, como o SiSU, o ProUni e o FIES. O objetivo é analisar o Enem
como um dispositivo de poder que regula e disciplina o processo educativo.
Partindo de uma pesquisa bibliográfica-documental, a análise fundamenta-se no
conceito de dispositivo de Michel Foucault, complementado pelas contribuições
de Giorgio Agamben e Gilles Deleuze. A análise também contempla documentos
oficiais e toma como corpus o Guia do Participante – Entenda a sua nota no
Enem (Brasil, 2021). Com base na noção de dispositivo como conjunto de
discursos, práticas e instituições que moldam subjetividades e regulam
comportamentos, defende-se que o Enem, para além de sua função avaliativa,
se concretiza como tecnologia de poder. Seu modelo de avaliação adaptativa
ajusta-se às diferenças individuais e sociais, mobilizando formas sutis de
controle que incidem diretamente sobre os sujeitos. Nesse sentido, a
configuração do Enem como dispositivo permite compreender o exame como um
instrumento essencial na manutenção e reprodução das dinâmicas de poder e
exclusão na educação brasileira.

PALAVRAS-CHAVE: educação, discurso, dispositivo, enem, ensino superior.




                                                                          44

1. INTRODUCTION


       Over the past few years, the National High School Exam (Enem) has
established itself as one of the primary assessment and selection tools for
admission to higher education in Brazil. Created in 1998 by the Ministry of
Education, the exam has undergone several reforms, expanding its influence and
becoming a central component of the country’s educational policies. Beyond its
evaluative function, the Enem can be understood as a mechanism that articulates
knowledge and power, shaping pedagogical practices, subjectivities, and life
trajectories.
       In contemporary Brazilian education, the Enem serves as the primary
mechanism for accessing higher education, whether through the competition for
spots via the Unified Selection System (SiSU) at public universities, or through
obtaining scholarships from the University for All Program (ProUni) or financing
from the Student Financing Fund (FIES) at private institutions. Given the exam’s
importance in the academic lives of millions of students, reflecting on its
configuration as a mechanism allows us to examine the subtle modes of control
and regulation that permeate the educational field.
       Starting from the question of how the Enem functions as a device for
access to higher education, this study aims to analyze its constituent elements
within the educational field. To this end, we investigate the history of the exam’s
creation, the concept of the device, and the materialization of this logic in the
Participant’s Guide – Understand Your Enem Score (Brazil, 2021). The
methodology adopted combines bibliographic and documentary research. The
bibliographic research allowed for a theoretical deepening based on the
assumptions of Michel Foucault (1969; 1977; 1995; 1998; 1999; 2000; 2008;
2014; 2022), Giorgio Agamben (2005; 2009), and Gilles Deleuze (1992; 1996),
whose contributions are fundamental to understanding the device as a
technology of power. The documentary research, on the other hand, consisted of
an analysis of official documents from the Ministry of Education (MEC) and the
Anísio Teixeira National Institute for Educational Studies and Research (INEP),
with a focus on the corpus comprising the aforementioned Participant’s Guide.
       Based on this approach, we have organized the article into three parts.
The first presents the history of the creation and development of the Enem, its


                                                                                45

reformulations over the years, and the process of systematizing the Participant’s
Guide. The second part discusses the notion of the “device” from a Foucauldian
perspective, drawing on the contributions of Agamben and Deleuze, situating its
configuration within the context of the Enem. Finally, the third part proposes a
discursive analysis of what is said and what is left unsaid in the Participant’s
Guide, highlighting the effects of power produced by this discursive apparatus.


2. THEORETICAL FRAMEWORK


2.1 THE ENEM IN PERSPECTIVE: FROM THE CREATION TO THE
SYSTEMATIZATION OF THE PARTICIPANT’S GUIDE


      The 1990s were a period of great challenges for education in Brazil. The
national landscape was characterized by stark socioeconomic and regional
inequalities, high rates of school dropout and grade repetition, low-quality
education, limited public funding, as well as educational reforms and pressures
stemming from globalization and the demands of the labor market. In response
to these challenges, the Ministry of Education (MEC) created the ENEM as an
tool to assess the quality of secondary education in the country and provide a
benchmark for student self-assessment. The creation of the exam was formalized
through Ministerial Ordinance No. 438, dated May 28, 1998, signed by then-
Minister Paulo Renato Souza. This ordinance established the Enem as an
instrument for assessing the performance of high school graduates, with the aim
of contributing to the improvement of basic education, as described below:


                     Ministerial Ordinance No. 438, dated May 28, 1998
                     THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR EDUCATION AND SPORTS, in the
                     exercise of the powers conferred upon him by Article 87, sole
                     paragraph, item II, of the Constitution, hereby resolves:
                     Art. 1 To establish the National High School Exam (ENEM) with the
                     following objectives:
                     I - To assess student performance at the end of basic schooling;
                     II - To inform public policies aimed at improving the quality of basic
                     education;
                     III - To contribute to improving the quality of secondary education,
                     vocational education, and higher education;
                     IV - To promote certification upon completion of high school;
                     V - To support selection processes for admission to higher education
                     (Brazil, 1998).




                                                                                        46

      The first edition of the Enem took place in 1998, with 157,221 registered
participants, of whom 115,575 actually took the exam on August 20. Of the total,
83% were exempt from the R$20.00 registration fee. That year, although the
Enem results were accepted by only two higher education institutions, the exams
were administered in 184 cities across the country. The exam consisted of 63
multiple-choice questions and an essay, covering the areas of languages, codes,
and their technologies; humanities; natural sciences; and mathematics (Inep,
2020). The main objective was to serve as a benchmark for self-assessment and
contribute to the improvement of teaching in schools, based on an
interdisciplinary and contextualized approach that encouraged the practical
application of acquired knowledge.
      In 2009, following a major overhaul, a new Enem was introduced, which
became the primary means of admission to various public universities with the
implementation of SiSU. The exam replaced traditional entrance exams,
complementing ProUni, created in 2005 to offer scholarships for “ ” programs at
private institutions. This new version of the Enem included 180 multiple-choice
questions—45 for each subject area—and an essay, administered over two days.
It also began to serve as certification of high school completion. The exam’s
Reference Matrices were adjusted based on the Encceja competency
certification. In 2009, 4,138,025 candidates registered for exams held in 1,830
municipalities. That edition was marked by a leak of the exam, which led to the
development of a new monitoring mechanism.
      According to data released by Inep (2020), other changes were
implemented starting in 2010, aimed at improving the exam and addressing the
“challenges of national education.” Between 2010 and 2013, security and
logistical measures were strengthened, such as having police forces escort the
exams; specialized support for candidates with disabilities was expanded; Enem
results became a criterion for student financing through FIES; and most federal
institutions began adopting it as a selection method. The exam score also
became a criterion for awarding scholarships under the Sciences Without
Borders program.
      Continuing these changes, from 2014 to 2016, new guidelines were
established. In terms of social inclusion, a quota system was instituted for
students from public schools, Black and mixed-race individuals, Indigenous


                                                                             47

people, and people with disabilities. Regarding accessibility, exams were made
available in Braille, with enlarged fonts, and with sign language interpreters. Also
noteworthy are: the recognition of social names, the identification of “cheaters,”
the collection of biometric data, and the acceptance of the ENEM by some
Portuguese universities.
         As noted by Inep (Brazil, 2020), in 2017, following a public consultation,
the exam schedule was modified: it shifted from two consecutive days (Saturday
and Sunday) to two Sundays in a row, allowing for a longer rest period between
exams. Another new feature that year was the debut of a personalized test
bearing the participant’s name and registration number. In 2018, upon reaching
its 20th anniversary, the Enem received a new logo, a commemorative historical
document, and a series of mini-documentaries about its history. Requests for
exemption from the registration fee began to be made prior to the exam, and high
school certification became the exclusive responsibility of Encceja.
         Between 2019 and 2023, the Enem underwent further changes,
particularly due to the COVID-19 pandemic. Notable among these was the 2019
launch of Enem Digital as a pilot project, to be implemented in 2020, with a focus
on modernizing the exam administration. During this period, challenges arose,
such as: the postponement of exams in 2020; health protocols in 2021; the
expansion of Enem Digital and adjustments to the National Curriculum Guidelines
in 2022; and the return to the regular format only in 2023.
         Since its inception in 1998, and with its growing role as a pathway to higher
education at both public and private institutions, there has been a need to provide
clear information to applicants. In 2012, the Participant’s Guide was created,
followed by the Enem Participant’s Handbook. The guide was not created in
response to specific legislation, but is part of the efforts by Inep and MEC to
increase transparency and facilitate access to information. The guide provides
details on the structure of the exams, grading criteria, essay-writing guidelines,
and study suggestions. The booklet, in turn, complements the guide with rules of
conduct, logistical guidelines, and examples of top-scoring essays. The booklet
was formalized by Ordinance No. 1,021, dated December 19, 2013, as noted
below:




                                                                                   48

                     Ordinance No. 1,021, dated December 19, 2013
                     THE MINISTER OF EDUCATION, in the exercise of the powers
                     conferred upon him by Article 87, sole paragraph, item II, of the
                     Constitution, and in view of the provisions of Articles 205 and 214 of the
                     Constitution, hereby resolves:
                     Art. 1 The National High School Exam (ENEM) Participant’s Handbook
                     is hereby established, with the objective of providing candidates with
                     detailed information about the exam.
                     Art. 2 The Participant’s Handbook shall contain, among other
                     information:
                     I - A detailed description of the subject areas assessed in the ENEM:
                     Languages, Codes, and their Technologies; Mathematics and its
                     Technologies; Natural Sciences and their Technologies; Human
                     Sciences and their Technologies.
                     II - Guidelines on the ENEM essay, including grading criteria, examples
                     of essays that received top marks, and topics from previous essays.
                     III - Study and preparation tips, study strategies, time management, and
                     relaxation techniques.
                     IV - Instructions regarding the day of the exam, including what to bring,
                     schedules, security procedures, and permitted and prohibited conduct.
                     Art. 3 The Participant’s Handbook shall be prepared and published
                     annually by the Anísio Teixeira National Institute for Educational
                     Studies and Research (INEP).
                     Art. 4 This Ordinance enters into force on the date of its publication
                     (Brazil, 2013).


      In 2021, INEP published on its website an update to the Participant’s Guide
– Understanding Your ENEM Score, with the aim of clarifying participants’
questions regarding exam scores, specifically the test-scoring methodology, the
Item Response Theory (IRT). To achieve this goal, the Participant’s Guide is
organized in a didactic manner and is divided into six sections: “Calculating the
Score,” “Understanding Other Aspects of the IRT Model,” “Grading Procedures,”
“Question Development Process,” “Common Questions About the ENEM Score,”
and “Technical Understanding of the IRT Score.” According to Inep (Brazil, 2021),
this document does not address the grading of the essay, as it has its own
methodology, detailed in the Participant’s Handbook.
      To complement this set of materials, the MEC and Inep publish the Enem
announcement annually in the Federal Official Gazette, including the schedule,
guidelines, rules, and deadlines for participation. The announcement stipulates
that candidates, before registering, must carefully read the document and the
regulatory acts referenced therein, in order to confirm their acceptance of all
conditions and requirements necessary to take the exam (Brazil, 2024).
      From this historical perspective, we observe that the Enem is a tool that
goes beyond the function of a mere selective exam. Created as a response to
the challenges faced by Brazilian education in the 1990s, it plays a significant


                                                                                            49

role in democratizing access to higher education, assessing the quality of basic
education, encouraging study, promoting social inclusion, and fostering academic
mobility in both public and private institutions. At the heart of this assessment
policy, we highlight the Participant’s Guide, whose structure, content, and
communicative function demand a more in-depth analysis. To this end, in the next
chapter, we propose to investigate the guide as an expression of a modern
pedagogical apparatus, grounded in Michel Foucault’s theoretical framework.


2.2 POWER AND KNOWLEDGE: THE CONFIGURATION OF A FOUCAULTIAN
DISPOSITIVE IN THE ENEM


       In order to understand how the Participant’s Guide fits into the fabric of
power-knowledge that structures the ENEM, it is necessary to draw upon the
notion of “device,” formulated by Michel Foucault. This concept, established as
an analytical tool in this study, was developed by Foucault in his work The History
of Sexuality, specifically in “The Will to Knowledge.” In this context, during an
interview with the International Psychoanalytical Association (IPA), the author
highlights this theoretical framework as a case of a more generalized “episteme,”
defined as:


                      [...] a decidedly heterogeneous set that encompasses discourses,
                      institutions, architectural organizations, regulatory decisions, laws,
                      administrative measures, scientific statements, philosophical, moral,
                      and philanthropic propositions. In short, the said and the unsaid are the
                      elements of the dispositif. The dispositif is the network that can be
                      woven between these elements (Foucault, 2000, p. 244).


       Given this definition, it is necessary to understand the relationships woven
between these elements to construct a discursive network capable of establishing
power and control. According to Foucault (2008), this weaving, at its origin,
requires two strategic planes: one for choosing the object and the other for its
fulfillment, thus composing the entire dynamism of the dispositif. From this
perspective, if the apparatus fails to meet pre-established economic and social
aspirations, other forms of knowledge are produced with the aim of filling the gaps
so that the dominant dynamic may prevail. Thus, it is evident that, in this strategy,




                                                                                            50

there is no single strategist, but rather a combination of power relations that
ultimately take on a practical meaning and culminate in a punitive society.
       In contemporary education, this notion is fundamental to understanding
how different elements combine to produce and control knowledge. Given this, in
light of the educational challenges faced in the 1990s, there was a need to rethink
school dynamics and propose a new mechanism that would maintain the
relationships between knowledge and power. To this end, the Ministry of
Education (MEC) created the ENEM, which can be analyzed as a mechanism
that standardizes and evaluates students’ academic performance, but also
establishes antagonistic standards of excellence and insufficiency that directly
influence access to higher education. Thus, the provisions contained in
Ministerial Ordinance No. 438, dated May 28, 1998, confirm this antagonism.
       For Foucault (2014), discourse is a concept that extends beyond its
monological function but encompasses metalinguistic factors. Discourses, as well
as those who produce them, convey positions and interests even when these are
underlying linguistic/phonetic codes. Thus, the author asserts that “discourses as
we can hear them, as we can read them in the form of text, are not, as one might
expect, a pure and simple interweaving of things and words” (Foucault, 2022, p.
59), but a linguistic strategy that articulates relations of power and domination.
Based on this conception, the ENEM, by encompassing a “set of rules” imposed
on participants, effectively qualifies this “discursive practice.”


                       These rules define not the silent existence of a reality, not the canonical
                       use of a vocabulary, but the regime of objects. “Words and Things” is
                       the—serious—title of a problem; it is the—ironic—title of the work that
                       modifies its form, displaces its data, and reveals, after all, an entirely
                       different task, which consists of no longer treating discourses as sets of
                       signs (signifying elements that refer to contents or representations), but
                       as practices that systematically form the objects they speak of
                       (Foucault, 2022, p. 60).


       As pointed out by Foucault (2022), the set of rules established since the
creation of the ENEM is what defines the regime of its practical application.
Teaching and assessment methods, in this context, function as devices for
regulating behavior and knowledge. In the school environment, pedagogical
practices and curricular content are frequently adjusted to align with the exam’s
criteria, transforming it into an instrument of control that guides both teaching and



                                                                                               51

learning. Foucault (1977) also argues that educational institutions operate in a
manner similar to prisons, as they employ surveillance and disciplinary
procedures to shape student behavior—such as the administration of
assessments that follow the exam’s required standards—thereby monitoring
student performance. Thus, “the exam combines the techniques of the hierarchy
that surveils and those of the sanction that normalizes” (Foucault, 1977, p. 185).
       According to Chignola (2014, p. 7), “a device is, therefore, first and
foremost, the point of connection between heterogeneous elements: discourses,
yes, but also regulations, architectural solutions, administrative decisions,
philosophical and moral propositions, and technologies.” From this perspective,
this point of connection is essential for achieving the intended strategic goal.
Schools, for example, are “fueled” by the applicability of this practice. This,
according to the author, generates consequences that can enhance this point of
connection, but also highlight the hierarchy of power that exists, implicitly, within
the educational system.
       Building on the more generalized notion of “episteme” developed by
Foucault, Agamben (2005, p. 11) emphasizes that this network established
among the distinct constituent elements of the apparatus possesses a dominant
strategic function based on its enunciative practices, which refer to “mechanisms
(at once linguistic and non-linguistic, legal, technical, and military) aimed at
addressing an urgency and achieving an effect.” In the case of the ENEM, “this
urgency to achieve an effect” manifests itself in the political changes and
educational crises that drive adaptations to the exam, often announced as
provisional but which, over time, end up becoming permanent. An example of this
practice was the implementation of stricter security and logistical measures,
including the escorting of exam materials by police forces in 2010, due to the leak
of exam questions that occurred in the 2009 edition.
       That said, Agamben (2005, p. 13) defines a “device” as follows:


                      I shall literally call a device anything that in some way has the capacity
                      to capture, guide, determine, intercept, shape, control, and ensure the
                      gestures, behaviors, opinions, and discourses of living beings. Not only,
                      therefore, prisons, asylums, the panopticon, schools, confessions,
                      factories, disciplines, legal measures, etc., whose connection to power
                      is in a certain sense evident, but also the pen, writing, literature,
                      philosophy, agriculture, the cigarette, navigation, computers, cell
                      phones, and—why not—language itself, which is perhaps the oldest of



                                                                                             52

                      these devices, in which thousands and thousands of years ago a
                      primate—likely without realizing the consequences that would follow—
                      had the unconsciousness to allow itself to be captured.


      Based on all this capacity that Agamben attributes to the device, three
fundamental characteristics defined by Foucault (2008) are revealed:
heterogeneity, security through relations of force and power, and the strategic
function that serves as an apparatus to resolve an urgency. In this sense, the
ENEM becomes an adaptable device that perpetuates new forms of control and
regulation within the educational system. Thus, this relationship is established in
a space that is not always physical, but which can “correlate the device with
discourse” (Moruzzi, 2017, p. 289), for, according to Veyne (2009), discourse is
a “formal framework” through which the materialization of disciplining objects is
presented to us.
      Moruzzi (2017) points out that “a civilization is formed when individuals
begin to speak in accordance with the device of the moment, without there
necessarily being an effort or physical violence; individuals come to constitute
themselves within these devices.” That is, the device is what shapes the subject
in all their subjective dimensions of self, belonging to a civilization where power,
thought, and freedom operate. According to the author, this device “has a
productive relationship in society, just like power” (Moruzzi, 2017, p. 290). Thus,
by analyzing the discourse present in Ministerial Ordinance No. 438, which
established the exam as an instrument for evaluating the performance of students
completing high school, with the aim of contributing to the improvement of the
quality of basic education, one can understand this relationship between
productivity and power in contemporary society.
      In line with the concepts presented by Agamben, Deleuze (1996) observes
that devices are constituted by lines of visibility and enunciation—that is,
mechanisms that operate “making see” and “making speak”—sustained by lines
of force that, at any moment, can be diverted or transformed into lines of flight.
These lines, therefore, are not fixed but subject to variations and displacements.
Deleuze (1996, p. 1) defines this dynamic by stating that the lines do not “delimit
or enclose homoge y systems on their own, such as the object, the subject,
language, etc., but follow directions, trace processes that are always in
disequilibrium, and that now approach and now move away from one another.”


                                                                                       53

In this sense, considering the ENEM as a standardized apparatus, these “lines”
not only delimit a homogeneous system of assessment but are also in constant
“variations and derivations” to meet educational, social, and cultural demands.
       In the context of this study, Foucault’s notion of the “device,”
complemented primarily by the perspectives of Agamben and Deleuze, allows us
to understand the dynamics of power and control present in contemporary
education by identifying how this concept of the device is configured in the ENEM.
To delve a little deeper into the research, we propose a discussion of the linguistic
aspects present in the ENEM Participant’s Guide—the document that “dictates”
or “does not dictate” the set of rules applied in the exam.
       Given this conceptual framework built upon the works of Foucault,
Agamben, and Deleuze, we understand that the ENEM functions as a dispositif
that operates in the production and regulation of subjectivities through
normalizing discursive practices. In this sense, it is essential to analyze the Enem
Participant’s Guide, a document that embodies, in normative and prescriptive
language, what is expected of exam participants. It is within this discursive space
that the apparatuses of power that regulate behavior and the silenced
meanings—the said and the unsaid—are simultaneously revealed, thus
constituting a privileged field for the critical analysis of language as a technology
of control.


3. RESULTS AND DISCUSSION


       Continuing the reflection on the Enem as a Foucauldian device, this
section proposes a critical analysis of the Participant’s Guide – Understand Your
Enem Score, based on the theoretical assumptions of Foucault, Agamben, and
Deleuze. The analysis is grounded in the notion of discourse as a practice that
produces knowledge and power, seeking to understand how the guide’s linguistic
con t operates not only through what it explicitly states, but also through strategies
of silencing, exclusion, or naturalization of meanings. By highlighting the tension
between what is stated and what is omitted, the aim is to demonstrate how the
guide contributes to the consolidation of a governmental rationality, establishing
a mechanism for controlling access to higher education in the contemporary era,



                                                                                   54

while simultaneously legitimizing evaluation criteria and desirable behaviors,
rendering conflicts, disputes, and contradictions present in the process invisible.
      In The Genealogy of Power, Foucault (1969) offers a powerful tool for
deconstructing traditional ways of understanding history and power relations, as
he helps us understand how norms, institutions, and subjects are historically
constituted and politically conditioned. To apply Foucault’s concept of “the said
and the unsaid” to the ENEM Participant’s Guide, it is important to highlight how
Foucault understands the relationship between what is explicitly stated (the said)
and what is implicit or omitted (the unsaid) in discourses. According to him, power
and knowledge are exercised not only through what is articulated, but also
through omissions, implied structures, and the rules governing what can be said;
that is, “what is said is determined by what is not said; it is structured against a
background of the unsaid” (Foucault, 1969, p. 112).
      Since the creation of the Enem, the Inep has sought to fulfill the exam’s
objectives, which entailed the need to establish criteria that would ensure an
assessment considered fair by the participants. From this perspective, several
questions have become recurrent among candidates: “How is my Enem score
calculated? Why did I answer more questions correctly this year than last year,
yet my score is lower? What is the weight of each question on the Enem? Why
don’t those who answer all questions correctly receive a score of 1000, or why
don’t those who get all questions wrong receive a score of 0?” (Brazil, 2021, p.
5). In response to these questions, in 2012, Inep implemented the Participant’s
Guide – Understanding Your Enem Score, updated in 2021, with the purpose of
explaining the test scoring methodology—the TRI—through an educational
framework designed to guide candidates.
      Given this theoretical framework, which conceives of discourse as a field
of forces in which both the spoken and the unspoken operate, we now turn to an
analysis of the Participant’s Guide – Understanding Your ENEM Score (2021).
Below, we will explore the explicit statements present in the document, seeking
to identify how they relate to the strategies of control and normalization described
by Foucault, Agamben, and Deleuze.




                                                                                 55

3.1 VOICES IN FOCUS: UNVEILING THE SAID IN DISCOURSES


       The 2021 ENEM Participant’s Guide – Understand Your Score provides a
detailed explanation of how scores are calculated using Item Response Theory
(IRT). According to the document, “to measure is to evaluate something using a
measuring instrument and compare it to a standard” (INEP, 2021, p. 7). However,
when this notion of “measurement” is applied to an abstract field such as
knowledge—represented by the skills described in the ENEM Reference
Matrices—it becomes necessary to resort to a concrete element that allows for
this measurement: the test. Thus, the assessment is structured based on a
standardized proficiency scale, which enables its pedagogical interpretation, as
demonstrated in the figure presented in the guide itself.


                           Figure 1. ENEM Proficiency Scale




                              Source: Brazil, 2021, p. 10.


       This scale is fundamental to understanding how candidates are assessed,
and there is one for each area of knowledge. The questions are divided into easy
and difficult and are positioned at the bottom and top of the scale, respectively.
According t (Brazil, 2021), this is the key distinguishing feature of the TRI, as both
the questions and the participants are positioned on the same scale and use the
same proficiency scale.
       For Foucault (2000), the device is defined as a heterogeneous network
that includes discourses, institutions, laws, and administrative measures
coordinated to address a specific emergency. In this case, the guide is part of an
educational device that, by placing students on “a single scale and using the
same proficiency scale,” standardizes and regulates participants’ performance at




                                                                                   56

the national level. Thus, this positioning “generates a process of the modern
state’s governmentalization” (Gonçalves, 2013, p. 109), understood as a


                      set consisting of the institutions, procedures, analyses and reflections,
                      calculations, and tactics that enable the exercise of this very specific
                      and complex form of power, which targets the population, primarily
                      through political economy and essential technical instruments, namely
                      security devices (Foucault, 1998, p. 291–292).


       From this perspective, the guide’s explicit discourse on the objectivity and
precision of the TRI, which employs “procedures, calculations, and tactics,” is a
clear example of how assessment practices are standardized, naturalized, and
ensure security. Thus, it becomes clear that “the apparatus is always inscribed in
a power play” (Foucault, 1995, p. 244), and, in the context of the ENEM, this
power is exercised through standardized assessment. Agamben (2009, p. 28)
emphasizes that, once a device is naturalized, its propagation becomes
imperceptible and at the same time compliant in the eyes of the government; that
is, “the device is always linked to a strategy of power.” Thus, it is undeniable that
the way the guide structures participants’ relationship with the exam—through
rigorous and detailed norms—creates a disciplined subjectivity in harmony with
the demands of the educational system.
       On the other hand, according to Deleuze (1992), devices embedded in a
society of control shape a constant labor. The TRI, for example, “models the
probability of a participant correctly answering a test item, based on the item’s
parameters and the participant’s proficiency” (Brasil, 2021, p. 24). We can affirm,
based on Deleuze (1996, p. 2), that this statement distributes “variables defined
by the regimes they give rise to,” such that “they are neither subjects nor objects,
but regimes that must be defined through the visible and the enunciable, with
their derivations, their transformations, and their mutations.” Thus, by detailing
how the TRI operates, the ENEM guide reveals the “visible regime” of control that
arises from the constant adaptation of assessment practices, shaping
participants’ expectations and behaviors in a subtle yet effective manner.
       In short, the analysis of the statements in the 2021 Enem Participant
Guide, relating them to the concepts of the “device” as proposed by Foucault,
Agamben, and Deleuze, demonstrates the functionality of this document as a
mechanism of power. In addition to regulating, disciplining, and modulating the


                                                                                            57

subjectivity of participants, it also promotes a vision of objective assessment at
the institutional level that is presented as fair on a national scale.


3.2 HIDDEN VOICES: REVEALING THE UNSPOKEN IN DISCURSIVE
STATEMENTS


       Beyond what is explicitly stated in the discursive statements of the 2021
ENEM Participant’s Guide – Understand Your Score, it is important to analyze
what is not said, exploring the document’s subtext and thus relating it to the
concepts of the “dispositif.” By revisiting the objective of creating the ENEM as a
fundamental instrument in democratizing access to higher education, in
assessing the quality of basic education, in encouraging students’ study and
preparation, in promoting social inclusion, and in facilitating academic mobility—
whether public or private—participants are consequently attributed a sense of
happiness when they achieve the desired success on the exam. According to
Agamben (2009, pp. 43–44), this happiness is part of the constitution of the
dispositif, for “at the root of every dispositif lies, in this way, an all-too-human
desire for happiness, and the capture and subjectivation— —of this desire, in a
separate sphere, constitute the specific power of the dispositif.”
       In this context, it is essential to realize that this “power” that generates the
subjectivation of the “desire for happiness” among participants does not reach
everyone. When they are measured by the same yardstick and use the same
proficiency scale modeled by the TRI for calculating scores, existing differences
in access to quality education in the country are not taken into account. For
Foucault (1977), the exercise of power will always be greater than its possession.
It is a fact that the guide includes a set of rules that demonstrate objectivity and
transparency; however, the structural inequalities that afflict the lives of
candidates during the exam preparation process are concealed.
       In the words of Bourdieu (1999, p. 75),


                       to the extent that the cultural capital embodied in the instruments of
                       production grows (and, for the same reason, the time required for its
                       embodiment for objective intent, its purpose, its function), the collective
                       power of the holders of cultural capital would tend to grow, if the holders
                       of the dominant form of capital were not in a position to pit the holders
                       of cultural capital against one another (who, incidentally, are inclined



                                                                                               58

                       toward competition by the very conditions of their selection and
                       training—and, in particular, by the logic of academic competition and
                       the entrance exam).


       The author helps us understand that the logic underlying the “competition”
of the exam establishes a selection of cultural capital—in this case, the
participants—originating from the holders of the instruments that produce it.
According to Agamben (2009), this is a strategy of power that produces
subjectivities and ways of life that constitute the apparatus. In the guide, the
pressures and anxieties that candidates face due to this logic of performance and
competition create subjectivities that discipline and shape them. In accordance
with the exam’s objectives, this takes the form of an unspoken element that
implicitly reinforces power and control within the official discursive statements.
       Related to this control, Deleuze (1992) argues that the adaptations and
adjustments made so that the “holders of the instruments” remain in power follow
a constant pattern, evident when observing changes in the exam’s historical c t
over the years. Thus, the TRI is presented in the guide as a fair and accurate tool,
that is, “a reliable method widely used in educational assessments and exams in
various countries” (Brazil, 2021, p. 13); however, what is left unsaid masks the
reality that students from diverse social and economic backgrounds face
difficulties in realizing their “desire for happiness.”
       Thus, the analysis of what is left unsaid in the Participant’s Guide shows
how the ENEM, by normalizing the TRI as a fair method, conceals social
inequalities that affect students. This silence is part of the mechanism that
produces subjectivities conformed to the exam’s criteria, reinforcing the logic of
power and control.


4. FINAL CONSIDERATIONS


       Since its creation in 1998, and as it has evolved significantly over the
years, the ENEM has become a very important tool for accessing higher
education in Brazil, particularly following the introduction of programs such as
SISU, ProUni, and FIES. This evolution demonstrates that Brazilian educational
policies have come to value a standardized national assessment as a means of
democratizing access to universities, both public and private.


                                                                                         59

       However, this assessment has also presented many challenges to the
educational system regarding equity and inclusion, as it does not account for
Brazil’s regional and socioeconomic inequalities, and this has a profound impact
on student performance. The unilateral application of the exam as a standardized
measure of knowledge is based on a meritocratic notion that lacks the depth to
assess students’ diverse subjectivities, as well as the hardships to which they are
subjected. Consequently, it is clear that there is an urgent need to implement
public policies that guarantee equal opportunities for all students.
       By understanding the concept of the “dispositif” as elaborated by Foucault,
and also debated by Agamben and Deleuze, we observe that this concept is
configured within the context of the ENEM, which also allows us to identify how
this exam functions as a mechanism of power and control within the Brazilian
educational context. As Foucault points out, the dispositif is a heterogeneous set
of correlated elements—discourses, institutions, norms, laws—that regulate and
discipline individuals. Thus, the centralized and standardized assessment
imposed by the ENEM acts as a dispositif that shapes the behavior and
subjectivity of participants.
       Agamben, in turn, also associates the device with the production of
subjectivities and ways of life, as he asserts that it not only controls but also
delineates the existence of subjects by “capturing” them. From this perspective,
the ENEM is not limited to merely assessing students’ knowledge but encourages
them to adapt to the idea of a meritocratic competition within the selection
process. Deleuze, on the other hand, defines devices as composed of lines of
visibility and enunciation, subject to variations and derivations. These “lines,”
when applied to the exam, demonstrate the existence of a rigid mechanism of
power, as over the years, the Enem has constantly adjusted to diverse conditions
to remain up-to-date and regulate educational practices.
       During the analysis of the Participant’s Guide, in light of the concepts
listed, we understand that the guide employs a well-planned criterion in the
constitution of power and control over students. Clearly, it offers a detailed
explanation of how scores are calculated using the TRI and its unique approach
to placing questions and participants on the same scale and using the same
proficiency scale, regardless of the educational conditions from which they
originate. The Participant’s Guide contains provisions that students perceive not


                                                                                60

merely as instructions, but as requirements for adaptation, that is, ordinances
requiring unilateral adherence. For Foucault, power manifests itself both in what
is said and in what is not said; thus, we observe that the guide explicitly states
the evaluation criteria but conceals the structural conditions unfavorable to
participants’ performance, such as regional and socioeconomic inequalities,
which are responsible for maintaining the hierarchies established by power.
      Based on this study, by analyzing the configuration of the ENEM as a
device in light of the concepts of Foucault, Agamben, and Deleuze, we identify
the exam- s a fundamental mechanism for the maintenance and reproduction of
the dynamics of power and exclusion in Brazilian education. Considering the
interrelationship between knowledge and power present in these concepts, an
important reflection emerges: why does the Ministry of Education (MEC)
guarantee the provision of basic education to students, yet simultaneously use
an instrument of control—the Enem—to select and determine access to higher
education? Could this be a strategy to prevent access to “knowledge” from
threatening or destabilizing the “power” exercised by dominant discourses?


                            ACKNOWLEDGMENTS


The authors thank the Coordination for the Improvement of Higher Education
Personnel (CAPES) for the financial support granted to author Natália Costa
Azevedo de Faria, which contributed to the development of this work.




                                                                               61

                                   REFERENCES


AGAMBEM, Giorgio. O que é um dispositivo? Trad. Nilcéia Valdati. Outra
Travessia, Santa Catarina, n. 5, p. 9-16. 2005. Disponível em: <
http://www.periodicos.ufsc.br/index.php/Outra/ article/view/12576/11743 >.
Acesso em: 26 jul. 2024.
AGAMBEN, Giorgio. O que é o contemporâneo? e outros ensaios. Trad.
Vinícius Nicastro Honesko. Chapecó: Argos, 2009.
BOURDIEU, Pierre. Escritos de educação. In: CATANI, Afrânio; CATANI,
Maria Alice (org.). Escritos de Educação. 2. ed. Petrópolis, RJ: Vozes, 1999.
p. 71-79.
BRASIL. Instituto Nacional de Estudos e Pesquisas Educacionais Anísio
Teixeira (INEP). Histórico do ENEM. 03 set. 2020. Disponível em:
http://www.inep.gov.br. Acesso em: 26 jul. 2024.
BRASIL. Instituto Nacional de Estudos e Pesquisas Educacionais Anísio Teixeira
(INEP). ENEM 2019 a 2023: Relatórios e Dados Oficiais. 21 out. 2020. Atualizado
em: 31 mar. 2025. Disponível em: http://www.inep.gov.br. Acesso em: 26 jul. 2024.
BRASIL. Instituto Nacional de Estudos e Pesquisas Educacionais Anísio Teixeira
(Inep). Entenda a sua nota no Enem: guia do participante. Brasília, DF: INEP,
2021.
BRASIL. Instituto Nacional de Estudos e Pesquisas Educacionais Anísio Teixeira
(INEP). Cartilha do Participante. Brasília, 2024.
BRASIL. Instituto Nacional de Estudos e Pesquisas Educacionais Anísio Teixeira.
Edital n. 51, de 10 de maio de 2024. Exame Nacional do Ensino Médio - ENEM
2024. Diário Oficial da União: seção 3, Brasília, DF, p. 28, 13 de maio. Disponível em:
https://static.poder360.com.br/2024/05/enem-edital-dou-mai2024.pdf. Acesso em: 26
jul. 2024.
BRASIL. Ministério da Educação. Brasília, DF: MEC, 1998.
BRASIL. Ministério da Educação. Portaria n° 1.021, de 19 de dezembro de 2013.
Define normas específicas para a elaboração e a divulgação da Cartilha do
Participante, com o objetivo de padronizar as informações e garantir a transparência
do processo. Diário Oficial da União: seção 1, Brasília, DF, 20 dez. 2013. Disponível
em: http://www.planalto.gov.br/ccivil_03/_ato2013-2018/2013/Port/Port_1021.htm.
Acesso em: 27 jul. 2024.
BRASIL. Ministério da Educação. Portaria nº 438, de 28 de maio de 1998. Institui o
Exame Nacional do Ensino Médio - ENEM. Diário Oficial da União, Brasília, DF, 29
maio 1998. Disponível em: http://www.in.gov.br. Acesso em: 26 jul. 2024.
CHIGNOLA, Sandro. Sobre o dispositivo. Trad. Sandra Dall Onder. Cadernos IHU
ideias, São Leopoldo, Universidade do Vale do Rio dos Sinos, Instituto Humanitas
Unisinos, a. XII, v.12, n. 214, p. 1-27, 2014.
DELEUZE, Gilles. O que é um dispositivo. In: DELEUZE, Gilles. O Mistério de
Ariana.Trad. Edmundo Cordeiro. Lisboa: Ed. Vega – Passagens, 1996. s.p. Disponível
em: https://www.uc.pt/iii/ceis20/conceitos_dispositivos/programa/deleuze_dispositivo.
Acesso em: 03 jul. 2024.



                                                                                        62

DELEUZE, Gilles. Post-scriptum sobre as sociedades de controle. Tradução de
Peter Pál Pelbarte. São Paulo: Editora 34, 1992.
FOUCAULT, Michel. A arqueologia do saber. Trad. Luiz Felipe Baeta neves. 8. ed.
Rio de Janeiro: Forense, 2022.
FOUCAULT, Michel. A genealogia do poder. São Paulo: Editora Paz e Terra, 1969.
FOUCAULT, Michel. A Governamentalidade. In: DREYFUS, Huberto; RABINOV, Paul.
Estratégia, poder-saber. 2. ed. Rio de Janeiro: Forense Universitária, 1998. p. 277-
293.
FOUCAULT, Michel. A ordem do discurso: aula inaugural no College de France,
pronunciada em 2 de dezembro de 1970. Trad. Laura Fraga de Almeida Sampaio. 24
ed. São Paulo: Edições Loyola, 2014.
FOUCAULT, Michel. Ditos e escritos IV: estratégia, poder-saber. 2. ed. Rio de
Janeiro: Forense Universitária, 1995.
FOUCAULT, Michel. História da sexualidade I: a vontade de saber. Rio de Janeiro:
Graal, 2000.
FOUCAULT, Michel. Microfísica do poder. 26. ed. Rio de Janeiro: Graal, 2008.
FOUCAULT, Michel. Vigiar e punir: Nascimento da Prisão. Petrópolis: Vozes, 1977.
GONÇALVES, Jadson Fernando Garcia. Foucault e a questão do dispositivo, da
governamentalidade e da subjetivação: mapeando conceitos. Revista Eletrônica do
Curso de Direito da UFSM, v. 8, n. 2, p. 322-347, 2013.
INEP. Educação no Brasil: Diagnóstico e Perspectivas. Brasília: Instituto Nacional
de Estudos e Pesquisas Educacionais Anísio Teixeira. Disponível em:
http://www.inep.gov.br. Acesso em: 26 jul. 2024.
MORUZZI, Andreia Braga. A infância como dispositivo: uma abordagem foucaultiana
para pensar a educação. Conjectura: Filosofia e Educação, Caxias do Sul, v. 22, n.
2, p. 279-299, maio/ago. 2017.
VEYNE, Paul. Foucault, seu pensamento, sua pessoa. 2. ed. São Paulo: Editora
Civilização Brasileira, 2009.




                                                                                   63

CHAPTER 4
 ORGANIZATION AND MEMORIES OF
 PEDAGOGICAL SPACES IN PROFESSIONAL
 AND TECHNOLOGICAL EDUCATION (EPT)



Silvana Maria Aparecida Viana Santos
PhD candidate in Education Sciences
Facultad Interamericana de Ciências Sociales (FICS)
E-mail: silvanaviana11@yahoo.com.br

Ana Luzia dos Santos da Silva
Specialist in Knowledge and Practices for Teaching in the Early Years of
Elementary School
Universidade do estado do Amazonas
E-mail: annahribqah@gmail.com

Anderson César Ramos da Luz Carvalho
Master’s in Emerging Technologies in Education
Must University (MUST)
E-mail: andersoncesar88@hotmail.com

Hermócrates Gomes Melo Júnior
PhD Candidate in Education
Facultad Interamericana de Ciências Sociales (FICS)
E-mail: hgjunior@ufba.br

Liliane Inácia da Silva
Master’s student in Emerging Technologies in Education
Must University (MUST)
E-mail: lilianeinacia20015@gmail.com

Renato Machado
Master’s Student in Emerging Technologies in Education
Must University (MUST)
E-mail: remachado1971@gmail.com

Tatiani Bonfim Bianchini
Master’s Student in Emerging Technologies in Education
Must University (MUST)
E-mail: tatiani.bonfim@hotmail.com




                                                                      64

Thiago Souza de Oliveira
PhD candidate in Education
Facultad Interamericana de Ciências Sociales (FICS)
E-mail: thiagokolenda@hotmail.com


ABSTRACT: This study explored the organization and memories of
pedagogical spaces in Professional and Technological Education (EPT),
addressing the challenge of adapting these environments to contemporary
educational demands and the needs for inclusion and innovation. The main
objective was to analyze how the configuration of these spaces influences the
teaching-learning process and contributes to the construction of institutional
identity. The methodology was based on aliterature review, examining
previous studies on the topic, relevant public policies, and examples of
innovative pedagogical practices. Results showed that pedagogical spaces
in EPT play a crucial role in promoting integrated and meaningful learning,
facing challenges related to technological updates and the maintenance of
an infrastructure that supports active learning methodologies. The final
considerations highlighted the need for continuous investments and effective
management for pedagogical spaces toevolve in a way that meets the
requirements of a qualified professional education aligned with labor market
and societal demands.

KEYWORDS: professional and technological education, pedagogical spaces,
educational innovation, institutional identity, inclusion.

RESUMO: Este estudo investigou a organização e memórias de espaços
pedagógicos na Educação Profissional e Tecnológica (EPT), abordando o
desafio de adaptar esses       ambientes    às    demandas     educacionais
contemporâneas        e    às necessidades de inclusão e inovação. O
objetivogeral foi analisar como a configuração desses espaços influencia o
processo de ensino-aprendizagem e contribui para a construção da identidade
institucional. A metodologia adotada baseou-se em uma revisão de literatura,
explorando estudos anteriores sobreo tema, políticas públicas relevantes e
exemplos de práticas pedagógicas inovadoras. Os resultados indicaram
que os espaços pedagógicos na EPT desempenham um papel fundamental
na promoção de uma aprendizagem integrada e significativa, enfrentando,
contudo, desafios relacionados à atualização tecnológica e à manutenção
de uma infraestrutura que suporte metodologias ativas de aprendizagem.
As considerações finais destacaram a necessidade de investimentos
contínuos e de uma gestão eficaz para que os espaços pedagógicos
evoluam de forma a atender às exigências de uma educação profissional
qualificada e alinhada com as demandas do mercado de trabalho e da
sociedade.

PALAVRAS-CHAVE: educação profissional e tecnológica, espaços
pedagógicos, inovação educacional, identidade institucional, inclusão.




                                                                           65

1. INTRODUCTION


       The organization and memories of pedagogical spaces in Professional and
Technological Education (PTE) represent a field of study that has gained
prominence in educational literature, given its importance for the development of
educational practices that respond to contemporary needs for technical and
technological training. This topic involves the analysis of the physical and
organizational structure of learning environments, as well as how these spaces
contribute to the construction of institutional memory and influence the
educational process.
       The rationale for choosing this topic lies in the growing demand for
qualified professionals in various technical fields, which highlights the need for
educational spaces that not only foster the development of specific skills but also
promote the integration of theoretical knowledge with practice. Furthermore, the
organization of these spaces and the memories they help to build play a
fundamental role in shaping the identity of vocational and technical education
(VTE) institutions, influencing both the perceptions of students and faculty as well
as the image of these institutions in society.
       The issue arises when observing that, despite the relevance of
pedagogical spaces in vocational and technological education, there are
significant challenges in their organization and in the way the memories of these
spaces are constructed and maintained. Issues such as the adequacy of
infrastructure to teaching-learning methodologies, resistance to change in
pedagogical practices, and the need to preserve institutional memory in the face
of rapid technological and curricular transformations are aspects that require in-
depth analysis.
       In this context, the objectives of this research are: first, to identify and
analyze the main characteristics of educational spaces in technical and
vocational education (TVE), taking into account their physical and pedagogical
organization; second, to understand how these spaces contribute to the
construction of institutional memory and the formation of the identity of TVE
institutions; and, finally, to investigate the challenges faced by institutions in
managing these spaces and preserving their memories. By achieving these
objectives, we hope to make a significant contribution to the literature on


                                                                                 66

professional and technological education, providing insights for the improvement
of pedagogical practices and the effective management of educational spaces.
      The following section provides a theoretical review that outlines the state
of the art regarding Professional and Technological Education in Brazil, the
organization of spaces pedagogical spaces and the importance of the memory
and identity of these spaces. The methodology employed is described with an
emphasis on literature review as a tool for compiling existing knowledge. The
results and discussions emerge from the analysis of the collected data, exploring
the pedagogies and teaching methods applied to VET, the impact of pedagogical
spaces on the teaching-learning process, challenges faced, and future
perspectives. Finally, the concluding remarks summarize the study’s key findings,
underscoring the need for effective management of these spaces to meet the
demands of contemporary education. This structural format aims to facilitate
readers’ understanding of the investigated aspects, allowing for a fluid and
informative reading experience.


2. THEORETICAL FRAMEWORK


      The theoretical framework of this study is structured to provide a cohesive
and informative theoretical basis for the main themes that comprise the research.
It begins with a historical and contextual analysis of Professional and
Technological Education (PTE) in Brazil, highlighting the regulatory milestones
and public policies that have influenced its development. This is followed by a
discussion of the organization of pedagogical spaces in VTE, examining the
physical and pedagogical structures that support the teaching-learning process.
Additionally, the relevance of memory and identity in pedagogical spaces is
addressed, reflecting on how these dimensions contribute to the perception and
value of VTE institutions. This section is grounded in previous studies,
educational theories, and practical examples that illustrate the dynamics between
educational spaces, learning, and institutional identity. This organization aims to
establish a clear understanding of key concepts and the existing literature, laying
the groundwork for data analysis and subsequent discussions in the text.




                                                                                67

3. VOCATIONAL AND TECHNOLOGICAL EDUCATION (VTE) IN BRAZIL


       Vocational and Technical Education (VTE) in Brazil has undergone
significant transformations over the years, reflecting changes in social, economic,
and technological demands. The evolution of VTE in the country can be
understood by examining its history and the regulatory milestones that have
shaped its public policies.
       The history of EPT in Brazil has been marked by a series of ups and
downs, with periods of expansion alternating with periods of stagnation.
According to Machado (2008), “teacher training for EPT has been a constant
challenge, reflecting changes in the world of work and the need to adapt curricula
to new technologies and production methods.” This quote highlights the
importance of EPT’s constant adaptation to social and technological changes.
       Regarding regulatory frameworks and public policies, Brazilian legislation
on EPT began to take a more concrete form starting in the 1990s, with the Law
on Guidelines and Foundations of National Education (LDB), Law No.
9,394/1996, establishing the legal foundations for the organization of national
education, including vocational education. Fernandes (2009) points out that “the
management of Federal Institutes represents a significant challenge, especially
considering the goal of integrating vocational education into secondary
education, thereby promoting a more comprehensive and coordinated
education.”
       The expansion of the network of Federal Institutes, beginning in 2008,
represents a significant milestone in the history of EPT in Brazil. Pacheco (2010)
argues that “Federal Institutes constitute a revolution in vocational and
technological education by offering quality education aligned with the demands
of sustainable regional development.” This statement highlights the importance
of Federal Institutes in promoting vocational education that meets local and
regional needs, contributing to economic and social development.
       The importance of the political-pedagogical foundation in the organization
of EPT is emphasized by Pacheco (2015), who advocates for the need for
"guidelines toward a transformative vocational and technological education,
capable of promoting not only job readiness but also the civic and critical



                                                                                68

education of students." This perspective underscores the role of VET in
promoting a comprehensive education that goes beyond technical skills.
      Finally, the production of knowledge about VET and its configuration as a
field of study has been the subject of analysis, as highlighted by Ciavatta (2016):
“The production of knowledge regarding the configuration of the field of vocational
and technical education reflects a growing academic and political interest,
marking VET as a relevant field of research and intervention.” This lengthy
quotation illustrates the growing recognition of VET as a field of study and the
importance of research for the development of innovative educational policies
and practices.
      Therefore, VET in Brazil is characterized by a history of continuous
evolution, marked by challenges, adaptations, and innovations. Regulatory
frameworks and public policies have played a crucial role in defining the contours
of VET, aiming not only to meet the demands of the labor market but also to
promote a holistic and civic-minded education.


4. ORGANIZATION OF LEARNING SPACES IN VET


      The organization of pedagogical spaces in Professional and Technological
Education (EPT) plays a fundamental role in the teaching-learning process,
directly reflecting on the quality of the education provided. The concept of
pedagogical spaces in VTE encompasses not only traditional classrooms but also
laboratories, workshops, libraries, and other environments that enable the
conduct of practical and theoretical activities, integrating technical and
technological knowledge.
      The importance of physical and technological infrastructure for the
effectiveness of the educational process is widely recognized. As Pacheco (2015)
states, “the political-pedagogical foundations of federal institutes must consider
infrastructure as a key element for promoting transformative vocational and
technological education.” This perspective highlights the role of infrastructure not
merely as a support but as an integral part of the pedagogical strategy, directly
influencing the quality of teaching and the students’ learning experience.
      Different models and practices for organizing learning spaces have been
explored in vocational and technical education (VTE) institutions, seeking to


                                                                                 69

adapt to the specific needs of the courses offered and the characteristics of the
student body. Ciavatta (2016) highlights that "the production of knowledge
regarding the configuration of the field of professional and technological
education reflects the need for spaces that foster the integration of theory and
practice, promoting more meaningful learning." This extended quote emphasizes
the need for pedagogical spaces that facilitate the practical application of
theoretical knowledge, a fundamental aspect of VET.
       The diversity of models and practices observed in the organization of
pedagogical spaces in VTE reflects the search for environments that are both
inclusive and conducive to the development of specific competencies. According
to Machado (2008), “teacher training for VET requires spaces that stimulate
creativity, innovation, and critical reflection, both on the part of teachers and
students.” This perspective points to the need for spaces that promote not only
the acquisition of technical knowledge but also the development of cognitive and
social skills.
       In short, the organization of pedagogical spaces in Professional and
Technological Education is a key element that directly influences the
effectiveness of the teaching-learning process. Physical and technological
infrastructure, combined with innovative pedagogical models and practices, are
fundamental to meeting the demands of an education system that seeks to
prepare students for the challenges of the labor market and contemporary society.


5. MEMORIES AND IDENTITY OF EDUCATIONAL SPACES


       The memories and identity of educational spaces play an essential role in
defining and recognizing Professional and Technological Education (PTE)
institutes. The construction of these institutes’ identity is intrinsically linked to the
memories shared by students, teachers, and the community, reflecting not only
the educational history but also the experiences lived within these spaces.
       The role of memories in building the identity of VTI institutions is
highlighted by Pacheco (2010), who states: “Federal institutions, throughout their
history, have accumulated a set of memories that contribute to the formation of
their unique identity, which is a reflection of pedagogical practices, community
interactions, and the innovations implemented.” This quote underscores the


                                                                                      70

importance of collective experiences in shaping the perception and value
attributed to EPT institutes.
       An analysis of case studies reveals how changes and continuities in
educational spaces influence institutional memory. A significant example can be
seen in the evolution of laboratories and workshops, which, as they advance
technologically, remain fundamentally committed to practical and applied
learning—a core value of TPE. As González Arroyo (2019) points out, “the
evolution of pedagogical spaces in EPT institutes reflects changes in social and
technological demands, while preserving the mission of providing an education
that effectively integrates theory and practice.”
       This duality between change and continuity is essential to understanding
how memories contribute to the identity of EPT institutes. The preservation of
certain traditional aspects, such as the emphasis on technical education and the
close relationship with the local productive sector, coexists with the
implementation of pedagogical and technological innovations, highlighting a
continuous process of identity renewal.
       Ciavatta (2016) offers a comprehensive perspective on this phenomenon,
noting that “The production of knowledge regarding the configuration "The field
of vocational and technological education is a testament to the constant quest to
balance tradition and innovation, an effort that is reflected in the way educational
spaces are organized and experienced." This lengthy quote underscores the
complexity of managing educational spaces, which must take into account both
current needs and historical legacy.
       In short, the memories and identity of pedagogical spaces at EPT are
fundamental elements that influence how the institutes are perceived and valued
by the educational community and society. Through the analysis of case studies,
it becomes evident that transformations in educational spaces contribute to the
dynamic construction of institutional identity, reflecting an ongoing commitment
to educational excellence and innovation.


6. METHODOLOGY


       The methodology employed in this study is based on a literature review, a
systematic process of searching for, collecting, analyzing, and interpreting


                                                                                 71

previous publications related to the research topic. This method allows for the
compilation of existing knowledge and theories, facilitating the identification of
gaps in current knowledge and the formulation of new research questions. The
literature review is essential for establishing the state of the art of the investigated
topic, offering an overview of the main discussions, methodologies, and results
obtained in previous studies.
       Data collection for the literature review involves identifying relevant
sources, including scientific articles, books, theses, dissertations, and research
reports, that address the organization and memories of pedagogical spaces in
Professional and Technological Education. To ensure a systematic approach,
academic databases and specialized search engines are employed, using
specific keywords related to the topic. This process is complemented by the
application of inclusion and exclusion criteria, aiming to select materials that offer
significant contributions to the understanding of the subject of study.
       After collection, the data undergo a critical analysis, in which they are
examined for their relevance, methodological quality, and contributions to the
research topic. This stage involves organizing the selected studies into thematic
categories, facilitating an understanding of the various approaches and findings.
The analysis also seeks to identify trends, convergences, and divergences in
research on the topic, as well as to highlight challenges, limitations, and possible
directions for future investigations.
       Finally, the methodology adopted in this study aims to synthesize the
knowledge acquired through the literature review in order to build a solid
theoretical foundation for discussing the proposed research objectives. This
approach not only contributes to a deeper theoretical understanding of the
organization and memories of pedagogical spaces in EPT but also provides
insights for reflection on pedagogical practices, educational policies, and the
management of learning spaces in technical and technological education
institutions.
       To clarify the theoretical foundations underlying the organization and
memories of educational spaces in Professional and Technological Education
(PTE), the following table summarizes the main contributions of relevant authors
in the field. This table concisely presents the fundamental studies, highlighting
the authors’ perspectives on the configuration of these spaces, the evolution of


                                                                                     72

VTE in Brazil, and the role of memory and identity in the formation of institutional
identity. The selection of these works reflects an effort to understand how different
elements contribute to the development of effective pedagogical practices and
inclusive, innovative learning environments. The inclusion of this table aims to
provide an integrated view of the theoretical foundations guiding the research,
facilitating the understanding of the concepts discussed throughout the text.


Table 1. Key theoretical contributions to the organization and memories of educational spaces
                             in vocational and technical education
     Author(s)                                       Title                                Year
MACHADO, L. R. S.          Teacher Training for Vocational and Technical Education:       2008
                            Historical Perspectives and Contemporary Challenges
 FERNANDES, F. Management of Federal Institutes: the challenge of the centennial 2009
       C. M.          of the Federal Network of Professional and Technological Educa-
                                                      tion
 PACHECO, E. M. Federal Institutes: A Revolution in Professional and Technological 2010
                                                  Education
  PACHECO, E.         Political and pedagogical foundations of federal institutes: guide- 2015
                       lines for transformative vocational and technological education

   CIAVATTA, M.       The production of knowledge regarding the configuration of the     2016
                             field of professional and technological education
   GONZALEZ           Vocational and technological education poses questions for us.     2019
   ARROYO, M.                                 What questions?
                                       Source: own work


       It is important to emphasize the relevance of each theoretical contribution
to understanding the complexity surrounding pedagogical spaces in VET.
Analyzing these contributions allows us to identify trends, challenges, and
opportunities in the organization of these spaces, as well as in the preservation
of their memories and the promotion of their identity. This understanding is
essential to inform subsequent discussions on management strategies and
pedagogical innovation that can effectively address contemporary educational
needs, highlighting the central role that theory plays in guiding educational
practices and policies in the field of vocational and technological education.


7. RESULTS AND DISCUSSION


       The “Results and Discussion” section is structured based on the analysis
of the word cloud generated from the theoretical contributions highlighted in the
previous table, focusing on the most recurring themes that emerged from the



                                                                                            73

literature review. This section of the text systematically explores the identified
themes, such as pedagogy and didactics applied to Professional and
Technological Education (PTE), the impact of pedagogical spaces on the
teaching-learning process, challenges faced in managing these spaces, and
future perspectives for their organization and maintenance. Each theme is
discussed in relation to the collected data, allowing for an interpretation focused
on what the most frequent terms reveal about current trends and challenges in
the field. The organization of this section aims to facilitate the reader’s
understanding of how the results obtained corroborate, expand, or challenge the
discussions present in the existing literature, providing a basis for reflections on
innovative pedagogical practices and the effective management of pedagogical
spaces in EPT.
      To provide a visual overview of the predominant themes discussed in this
study, a word cloud was created based on the frequencies of terms extracted
from the literature review and the key contributions identified in the table. This
graphic tool is intended to immediately illustrate the words and concepts that
emerge as central to the organization and memories of educational spaces in
Professional and Technological Education (PTE). The word cloud aims to
facilitate the visualization of thematic emphases, allowing readers to quickly
grasp the aspects that were most focused on in the reviewed literature and in the
analysis conducted, serving as a visual reference point that complements the
textual discussion.




                                                                                 74

             Figure 1. Keywords in Professional and Technological Education




                                   Source: own work


      Following the presentation of the word cloud, it is clear that the most
prominent terms directly reflect the main focuses of the research, highlighting the
relevance of concepts such as innovation, inclusion, practice, and identity within
the context of Professional and Technological Education. The presence of these
terms in the cloud not only reinforces the importance of these areas as topics of
discussion in the field of VTE but also guides subsequent reflections on how
these concepts interconnect with practical issues regarding the organization of
pedagogical spaces and the construction of institutional memories. The analysis
of the word cloud, therefore, serves as a starting point for more in-depth
discussions on the challenges and opportunities that arise for improving
vocational and technical education, aligning it with contemporary needs for
learning and professional development.


8. PEDAGOGY AND DIDACTICS APPLIED TO VET


      In Professional and Technological Education (PTE), pedagogical
approaches and didactic strategies play a fundamental role in promoting teaching
that meets the specific needs of the productive sector and contemporary society.
Adapting teaching methodologies to incorporate both technical knowledge and
technological skills becomes essential in this context.




                                                                                75

      Pedagogical approaches in VET emphasize the integration of theory and
practice, an essential aspect of professional training. Machado (2008) highlights
the importance of this integration, arguing that “the training of teachers for
Vocational and Technical Education requires a commitment to adopting
pedagogical practices that promote the application of knowledge in practical
contexts.” This perspective reinforces the need for teaching strategies that
facilitate the connection between classroom learning and its application in the
workplace.
      With regard to innovative teaching strategies, the use of digital
technologies and multimedia resources has proven effective in improving
teaching-learning process. Ciavatta (2016), in an analysis of the configuration of
the EPT field, observes that "the production of knowledge and pedagogical
innovation are fundamental to responding to the challenges posed by the
information society, requiring an educational environment that incorporates new
technologies and active learning methodologies." This lengthy quotation
highlights the need for constant updating of pedagogical practices to incorporate
the technological and methodological innovations that characterize today’s
society.
      The application of innovative teaching strategies in EPT educational
settings is not limited to the use of technologies but also includes active
methodologies, such as project-based learning, collaborative learning, and
problem-based learning. These approaches promote greater interaction between
students and teachers and stimulate the development of critical and reflective
skills. Pacheco (2015) underscores the relevance of these methodologies, stating
that "the political-pedagogical foundations of Federal Institutes must include
teaching strategies that engage students in the learning process, making them
protagonists of their own education."
      Therefore, pedagogy and teaching methods applied to EPT require
constant reflection and adaptation to new educational and productive realities.
The incorporation of integrative pedagogical approaches and innovative teaching
strategies into educational settings is essential to prepare students for the
challenges of the job market and to promote vocational training that is at once
technical, technological, and humanistic.



                                                                               76

9. IMPACT OF PEDAGOGICAL SPACES ON THE TEACHING-LEARNING
PROCESS


       The impact of pedagogical spaces on the teaching-learning process is a
topic of growing interest in Professional and Technological Education (PTE).
Research analysis reveals that both the physical and organizational
environments exert a significant influence on learning, affecting not only the way
students absorb knowledge, but also how they interact with one another and with
educators.
       The physical environment—including classroom layout, lighting, thermal
comfort, and the availability of technological resources—can either enhance or
limit learning opportunities. According to Pacheco (2015), “the configuration of
educational spaces should be designed to promote interaction and collaboration,
creating an environment conducive to the development of skills relevant to
technical and technological training.” This perspective highlights the need for
spaces that are flexible and adaptable to different teaching and learning
modalities.
       Beyond the physical aspect, the organizational environment—which
includes institutional culture, pedagogical practices, and school management—
plays a crucial role in the educational process. The way in which educational
spaces are managed and activities are organized directly influences student
engagement and motivation. Ciavatta (2016) addresses this issue by stating that
“the production of knowledge regarding the configuration of the field of
professional and technological education reflects the importance of creating
learning environments that stimulate curiosity, experimentation, and critical
reflection.” This lengthy quote underscores the need for spaces that foster the
construction of meaningful knowledge, in an environment that encourages
students’ active participation.
       Examples of successful practices in designing educational spaces that
promote learning include the implementation of well-equipped laboratories for
conducting practical experiments, classrooms that allow for reconfiguration of the
space to accommodate different educational activities, and common areas that
encourage collaborative study and interaction among members of the school
community. Fernandes (2009) illustrates this approach by noting that “the


                                                                               77

administration of Federal Institutes faces the challenge of integrating physical
spaces and pedagogical practices in a way that reflects the institution’s
educational objectives, fostering a dynamic and inclusive learning environment.”
      Therefore, the impact of pedagogical spaces on the teaching-learning
process is multifaceted, involving physical and organizational aspects that, when
properly coordinated, contribute to a richer and more effective educational
experience. The creation of environments that support active learning,
collaboration, and innovation is essential to meet the demands of contemporary
professional and technological education, preparing students for the challenges
of the labor market and society.


10. CHALLENGES AND FUTURE PROSPECTS


      The organization and maintenance of innovative and inclusive learning
spaces in Professional and Technological Education (PTE) face significant
challenges, which require constant attention and collaborative efforts from
administrators, educators, and the educational community. Among the main
challenges is the need to adapt physical infrastructure to new pedagogical and
technological demands, ensuring that all students have equal access to learning
opportunities.
      One of the challenges mentioned by Pacheco (2015) is "the need to align
political and pedagogical principles with educational practices, so as to foster a
professional and technological education that is truly transformative and
inclusive." This quote highlights the complexity of integrating educational policies
and pedagogical practices in a way that meets the needs of a diverse student
population, within a context of rapid technological and social change.
      Furthermore, maintaining pedagogical spaces that keep pace with
technological innovations represents another challenge. Ciavatta (2016)
highlights that “constant technological evolution necessitates frequent updates to
teaching resources and physical infrastructure, in order to provide a learning
environment that is in tune with contemporary practices in the world of work.” This
statement underscores the importance of continuous investment in material and
technological resources, so that educational settings can effectively prepare
students for the professional challenges they will face.


                                                                                 78

      As for the future prospects for learning environments in EPT, there is an
expectation of increasing integration of digital technologies and innovative
pedagogical approaches, such as project-based learning and gamification, which
promote student engagement and active participation in the learning process.
Fernandes (2009), in discussing the challenges for the management of Federal
Institutes, suggests that “the incorporation of active methodologies and emerging
educational technologies can transform pedagogical spaces into dynamic and
adaptive learning environments, capable of responding to the educational and
professional needs of a society in constant transformation.”
      Therefore, the challenges in organizing and maintaining innovative and
inclusive pedagogical spaces are complex and multifaceted, requiring a holistic
approach that considers both the physical and pedagogical dimensions of
education. Future prospects point toward greater flexibility in learning spaces,
with a focus on personalizing education and preparing students for an
increasingly technological and globalized job market. Overcoming these
challenges and realizing these prospects require an ongoing commitment to
innovation, inclusion, and sustainability within the context of EFA.


11. FINAL CONSIDERATIONS


      The concluding remarks of this study on the organization and memories of
educational spaces in Professional and Technological Education (PTE) reflect on
the importance of such spaces in the teaching-learning process and in the
construction of institutional identity. The analysis conducted, based on a thorough
literature review, identified the challenges faced in designing educational
environments that are simultaneously innovative, inclusive, and conducive to the
development of skills relevant to the labor market.
      It has been shown that educational spaces in early childhood education
play a significant role not only in the transmission of knowledge but also in
promoting active and meaningful learning. The integration of theory and practice,
essential for professional and technological training, requires spaces that are
adequately equipped and organized to stimulate interaction, creativity, and critical
thinking. The challenges associated with technological updates and the



                                                                                 79

adaptation of pedagogical practices to new educational and professional
demands require attentive management and adequate resources.
       Furthermore, the memory and identity of educational spaces contribute to
a sense of continuity and belonging among students and teachers, reinforcing the
institution’s value and mission. Preserving these memories, combined with the
ability to innovate and adapt to change, is crucial for maintaining the relevance
and effectiveness of T&V institutions in the face of contemporary challenges.
       Future prospects point to a trend toward greater flexibility and
personalization of learning spaces, with the incorporation of advanced
technologies and pedagogical methodologies that foster an education more
closely aligned with students’ individual needs and the demands of the workforce.
The creation of educational environments that foster collaborative and
interdisciplinary learning, as well as civic and ethical education, emerges as a
fundamental element in training qualified professionals who are aware of their
role in society.
       It can therefore be concluded that organizing and maintaining appropriate
learning environments in EPT are complex tasks that require a constant
commitment to educational quality and innovation. Overcoming the identified
challenges and realizing future prospects will depend on joint efforts by
administrators, educators, students, and the community, in a continuous process
of evaluation and adaptation to social and technological dynamics. By shedding
light on crucial aspects of pedagogical spaces in EPT, this study aims to provide
insights for reflections and actions that strengthen vocational and technological
education in the country, making it more effective, inclusive, and aligned with the
demands of the 21st century.




                                                                                80

                                     REFERENCES

CIAVATTA, M. The production of knowledge regarding the configuration of the field of
vocational and technological education. HOLOS, vol. 6, pp. 33–49, 2016. Available at:
https://www2.ifrn.edu.br/ojs/index.php/HOLOS/article/view/5013. Accessed on: Feb.
12, 2024. DOI: 10.15628/holos.2016.5013.

FERNANDES, F. C. M. Management of Federal Institutes: the challenge of the
centennial of the Federal Network of Professional and Technological Education.
HOLOS, vol. 2, pp. 3–9, 2009. Available at:
https://www.redalyc.org/pdf/4815/481549226002.pdf. Accessed on: Feb. 12, 2024.

GONZALEZ ARROYO, M. Professional and technological education challenges us.
What questions? Educação Profissional E Tecnológica Em Revista, vol. 3,
no. 1, pp. 5–18, 2019. Available at: ttps://ojs.ifes.edu.br/index.php/ept/article/view/374.
Accessed on: Feb. 12, 2024. https://doi.org/10.36524/profept.v3i1.374.

MACHADO, L. R. S. Teacher Training for Professional and Technological Education:
historical perspectives and contemporary challenges. In: MEC/INEP. (Eds.). Teacher
Training for Professional and Technological Education. Brasília: MEC/INEP, 2008.
vol. 8, pp. 67–82.

PACHECO, E. Political-pedagogical foundations of federal institutes: guidelines
for transformative vocational and technological education. Natal: IFRN, 2015. Available
at: https://memoria.ifrn.edu.br/bitstream/handle/
1044/1018/Fundamentos%20Poli%CC%81tico-Pedago%CC%81gicos%20dos
%20Institutos%20Federais%20-%20Ebook.pdf. Accessed on: Feb. 12, 2024.

PACHECO, E. M. The Federal Institutes: A Revolution in Professional and
Technological Education. Natal: IFRN, 2010. Available at: https://memoria.
ifrn.edu.br/bitstream/handle/1044/1013/Os%20institutos%20federais%20-%20E
book.pdf. Accessed on: Feb. 12, 2024.




                                                                                         81

CHAPTER 5
 TEACHING QUADRATIC EQUATIONS WITH
 GOLD BEADS: REFLECTIONS ON A
 PEDAGOGICAL PRACTICE


Laine Silva Ramos
Master’s student in Education
Universidade Estadual do Maranhão (UEMA)
E-mail: laineramos@aluno.uema.br

Thamires Silva Soares
Master’s Degree in Science and Mathematics Education
Universidade Federal do Maranhão (UFMA)
E-mail: thamiressilvats91@gmail.com

Deuseliane Patrícia Oliveira Leal Leal
Bachelor’s Degree in Mathematics
Universidade Estadual do Maranhão (UEMA)
E-mail: deuselianeleal@aluno.uema.br

Yara Letícia Pereira Serra
Bachelor's Degree in Mathematics
Universidade Estadual do Maranhão (UEMA)
E-mail: yaraserra@aluno.uema.br

Mauro Guterres Barbosa
PhD in Science and Mathematics Education
Universidade Federal de Mato Grosso (UFMT)
E-mail: mbarbosa1977@gmail.com

Rayane de Jesus Santos Melo
PhD in Education
Universidade Federal de São Carlos (UFSCar)
E-mail: rayane.melo@ufma.br

Quesia Guedes da Silva Castilho
PhD in Science
Universidade Estadual do Maranhão
E-mail: quesiacastilho@professor.uema.br

Jackson Martins Reis
Master’s Degree in Mathematics
Universidade Estadual do Maranhão
E-mail: prof.jackson.reis@gmail.com



                                                       82

ABSTRACT: This qualitative study, designed as action research, aimed to
analyze how the use of base ten blocks, integrated into a planned
pedagogical proposal, can contribute to the learning of quadratic equations in
the final years of elementary school. The investigation was carried out with a 9th-
grade class in a public school through four lessons that comprised a
methodological teaching plan. The activities integrated the use of base ten
blocks with the traditional algebraic approach, allowing students to move from
concrete representations to symbolic records. Data collection took place
through observations conducted during the implementation of the proposal.
The results indicated that the use of base ten blocks favored the conceptual
understanding of quadratic equations, stimulated students’ interest and
participation, and contributed to the development of meaningful learning.
However, it was found that the resource requires intentional teachermediation so
that its manipulative aspect does not override the learning objective. It is
concluded that base ten blocks, when used in a planned and reflective
way, constitute a powerful learning tool and an effective strategy to make
the teaching of quadratic equations more meaningful and engaging.

KEYWORDS: mathematics teaching, quadratic equations, base ten blocks,
meaningful learning, pedagogical proposal.

RESUMO: Este estudo, de natureza qualitativa e delineado como pesquisa-
ação, teve como objetivo analisar de que forma o uso do material dourado,
articulado a uma proposta pedagógica planejada, pode contribuir para a
aprendizagem       das equações quadráticas nos Anos Finais do Ensino
Fundamental. A investigação foi desenvolvida com uma turma de 9º ano, em
uma escola pública, por meio de quatro aulas que compuseram um plano
metodológico de ensino. As atividades integraram o material dourado à
abordagem algébrica tradicional, permitindo aos alunos transpor representações
concretas para registros simbólicos. A coleta de dados ocorreu por meio de
observações realizadas durante a aplicação da proposta. Os resultados
indicaram que o uso do material dourado favoreceu a compreensão conceitual
das equações quadráticas, estimulou o interesse e a participação dos alunos
e contribuiu para o desenvolvimento de aprendizagens significativas. Constatou-
se, contudo, que o recurso requer mediação docente intencional para que
o caráter manipulativo não se sobreponha ao objetivo de aprendizagem.
Conclui-se que o material dourado, quando utilizado de forma planejada e
reflexiva, constitui um instrumento potencializador da aprendizagem e uma
estratégia eficaz para tornar o ensino das equações quadráticas significativo
e atrativo.

PALAVRAS-CHAVE: ensino de matemática, equações quadráticas,
material dourado, aprendizagem significativa, proposta pedagógica.




                                                                                83

1. INTRODUCTION


       The teaching of quadratic equations is still, in many contexts,
characterized by mechanical and unmeaningful approaches (Pereira, 2017),
which contributes to students’ learning difficulties (Silva, 2017). In light of this, this
study proposes a methodological teaching plan that seeks to overcome such
difficulties through the use of golden material, promoting conceptual
understanding and meaningful learning.
       The research, which is qualitative in nature and characterized as action
research, was guided by the following question: How can a pedagogical approach
that integrates the use of golden material with the teaching of quadratic equations
contribute to learning in the resolution of these equations? Thus, we aim to
analyze how the use of golden material, integrated into a planned pedagogical
proposal, can promote conceptual understanding and meaningful learning of
quadratic equations in the final years of elementary school.
       To this end, we developed a pedagogical proposal inspired by didactic
transposition (Chevallard, 1991; Brasil, 2006), applied in a 9th-grade elementary
school class.
       The stages of theoretical review and analysis of textbooks, presented in a
previous study (Soares et al., 2022), formed the basis of this research, which
focuses on the development, implementation, and evaluation of the pedagogical
proposal.
       The following sections present the methodological approach, a description
of the proposal, and an analysis of the results obtained during the pedagogical
intervention.


2. METHODOLOGY


       This study is qualitative in nature (Minayo, 2002) and is classified as action
research, as it seeks to address the difficulties observed in learning “quadratic
equations” by promoting the joint participation of researchers and students
(Thiollent, 1997). The research was conducted in a spiral cycle, in which the
planning was constantly reevaluated and adjusted according to the reality of
pedagogical practice and the needs of the participating group.


                                                                                       84

           This type of research comprises four stages: exploratory, planning, action,
   and evaluation (Thiollent, 1997). The exploratory stage, focused on the analysis
   and diagnosis of the effects of using concrete materials in teaching the
   mathematical concept in question, was addressed in a previous study (Soares et
   al., 2022). The remaining stages are presented in this paper and summarized in
   Table 1, which describes the roadmap of the pedagogical intervention.


                          Table 1. Roadmap of the pedagogical intervention
                                                STAGES
         Planning                   Action                 Monitoring                Evaluation
  Development of the       Implementation of the     Application      of data    Verification      of
pedagogical proposal in- pedagogical proposal in collection instruments results obtained, seeking
  tegrating golden ratio the field of study with the       (interview).       to highlight the function
 material and quadratic    target audience of the                              of the gilded material
equations, to be used as          research.                                                   as
a methodological plan for                                                        facilitator       of
teaching quadratic equa-                                                        learning          and
          tions.                                                               possible adjustments
                                                                              and/or improvements to
                                                                                    the teaching
                                                                                   methodology.
                                     Source: Ramos et al., (2022).


           During the planning phase, the pedagogical proposal was developed by
   integrating the golden material into the teaching of quadratic equations. The
   activities were designed based on textbooks for the final years of elementary
   school and studies on the topic.
           In the implementation phase, the proposal was applied in a 9th-grade class
   at a public school through lessons that used the golden material as a mediating
   resource. The choice of school took into account the researcher-teachers’
   familiarity with the environment and their good relationship with the school
   community.
           During the monitoring phase, the classes were observed and documented
   through observations and interviews conducted at the end of the intervention to
   determine whether students perceived the golden material as facilitator of
   learning.
           Finally, during the evaluation phase, the students’ statements and
   observations were analyzed and interpreted, seeking to understand how the use
   of manipulatives contributed to the understanding of the mathematical concept of




                                                                                                 85

   quadratic equations and to the development of meaningful learning in the final
   years of elementary school.
          With the methodological phase concluded, the next section presents the
   pedagogical proposal developed and applied in this study, detailing its
   organization, the objectives of each class, and the strategies used for teaching
   quadratic equations.


   3. PEDAGOGICAL PROPOSAL


          The pedagogical proposal outlines a methodological teaching plan
   organized into four 50-minute lessons, detailing how the golden material was
   used to teach “quadratic equations,” with the aim of overcoming the learning
   difficulties often associated with this topic. Table 2 presents the introductory
   preamble of the proposal and the characterization of the mathematical concept
   in accordance with the guidelines of the National Common Core Curriculum
   (BNCC)


                       Table 2. Initial preamble of the pedagogical proposal
    Curricular component                                   Mathematics
        Thematic unit                                         Algebra
       Subject matter                  Algebraic expressions: factoring and notable products;
                                     Solving quadratic polynomial equations through factoring.

                          Recognize that mathematics is a human science, born of the needs and
                           concerns of different cultures at different historical moments, and is a
Competency Specific to the living science that contributes to solving scientific and technological
         BNCC             problems and to underpinning discoveries and constructions, including
                                               those with impacts on the world of
                                                     work (Competency 1).
                          Understand the processes of factoring algebraic expressions, based on
          Skills                      their relationships with notable products, to solve
                               and formulate problems that can be represented by quadratic
                                              polynomial equations (EF09MA09).
                                Source: Ramos et al., (2022).


          To provide an overview of the proposal, Table 3 presents the organization
   of the classes that make up the methodological teaching plan, indicating the
   sequence and the main themes of each stage




                                                                                                 86

                                 Table 3. Organization of the lessons
Lesson 1: Introduction to        Lesson 2                   Lesson 3            Lesson 4 Solving
       the topic          Golden Material in Action   The usual solution           Problems

    Presentation and    Review of previous class; Review of previous class;
    discussion of the    Presentation on solving Presentation of Bhaska-       Solving of exercises.
 mathematical object;     quadratic equations      ra's method for solving
   Presentation of the      using the golden      quadratic equations; Solv-
    golden material;       material; Solving of        ing of exercises.
   Articulation     of         exercises.
quadratic equations and
  the golden material;
        Solving of
        exercises.
                                   Source: Ramos et al., (2023).


          The following describes the methodological procedures adopted in each
  class, which guide the proposed teaching practice. The subsections are
  organized according to the sequence of classes, addressing their structure,
  analysis, and discussion.


  3.1 LESSON 1: RAISING STUDENTS’ AWARENESS OF THE TOPIC


          Lesson Topic: Understanding the concept of quadratic equations using
  the golden material
          Duration: 50 minutes Objectives:
          Understand the difference between linear equations and quadratic
  equations;
          Represent a quadratic equation using the gold-colored material;
          Identify the coefficients of a quadratic equation using the gold material;
          Understand the difference between a complete and an incomplete
  equation using the gold-colored material.
          Resources used: whiteboard, marker, textbook, gold-colored material,
  exercises. Assessment procedures: student participation and engagement in
  activities, as well as in asking questions and raising concerns.


  3.1.1 Methodological Procedures, Analysis, and Discussion


          The initial lesson aimed to draw on students’ prior knowledge and
  introduce the mathematical concept of “equations , linking it to the use of the



                                                                                                87

golden ratio. Through a dialogic approach, the teacher-researcher facilitated
comparisons between first- and second-degree equations, encouraging students
to identify differences, recognize coefficients, and classify the equations based
on their completeness.
        Next, we presented the golden material and explained the correspondence
between its pieces and the coefficients of the equation: the plate representing 𝑎
(𝑥2),   representing   , the bar   representing   𝑏 (𝑥 ),   and   representing the
, and the smaller cube corresponding to the independent term𝑐 . This association
allowed students to understand the transition from algebraic to geometric
notation, giving visual meaning to mathematical expressions.
        During the practical activity, students demonstrated enthusiasm and
cooperation in assembling the representations, which reinforces the potential of
manipulative materials to promote engagement and meaningful learning (Lins et
al., 2019; Przybyviz et al., 2018). The observed interactions indicated that the use
of the material sparked students’ interest and contributed to their initial
understanding of quadratic equations in a concrete and participatory way.


3.2 LESSON 2: GOLDEN MATERIAL IN ACTION


        Lesson Topic: Solving quadratic equations with the golden material
        Duration: 50 minutes Objectives:
        Use the golden material to factor and solve quadratic equations with
rational roots;
        Recognize that the use of calculation strategies created by students
fosters a better relationship with mathematical content and greater intellectual
autonomy.
        Resources used: whiteboard, marker, textbook, golden material,
exercises. Assessment procedures: student participation and engagement in
activities, as well as questions and inquiries.


3.2.1 Methodological procedures, analysis, and discussion


        The objective of Lesson 2 was to apply the core concepts to solving
quadratic equations. The teacher-researcher began the lesson with the following


                                                                                 88

questions: “Why do we solve a quadratic equation? What are we trying to find?”
One of the students replied: “To find the solution.” Another question was then
asked: “What is the solution to a quadratic equation?” The students were unable
to answer, so the teacher-researcher formalized the answers to the questions
posed to the students. In addition, the relationship between the roots and the
coefficient of the equation was mentioned.
       Building on the concepts from the previous class, the example 3x2+
       7𝑥 + 4 = 0, asking students to identify the coefficients𝑎 ,𝑏 , and𝑐 , to
       represent the equation using the gold-colored material. The class correctly
identified the coefficients, and the teacher-researcher explained that the shape
formed should be a square or rectangle, whose area would represent the product
of the factors. Some students, however, had difficulty relating the dimensions of
the pieces to the sides of the shape. “Miss, I don’t get it. Why is this side 3𝑥 + 4?”
asked one of the students. The teacher replied that “the base and height of the
shape result from the sum of the dimensions of the pieces of the gold material.”
During this stage, the interactions between the students and the teacher were
recorded, as illustrated in Figure 1.


  Figure 1. On the left, an entry from a student’s notebook. On the right, a student asking for
                                clarification during the explanation




                                 Source: Ramos et al., (2023).


       To conclude the class, students received the golden material and a list of
exercises, in which they were to represent and solve quadratic equations. Since
there was not enough material for everyone, groups were formed: some students
chose to make the representations in their notebooks, while others manipulated
the material. Due to time constraints, it was only possible to solve the first two
proposed equations:




                                                                                                  89

a) 𝑥2 + 2x + 1 = 0


         Figure 2. Student A correctly representing the equation and finding its solution




                                 Source: Ramos et al., (2023).


b) 𝑥2 − 5x + 6 = 0


            Figure 3. Student B correctly identifying the coefficients of the equation




                                 Source: Ramos et al., (2023).


       Figures 2 and 3 show that the students understood the problem-solving
strategy using the gold-colored material. Student A correctly associated the
pieces with the coefficients of the equation, representing it appropriately and
finding the algebraic solution. Student B also identified the coefficients accurately
but did not complete the solution due to time constraints, although their
representation indicated an understanding of the method.
       Overall, the class was dynamic and interactive. Initially, the students’
interest was limited, but it increased significantly when the teacher-researcher
demonstrated the solution using the gold-colored material. This engagement
confirms that “environments where manipulative materials are used promote
learning and foster more positive attitudes in students” (Passos, 2004, p. 3). This
observation reinforces the potential of manipulative materials as mediators in the
construction of mathematical knowledge.




                                                                                            90

3.3 LESSON 3: THE USUAL SOLUTION


       Lesson Topic: Bhaskara's Formula for Solving Quadratic Equations
       Duration: 50 minutes
       Objectives:
       Understand the conceptual aspects of Bhaskara's formula;
       Understand how to solve quadratic equations and know how to apply them
in practical contexts.
       Resources used: whiteboard, marker, textbook, exercises.
       Assessment procedures: student participation and engagement in
activities, as well as questions and inquiries.


3.3.1 Methodological Procedures, Analysis, and Discussion


       In this class, the teacher-researcher addressed the concepts, formulas,
and methods for solving quadratic equations. She began with a brief review of
the coefficients𝑎 ,𝑏 , and𝑐 , revisiting what had been discussed in She then
explained Bhaskara’s formula and the discriminant (∆), highlighting its relationship
with the nature of the roots.
       After the theoretical presentation, examples were solved collectively to
review the solution process, which the students were already familiar with. To
consolidate learning, a group activity was conducted, the objective of which was
to classify equations according to the number and type of roots: two distinct real
roots, equal roots, or no roots.


          Figure 4. On the left, student A’s record. On the right, student B’s record




                                Source: Ramos et al., (2023).




                                                                                        91

       The records show that student B initially had difficulty identifying the roots
but, with the support of the teacher-researcher, was able to solve them. Student
A, on the other hand, demonstrated mastery of the procedure. We observed that
this lesson sparked the interest of some students who had been less active in
previous activities, indicating that part of the class showed greater affinity for
algebraic approaches and the use of formulas in mathematics.


3.4 LESSON 4: PROBLEM SOLVING


       Lesson Topic: Solving exercises to reinforce the content
       Duration: 50 minutes Objectives:
       Apply the fundamental concepts of quadratic equations using gold-plated
material;
       Perform geometric operations on the equations;
       Resources used: whiteboard, marker, textbook, golden material, list of
exercises. Assessment procedures: student participation and engagement in
activities, as well as questions and inquiries.


3.4.1 Methodological Procedures, Analysis, and Discussion


       The last class was dedicated to solving exercises involving quadratic
equations. The objective was to verify whether students had indeed mastered the
geometric manipulation of the equations and whether the hands-on process
facilitated understanding of the content, in contrast to Bhaskara’s formula.
       The students were divided into seven groups based on proximity, and each
group was given the golden material and a list of exercises, as shown in Table 4
below. It was up to the students to choose the solution method with which they
were most familiar, whether using the golden material or applying Bhaskara’s
formula.


                      Table 4. Activity conducted with the students




                                                                                  92

                    Source: Adapted from Silva and Camargo (2016).


      The teacher-researchers circulated around the classroom to answer
questions and monitor the progress of the activities. Most groups worked
diligently on solving the problems, sharing discoveries and hypotheses. This
social interaction, resulting from experimentation (Lorenzato, 2010), fostered
meaningful learning, allowing conclusions to be reached collectively and
collaboratively. We also observed that students with greater mastery assisted
their peers who were struggling, reinforcing the cooperative nature of the process.
Table 5 presents the solution methods adopted by each group, indicating whether
they opted to use the golden ratio or Bhaskara’s formula.


                        Table 5. Choice of problem-solving method
            Group          Question 1        Question 2           Question 3
              1          Golden Material            -                  -
              2             Bhaskara                -           Golden Material
              3          Golden Material            -                  -
              4             Bhaskara                -              Bhaskara
              5                 -             Bhaskara             Bhaskara
              6          Golden Material            -                  -
              7          Golden Material            -              Bhaskara
                             Source: Ramos et al., (2023).


      The students’ choice of methods was well balanced, which surprised the
teacher-researchers, as they had expected a greater preference for using the
gold-colored material. One possible explanation is that the Bhaskara formula
method, covered on the same day, was fresher in the students’ minds, whereas
the use of the golden material had been explored a week earlier. This hypothesis




                                                                                  93

is reinforced by the fact that some groups asked for the manipulative procedure
to be reviewed before beginning the problem-solving task.
           The blank spaces on the chart correspond to the questions that the groups
were unable to complete. Even among the identified solutions, some contained
partial errors. In the first question, which involved solving quadratic equations,
four groups opted for the gold material, two for Bhaskara’s formula, and one did
not perform the activity. Among those who used the gold material, the majority
obtained correct results, with only one incorrect solution, as shown in Figure 5.


                      Figure 5. Group 1’s solution for the equation 2x²− 3x = 0




                                   Source: Ramos et al., (2023).


           Group 1, despite not representing the negative coefficients of the equation
in the drawing, demonstrated an understanding of the relationship between these
coefficients and the dimensions of the figure, since the negative values were
expressed in the algebraic representation. However, by incorrectly representing
one of the dimensions, they arrived at an incorrect solution. The expected sides
of the figure would be 2𝑥 − 3e and𝑥 (or 2𝑥 − 3e −𝑥), resulting in the solution
       3
      { , 0}
       2
set            After the correction, the professor-researcher guided the group in
restructuring the solution.
           In contrast, the groups that used Bhaskara’s formula were unsuccessful in
most of the equations, making errors in basic operations. We chose not to delve
deeper into the analysis of these solutions, since the focus of the study is on the
use of the golden ratio.
           The second question was designed in a contextualized manner,
considering that “students construct meaningful knowledge by identifying with the
situations presented to them” (Brasil, 2006, p. 83). Only one group failed to


                                                                                   94

determine the equation; among the others, only Group 5 attempted to solve it and
find the roots, albeit incorrectly, using Bhaskara’s method.
       In the third question, whose statement read: “The square minus twice a
number equals -1. Calculate this number,” three groups did not complete the task,
one used the golden material, and three resorted to Bhaskara’s formula. The
group that worked with the material and two of those that applied Bhaskara
arrived at the correct result.
       Figure 6 illustrates the record of the group that used the golden material to
solve the third question, demonstrating their understanding of the proposed
method.


                      Figure 6. Group 2’s solution to the third question




                                 Source: Ramos et al., (2023).


       At the end of the class, the teacher-researchers asked the students which
method they preferred and why. The responses were as follows:


                       Student A: I liked both methods.
                       Student B: I liked the material better; it’s easier and faster to solve.
                       Student C: I liked Bhaskara’s Formula better; it’s easier. The gold
                       material is too complicated.
                       Student D: It’s easier with the formula. It’s more practical with the
                       material. Student E: I liked the material better; I think it’s easier—we
                       can see the equation and the answer. (Interview with students, 2022).


       The responses reveal different perceptions of the methods. Although not
everyone preferred the golden material, those who chose it demonstrated a more
meaningful understanding of the equation-solving process, attributing meaning to
the construction of the solutions. According to Francisco et al. (2019, p. 6),
“algebraic solving is supported by geometric solving, giving greater meaning to
the former and streamlining the equation-solving process.”




                                                                                            95

       We emphasize, however, that the use of the golden material presented
challenges. The manipulative nature of the resource sometimes diverted the
attention of some students, who began to use it in a playful manner, as illustrated
in Figure 7.


                     Figure 7. Students playing with the golden material




                               Source: Ramos et al., (2023).


       Upon observing the behavior of some students, the teacher-researchers
reinforced the objective of the activity and the educational nature of the golden
material, redoubling their attention to ensure that its use remained focused on
learning, as advised by Nacarato (2005).
       With this final lesson, we have completed the implementation of the
pedagogical approach, confirming that the “golden material” promotes
meaningful learning and an understanding of quadratic equations, even though it
has limitations and presents challenges, requiring careful instructional planning
(Lorenzato, 2006).

4. SUMMARY OF THE LESSONS




                                                                                96

       The implementation of the pedagogical proposal, structured into four
lessons, allowed us to observe the students’ progress in understanding quadratic
equations and in using the golden material as a resource for mediating
mathematical knowledge.
       In the first lesson, the focus was on raising awareness and revisiting prior
knowledge, establishing the difference between first- and second-degree
equations and introducing the geometric representation of coefficients using the
golden material. The students demonstrated curiosity and engagement,
recognizing the resource’s potential for visualizing abstract concepts.
       The second class was dedicated to solving quadratic equations with the
golden material, promoting the collective construction of reasoning and the
development of intellectual autonomy. The dialogue between teacher-
researchers and students showed that the manipulative method promoted
engagement and understanding, although specific doubts arose in situations
involving negative coefficients.
       In the third class, the work focused on the formalization of knowledge,
revisiting Bhaskara’s formula and the relationship between the discriminant and
the roots of the equation. This stage revealed that some students identify more
with algebraic methods, while others maintain an affinity for concrete approaches,
indicating the importance of methodological diversification.
       Finally, the fourth class proposed the practical and comparative application
of the two methods—the golden material and Bhaskara’s formula—in problem-
solving situations. Group discussions, the exchange of strategies, and the
sharing of solutions demonstrated that the golden material fosters meaningful
learning, although it requires constant guidance to ensure the focus does not get
lost in the playful aspect.
       Overall, the four lessons showed that the use of golden material
constitutes a powerful tool for the didactic transposition of the mathematical
object “quadratic equations,” promoting engagement, conceptual understanding,
and reflection on the problem-solving process. However, they revealed the need
for careful instructional planning to balance the manipulative nature of the activity
with the goal of formal learning


5. FINAL CONSIDERATIONS


                                                                                  97

      Based on the assumption that the mathematical concept of “quadratic
equations” has often been associated with a mechanical and meaningless
approach to teaching (Pereira, 2017), and that such an approach tends to lead to
learning difficulties (Silva, 2017), this study aimed to propose a methodology
capable of overcoming these limitations through the manipulative use of golden
material. In this sense, we sought to understand, in a qualitative study, how a
coordinated teaching methodology




                                                                             98

                                   REFERENCES


BRAZIL. Ministry of Education. Secretariat of Basic Education. Curriculum guidelines
for secondary education: Natural sciences, mathematics, and related technologies.
Brasília, vol. 2, no. 1, 2006. ISBN 85-98171-43-3. Available at: <
http://portal.mec.gov.br/seb/arquivos/pdf/ book_volume_02_internet.pdf>.
Accessed on: Dec. 22, 2022.

CHEVALLARD, Y. Didactic Transposition: From Wise Knowledge to Taught
Knowledge. Buenos Aires: Aique, 1991. Available at: <
http://www.terras.edu.ar/biblioteca/11/11DID_ Chevallard_Unidad_3.pdf>. Accessed
on: Nov. 10, 2022.

FRANCISCO, G.; NÉ, A. L. S.; COMIOTTO, T. Golden Ratio and Quadratic Polynomial
Equations: From Algebraic to Geometric, From Mechanical to Meaningful. In Teia –
Ibero-American Journal of Mathematics and Technology Education, Pernambuco,
vol. 10, no. 3, 2019. Available at:
<https://periodicos.ufpe.br/revistas/emteia/article/viewFile/242482/pdf>. Accessed on:
June 29, 2022.

LINS, G. S. et al. The teaching of mathematics and solving equations with
concrete materials. National Conference on Mathematics Education - XIII ENEM;
Cuiabá - MT, July 14–17, 2019. Available at: <
https://www.sbemmatogrosso.com.br/eventos/index.php/enem
/2019/paper/download/528/849>. Accessed on: June 28, 2022.

LORENZATO, S.. Mathematics Teaching Laboratory in Teacher Education.
Campinas: Autores associados, 2006.

MINAYO, M. C. S. (Ed.). Social Research: Theory, Method, and Creativity. 21st ed.
Petrópolis, RJ: Vozes, 2002. Available at:
<https://wp.ufpel.edu.br/franciscovargas/files/2012/11/p esquisa-social.pdf>. Accessed
on: June 14, 2022.

       . To Learn Mathematics. 3rd ed. São Paulo: Autores Associados, 2010.

NACARATO, Adair Mendes. I work first with concrete examples. Journal of
Mathematics Education, vol. 9, no. 9-10, pp. 1-6, 2005.


PASSOS, C. L. B. Teaching Resources in the Training of Mathematics Teachers. In:
VII São Paulo Meeting on Mathematics Education: Mathematics in School: Content and
Contexts, 2004, São Paulo. Proceedings of the VII São Paulo Meeting on
Mathematics Education: Mathematics in School: Content and Contexts. São Paulo:
SBEM/SP, 2004. pp. 1–11. Available at:
<http://docplayer.com.br/66368436-Recursos-didaticos-na-formacao-de-professores-
de-matematica-carmen-lucia-brancaglion-passos-ufscar-dme.html>. Accessed on: May
20, 2022.

PEREIRA, J. L. R. Analysis of textbooks: Comparing Algebra with a focus on
quadratic equations in three 9th-grade mathematics textbooks. 2017. 35f. Thesis
(Master’s Degree in Specialization for Mathematics Teachers) – Federal University of
Minas Gerais, Belo Horizonte, 2017. Available at: <



                                                                                       99

https://repositorio.ufmg.br/bitstream/1843/BUOS-U2J28/1/monografia_joaori bas.pdf>.
Accessed on: July 9, 2022.

PRZYBYVIZ, F. et al. A proposal for teaching quadratic equations using different
teaching resources. Paraná Conference on Technology in Mathematics Education -
EPTEM; Apucarana - PR, November 22–24, 2018. Available at: < https://www.research
gate.net/publication/329360810_A_PROPOSAL_FOR_TEACHING_QUADRATIC_EQU
ATIONS_USING_DIFFERENT_TEACHING_RESOURCES
_DIDACTIC_RESOURCES>. Accessed on: June 28, 2022.

SILVA, S. M. Students’ difficulties in learning quadratic equations with one
unknown. 2017. Final Course Project (Bachelor’s Degree in Mathematics) – Federal
University of Paraíba, Rio Tinto, 2017. Available at:
<https://repositorio.ufpb.br/jspui/bitstream/1234567 89/3242/1/SMS13062017.pdf>.
Accessed on: May 12, 2022.

SOARES, Thamires Silva; LEAL, Deuseliane Patrícia Oliveira Leal; SERRA, Yara
Letícia Pereira; BARBOSA, Mauro Guterres. SOLVING QUADRATIC EQUATIONS
USING THE GOLDEN MATERIAL. REAMEC - Amazonian Network for Science and
Mathematics Education, Cuiabá, vol. 10, no. 3, p. e22072, 2022. DOI:
10.26571/reamec.v10i3.14243. Available
at: https://periodicoscientificos.ufmt.br/ojs/index.php/reamec/article/view/14243
. Accessed on: Nov. 12, 2025.

THIOLLENT, M. Action Research in Organizations. São Paulo: Atlas, 1997.
Available at: <https://posgraduacao.faccat.br/moodle/pluginfile.php/1725/
mod_resource/content/0/09pesquisa_acao_2009_1.pdf>. Accessed on: Feb. 3, 2023.




                                                                                  100

CHAPTER 6
 PERSONAS: THEORY AND PRACTICE IN
 TEACHING ACTION


Rita de Cássia Spréa
Master's Degree in Child and Adolescent Health
Universidade Federal do Paraná (UFPR)
E-mail: ritaspreapsicologia@gmail.com


ABSTRACT: The "Personas Methodology" was developed as an active and agile
strategy to respond to changes in teaching and learning and the new demands
of the edu-cational environment, characterized by the coexistence of digital and
analog spaces. The objective was to improve the academic and clinical
performance of Psychology students, in addition to developing essential soft skills
for profes-sional practice. The methodology was applied in the course "Clinical
Practice: Behavioral and Cognitive Approaches" in the 7th semester at Tuiuti
University of Paraná, using the Flipped Classroom, clinical simulations inspired
by the OSCE model, and the development of treatment plans based on
"personas" constructed based on scientific literature and clinical cases. The
evaluation pro-cess included formal exams, guided studies, and the production
of digital mate-rials for scientific dissemination. The results initially revealed
student resistance, attributed to the difficulty adapting to active methodologies,
but over the semes-ter, improved scores, increased autonomy, development of
critical skills, negotia-tion skills, and crisis management. It was also observed that
night classes, de-spite the workload, achieved high performance. The conclusion
is that the "Per-sonas Methodology" proved effective, contributing to the
comprehensive devel-opment of students and can be replicated in other
disciplines and courses, pro-vided it is accompanied by flexible teaching and
dialogue with students.

KEYWORDS: active methodologies, agile methodologies, personas, teaching
and learning.

RESUMO: A “Metodologia Personas” foi desenvolvida como estratégia ativa e
ágil para responder às transformações no ensino-aprendizagem e às novas
demandas do ambiente educacional, caracterizado pela convivência entre
espaços digitais e analógicos. O objetivo foi aprimorar o desempenho acadêmico
e clínico de estudantes de Psicologia, além de desenvolver soft skills essenciais
para a prá-tica profissional. A metodologia foi aplicada na disciplina “Prática
Clínica: Abor-dagens Comportamentais e Cognitivas”, no 7º período da
Universidade Tuiuti do Paraná, utilizando a Sala de Aula Invertida, simulações
clínicas inspiradas no modelo OSCE e elaboração de planos de tratamento a
partir de “personas” construídas com base em literatura científica e casos
clínicos. O processo avali-ativo incluiu provas formais, estudos dirigidos e
produção de materiais digitais para divulgação científica. Os resultados


                                                                                  101

evidenciaram inicialmente resistência dos alunos, atribuída à dificuldade de
adaptação às metodologias ativas, mas ao longo do semestre verificou-se
melhora nos escores, maior autonomia, desen-volvimento de competências
críticas, capacidade de negociação e gerenciamen-to de crises. Observou-se
ainda que turmas noturnas, mesmo com a sobrecarga do trabalho, obtiveram
desempenho elevado. Conclui-se que a “Metodologia Personas” mostrou-se
eficaz, contribuindo para a formação integral dos alunos e podendo ser replicada
em outras disciplinas e cursos, desde que acompa-nhada de flexibilidade
docente e diálogo com os discentes.

PALAVRAS-CHAVE: metodologias ativas, metodologias ágeis, personas.
ensino-aprendizagem.




                                                                            102

1. INTRODUCTION


       In recent decades, social, cultural, and technological changes have brought
about profound transformations in the way individuals relate to knowledge and
construct understanding. The educational environment, situated within this context,
is also impacted by contemporary society, characterized by the coexistence of digital
and analog spaces, instant communication, and unrestricted access to information
(VALENTE; ALMEIDA; GERALDINI, 2017). This reality demands new pedagogical
approaches from higher education institutions, since, according to the Brazilian
Association of Distance Education, “it is urgent and necessary that the paradigms
underpinning pedagogical practice adapt to the new student and the new reality in
which we live” (ABED, 2016, p. 9).
       However, teaching practice in undergraduate programs, particularly in
Psychology, still relies heavily on traditional methodologies, which are often
insufficient to prepare students for the complexities of clinical practice. This
scenario highlights the following research question: how can active and agile
methodologies contribute to the development of the technical and socio-
emotional competencies necessary for clinical training in Psychology?
       The rationale for this investigation is grounded in the need to innovate the
teaching-learning process, fostering autonomy, critical thinking, and the
development of soft skills—such as assertive communication, decision-making
under pressure, frustration tolerance, and crisis management—which are
indispensable competencies for future psychologists. In this sense, the creation
of the “Personas Methodology” seeks to address gaps observed in previous
semesters, proposing a mechanism to bridge the gap between theory and clinical
practice through simulation, case studies, and active methodologies.
       Thus, this study aims to: Describe the creation, implementation, and
application of the Personas Methodology in the course “Clinical Practice:
Behavioral and Cognitive Approaches” in the Psychology program at Tuiuti
University of Paraná; To analyze the impact of the methodology on the
development of technical skills (diagnosis, hypothesis formulation, clinical
management) and socio-emotional skills (soft skills); To evaluate the results
obtained in the “ ” course in terms of academic performance and student
engagement, verifying its effectiveness for the teaching-learning process; and


                                                                                 103

discuss the possibility of replicating the methodology in other disciplines and
undergraduate programs.


2. THEORETICAL FRAMEWORK


       Active methodologies, often grounded in Piaget’s constructivism and
Vygotsky’s sociocultural perspective, have been identified as promising
approaches to making learning more meaningful and responsive to students’
needs (VALENTE; ALMEIDA; GERALDINI, 2017). Authors such as Freire (1996)
emphasize the importance of problematizing and dialogic education, as opposed
to the banking model of teaching, highlighting that knowledge must be
constructed through interaction and not unilaterally imparted by the teacher. In
this field, there is consensus on the relevance of student-centeredness in the
learning process. However, the literature also points to challenges: student
resistance, teacher overload in planning, and the institutional difficulty of breaking
with traditional paradigms (SOARES; FERRAZ, 2007).
       Agile methodologies, in turn, although originating in the technology sector,
have been progressively explored in higher education, particularly in health
education. They promote values such as simplicity, flexibility, assertive
communication, and continuous feedback (ASFORA, 2009). The international
literature reinforces that these principles are useful for preparing professionals in
environments of uncertainty and constant change, favoring adaptive learning.
However, gaps still exist regarding the systematization of hybrid models that
integrate agile and active methodologies in a cohesive and replicable manner in
clinical contexts, especially in Psychology.
       In psychology education, the literature highlights efforts to bridge theory
and practice through clinical simulations, case studies, and flipped classroom
methodologies (MEDEIROS et al., 2013; ANDRADE; MADEIRA; AIRES, 2013).
Such strategies have proven effective in fostering technical skills and developing
clinical reasoning. However, there are contradictions between the recognition of
their importance and the concrete difficulty of implementing them on a large scale,
due to factors such as infrastructure, reduced course loads, and a shortage of
faculty members trained to conduct these approaches.



                                                                                  104

          A critical analysis of the literature reveals that, although there is consensus
on the need for pedagogical innovation, there are still gaps in empirical studies
that systematically evaluate the impacts of integrating active and agile
methodologies into clinical training in Psychology. Research is predominantly
conducted in the fields of Medicine and Nursing, but there is a smaller number of
studies applied to the teaching of Psychology. Furthermore, it is observed that
the discussion regarding the development of soft skills—such as communication,
negotiation, decision-making under pressure, and frustration tolerance—is still in
its infancy in studies on mental health training, despite these being crucial
competencies for professional practice.
          Thus, this study is part of an effort to fill these gaps by proposing and
evaluating the “Personas Methodology” as a pedagogical model that combines
principles of active and agile methodologies, applied specifically to clinical
training in Psychology. In doing so, it seeks to contribute not only to the literature
on educational innovation but also to teaching practice, offering a replicable
model that engages with the contemporary reality of higher education and the
demands of the professional market.


                                      Table 1. Lesson Plan
Class     Topic                                                         Chapter     Persona

1         Emotional Disorders: A Unified Transdiagnostic Protocol       6              José
2         Post-Traumatic Stress Disorders                               2              Tom
3         Obsessive-Compulsive Disorder                                 4              Julia
4         Cognitive Therapy for Depression                              7             Denise
5         Bipolar Disorder                                              11            Débora
6         Eating Disorders: A Transdiagnostic Protocol                  17            Márcia
7         Alcohol and Drug Use Disorders                            13 and 14         William
                                Source: compiled by the author


                     Table 2. Mean scores obtained in the assessment stages
Class     AV1 Mean               Average ED1             AV2 Average            Average ED2

    7MA      8.33                            9.51                            9.63       9.82
    7NA       8.41                          9.56                             9.36        9.7
                                 Source: produced by the author




                                                                                          105

3. METHODOLOGY


      This study is characterized as applied research of a qualitative and quan-
titative nature, as it sought both to understand the process of implementing the
proposed methodology and to evaluate its measurable impacts on students’ ac-
ademic performance. The design adopted was that of a pedagogical intervention
study, conducted in the context of higher education in Psychology.
      The sample consisted of students regularly enrolled in the course “Clinical
Practice: Behavioral and Cognitive Approaches,” offered in the 7th semester of
the Psychology program at Tuiuti University of Paraná. Two classes participated,
totaling approximately 60 students, with diverse profiles in terms of age, profes-
sional experience, and study shifts (day and night). Volunteers from advanced
semesters of the program also collaborated, having been previously trained to
act as simulated patients during the assessments.
      Data collection was conducted using various instruments and procedures.
First, the Flipped Classroom methodology was employed, in which students had
prior access to selected chapters from the book Clinical Manual of Psychological
Disorders: Step-by-Step Treatment (2016). In the classroom, each topic was op-
erationalized using a “clinical persona,” constructed based on demographic and
behavioral characteristics, to simulate patients with specific needs.
      Formal assessment took place at two bimonthly intervals (AV1 and AV2),
inspired by the OSCE (Objective Structured Clinical Examination) model, which
consists of structured clinical simulation stations. Trained volunteers portrayed
cases of Post-Traumatic Stress Disorder and Obsessive-Compulsive Disorder in
the first two-month period, and different diagnoses drawn from the book Clinical
Cases of the DSM-5 (2015) in the second. Students completed structured as-
sessment forms ( ) containing diagnostic items, identification of core beliefs and
cognitive distortions, choice of treatment protocol, and selection of techniques.
Quantitative analysis was performed using the scores assigned on the forms,
which were recorded and compared with scores obtained in previous semesters
when the methodology was not used.
      In addition to formal assessments, the Directed Studies (ED1 and ED2)
constituted another source of data. In the first two months, students presented
treatment plans developed based on the personas studied in class. In the second,


                                                                              106

they produced scientific outreach materials in digital formats (videos, podcasts,
cards, or blog posts), based on scientific articles, using language accessible to
the general public. These products were analyzed for clarity, scientific accuracy,
and innovation, providing qualitative evidence of the methodology’s impact.
       The analyses were conducted on two levels. Quantitatively, assessment
scores were compared across classes and shifts, with attention to differences in
performance. Qualitatively, we observed student engagement, initial adaptation
difficulties, reports of resistance, and, subsequently, progress in the development
of technical and socio-emotional competencies, particularly soft skills such as
communication, decision-making, and frustration tolerance.
       Regarding ethical considerations, the research followed the principles es-
tablished by Resolution No. 510/2016 of the National Health Council, which reg-
ulates studies in the Humanities and Social Sciences. All participants were in-
formed about the objectives of the pedagogical project, and their participation
was voluntary, with no academic repercussions for those who chose not to col-
laborate in specific activities. The cases used for simulation were adapted from
public or literary materials, without identifying real patients, thereby safeguarding
confidentiality and professional ethics.
       Finally, some limitations of the study are acknowledged. The intervention
took place in only one course, which limits the generalizability of the results. Fur-
thermore, the observation period was limited to one academic semester, making
it impossible to assess long-term effects. Despite these limitations, the method-
ology was described in detail, ensuring the possibility of replication in other edu-
cational contexts and allowing for the expansion of evidence regarding the effec-
tiveness of the integration of active and agile methodologies in psychology edu-
cation.


4. RESULTS AND DISCUSSION


       The implementation of the Personas Methodology yielded positive results
in both students’ academic performance and the development of socio-emotional
skills. Regarding formal assessments, a significant improvement in scores was
observed    compared     to   previous     semesters   in   which   only   traditional
methodologies were used. In particular, in the evening classes, although the


                                                                                  107

literature indicates that students in this shift tend to perform less well due to work
overload and sleep deprivation (ARAÚJO; ALMONDES, 2012), the results
revealed superior performance, suggesting that the methodological approach
fostered motivation and engagement, even under adverse conditions.
       In the first two months, students demonstrated greater difficulty adapting
to the OSCE-inspired assessment model, especially regarding the reduced
response time and the requirement for synthesis in simulated situations. This
initial resistance was accompanied by manifestations of anxiety and insecurity,
as described by Soares and Ferraz (2007) when addressing the defense
mechanisms mobilized in contexts of pedagogical change. However, over the
course of the semester, a progressive reduction in these barriers was observed,
with increased autonomy, greater clarity in diagnostic formulation, and
confidence in proposing therapeutic protocols.
       The Directed Studies (DS1 and DS2) also revealed significant gains. In
the first, the treatment plans showed progress in the integration of theory and
clinical practice, demonstrating the ability to integrate prior knowledge with the
demands presented by the personas. In the second, the production of scientific
outreach materials—videos, podcasts, cards, and texts—indicated not only
conceptual mastery but also creativity and the ability to translate academic
language for the lay public, an aspect still largely unexplored in traditional
psychology education. This practice aligns with the literature on university
extension and scientific communication, which advocates for bringing academia
closer to society as a means of bridging the gap between technical knowledge
and social demands (FREIRE, 1996).
       The qualitative analysis showed that, in addition to cognitive and technical
gains, there was development of soft skills, such as assertive communication,
teamwork, frustration tolerance, and decision-making under pressure. These
results align with research indicating the effectiveness of clinical simulation-
based learning in fostering complex competencies among health science
students (MEDEIROS et al., 2013; ANDRADE; MADEIRA; AIRES, 2013). At the
same time, the need to adjust the pace of implementation—moving from one case
per class to one case every two or three classes—highlighted the challenge of
balancing pedagogical innovation with students’ capacity for absorption, pointing



                                                                                  108

to a gap in the literature regarding the optimal dosage of simulation workload in
psychology programs.
       In terms of limitations, it should be noted that the intervention was
conducted in only one course and over a limited period (one semester), restricting
the generalizability of the findings. Furthermore, the absence of a formal control
group precludes comparison under equivalent conditions, although historical data
from previous classes served as a reference point. Despite these limitations, the
results obtained offer relevant contributions to teaching practice, demonstrating
that the integration of active and agile methodologies can enhance the teaching-
learning process in Psychology, particularly in the development of clinical and
socio-emotional competencies.
       The implications of this study reinforce the need for greater institutional
investment in innovative pedagogical approaches and point to avenues for future
research. Among these, the expansion of the application of the Personas
Methodology to other disciplines within the Psychology program, replication at
different higher education institutions, and the conduct of longitudinal studies
evaluating the medium- and long-term impact on the professional practice of
graduates stand out.


5. CONCLUSION


       The present study aimed to describe the creation, implementation, and
evaluation of the Personas Methodology, applied in the course “Clinical Practice:
Behavioral and Cognitive Approaches” in the Psychology program at Tuiuti
University of Paraná, as well as to analyze its impacts on the development of
students’ technical and socio-emotional competencies. Through the application
of this pedagogical approach, it was possible to observe a significant
improvement in academic performance, greater student engagement, and
progress in the ability to integrate theory and clinical practice.
       The results showed that the use of clinical personas, combined with active
methodologies and agile principles, fostered student autonomy, improved
diagnostic formulation, and strengthened soft skills such as assertive
communication, frustration tolerance, and decision-making under pressure.
Although there was initial resistance on the part of the students, the process


                                                                              109

demonstrated that adapting to innovative methodologies helps overcome barriers
and enhance academic and professional maturity.
       From a practical standpoint, the Personas Methodology proved effective
in bridging the gap between academic training and clinical reality, offering future
psychologists a safe space for experimentation and reflection. From a theoretical
perspective, the study contributes to the debate on the integration of active and
agile methodologies in psychology education, filling existing gaps in the literature.
While acknowledging the limitations regarding the scope of the intervention and
the observation period, the findings reinforce the importance of expanding future
research to explore its replication across different disciplines, institutions, and
educational contexts.
       Thus, it is concluded that the Personas Methodology represents an
innovative and replicable pedagogical strategy, capable of enriching the
teaching-learning process and training professionals who are more critical,
autonomous, and prepared for the challenges of contemporary clinical practice.




                                                                                 110

                                    REFERENCES
ABED, A. L. Z. O desenvolvimento das habilidades socioemocionais como caminho
para a aprendizagem e o sucesso escolar de alunos da educação básica. Construção
psicopedagógica, São Paulo, v. 24, n. 25, p. 8-27, 2016.

ALMEIDA, B. F.; NASCIMENTO, P.; RAMOS, R. S.; FIUSA, D. R. D. Inconsciente
coletivo e o arquétipo da persona: noções introdutórias. Revista Saberes da UNIJIPA,
Ji-Paraná, Ed. 2, 2015.

ANDRADE, A. F. de; MADEIRA, C. A. G.; AIRES, S. F. OSCE virtual: Simulação de
avaliação de casos clínicos. Anais do II Congresso Brasileiro de Informática na
Educação (CBIE), 2013.

ARAÚJO, D. de F.; ALMONDES, K. M. de. Avaliação da sonolência em estudantes
universitários de turnos distintos. Psico-USF, Bragança Paulista, v. 17, n. 2, p. 295-
302, 2012.

ASFORA, D. M. Uma abordagem para priorização de requisitos em ambientes ágeis.
2009. Dissertação (Mestrado em Ciência da Computação) – Universidade Federal de
Pernambuco, Recife, 2009.

FREIRE, P. Pedagogia da autonomia: saberes necessários à prática educativa.
São Paulo: Paz e Terra, 1996.

MEDEIROS, S. B.; PEREIRA, C. D. F. D.; TOURINHO, S. F. V.; FERNANDES, L. G.
G.; SANTOS, V. E. P. Exame clínico estruturado: reflexões sob um olhar da
enfermagem. Cogitare Enfermagem, Natal, v. 19, n. 1, p. 170-173, 2013.

SOARES, A. F.; FERRAZ, S. M. Grupos operativos de aprendizagem nos serviços de
saúde. Escola Anna Nery Revista de Enfermagem, Rio de Janeiro, v. 11, n. 1, p. 52-
57, 2007.

VALENTE, J. A.; ALMEIDA, M. E. B. de; GERALDINI, A. F. S. Metodologias ativas: das
concepções às práticas em distintos níveis de ensino. Revista Diálogo Educacional,
Curitiba, v. 17, n. 52, p. 455-478, abr./jun. 2017.

PRZYBYVIZ, F. et al. A proposal for teaching quadratic equations using different
teaching resources. Paraná Conference on Technology in Mathematics Education -
EPTEM; Apucarana - PR, November 22–24, 2018. Available at: < https://www.research
gate.net/publication/329360810_A_PROPOSAL_FOR_TEACHING_QUADRATIC_EQU
ATIONS_USING_DIFFERENT_TEACHING_RESOURCES
_DIDACTIC_RESOURCES>. Accessed on: June 28, 2022.

SILVA, S. M. Students’ difficulties in learning quadratic equations with one
unknown. 2017. Final Course Project (Bachelor’s Degree in Mathematics) – Federal
University of Paraíba, Rio Tinto, 2017. Available at:
<https://repositorio.ufpb.br/jspui/bitstream/1234567 89/3242/1/SMS13062017.pdf>.
Accessed on: May 12, 2022.

SOARES, Thamires Silva; LEAL, Deuseliane Patrícia Oliveira Leal; SERRA, Yara
Letícia Pereira; BARBOSA, Mauro Guterres. SOLVING QUADRATIC EQUATIONS
USING THE GOLDEN MATERIAL. REAMEC - Amazonian Network for Science and
Mathematics Education, Cuiabá, vol. 10, no. 3, p. e22072, 2022. DOI:
10.26571/reamec.v10i3.14243. Available



                                                                                         111

at: https://periodicoscientificos.ufmt.br/ojs/index.php/reamec/article/view/14243
. Accessed on: Nov. 12, 2025.

THIOLLENT, M. Action Research in Organizations. São Paulo: Atlas, 1997.
Available at: <https://posgraduacao.faccat.br/moodle/pluginfile.php/1725/
mod_resource/content/0/09pesquisa_acao_2009_1.pdf>. Accessed on: Feb. 3, 2023.




                                                                                    112

CHAPTER 7
 STORIES BETWEEN THE LINES OF SCHOOL
 NOTEBOOKS


Eliane Küster
Master of Education
Pontifícia Universidade Católica do Paraná
E-mail: likuster@yahoo.com.br

Alboni Marisa Dudeque Pianovski Vieira
Doctor of Education
Pontifícia Universidade Católica do Paraná
E-mail: alboni@alboni.com


ABSTRACT: The article analyzes the school notebooks of a third age student in
the context of school, social and cultural practices and guidelines, in a Youth and
Adult Education (YLE) class, in the Municipal Education Network of Curitiba, from
2003 to 2004. Considering the school notebooks as research sources and the
EJA as a learning opportunity, we tried to identify its different uses and possible
meanings. This bibliographical, documental and field research was based on the
studies of Chartier (1990), Oliveira (2008), Grinspun (2008), Viñao-Frago (2008)
and Julia (2001). As a result, it was possible to reflect on the school notebooks,
their use and what they represent in the school's daily life, as their own spaces
of expression of the student's individuality.

KEYWORDS: active methodologies, agile methodologies, personas, teaching
and learning.

RESUMO: O artigo analisa os cadernos escolares de uma aluna da terceira
idade no contexto das práticas e pautas escolares, sociais e culturais, em uma
classe de EJA - Educação de Jovens e Adultos, na Rede Municipal de Ensino de
Curitiba, no período de 2003 a 2004. Considerando os cadernos escolares como
fontes de pesquisa e a EJA como oportunidade de aprendizagem, procurou-se
identificar seus diferentes usos e possíveis significados. A pesquisa, de caráter
bibliográfico, documental e de campo, apoiou-se nos estudos de Chartier (1990),
Oliveira (2008), Grinspun (2008), Viñao-Frago (2008) e Julia (2001). Como
resultado, foi possível refletir sobre os cadernos escolares, sua utilização e o que
representam no cotidiano da escola, como espaços próprios de expressão da
individualidade da aluna.

PALAVRAS-CHAVE: história cultural, história da educação, EJA - educação de
jovens e adultos, cadernos escolares.




                                                                                113

1. INTRODUCTION


      This article examines school notebooks as documentary sources within
the field of cultural history (CHARTIER, 1990). It is well known that school
notebooks constitute “a significant material artifact of the contemporary school,
the study of which proves to be an excellent source of research” (OLIVEIRA,
2008, p. 129). In this regard, Grinspun (2008) notes that “each notebook bears
the mark of each of us, of our preferences and the way those preferences were
addressed,” adding that “each person put into their [notebook], beyond what was
requested, copied, or created, a unique way of interpreting what existed”
(GRINSPUN, 2008, p. 261).
      Not everything, however, is recorded in the notebooks. Viñao-Frago
(2008) states that the notebooks “remain silent; they say nothing about the oral
or gestural interventions of the teacher and students, about their significance and
the way they occur and manifest themselves, or about the atmosphere or climate
of the classroom” (VIÑAO-FRAGO, 2008, p. 25). Seeking out these interventions
and the environment in which they occurred justifies this study of school
notebooks. As Oliveira (2008) observes in this field, the subjects of the school
are also considered:


                       In the case of school notebooks, the subjects to be examined by the
                       study are, primarily, the students to whom they belonged, but not
                       exclusively. The study offers a glimpse into some of the other school
                       subjects—such as teachers, their practices, and thus their pedagogical
                       affiliations—school content and the methodology in use, the institution’s
                       epistemological and methodological commitments, and even the
                       general rules of current educational policy (OLIVEIRA, 2008, p. 130).


      The general objective of the study was, therefore, to investigate what the
school notebooks of a senior citizen student revealed in the context of school,
social, and cultural practices and norms during the time she attended a class in
the EJA (Youth and Adult Education) program at a school in the Curitiba
Municipal Education Network from 2003 to 2004. The specific objectives were
established as follows: to consider school notebooks as research sources; to
present Adult Basic Education (ABE) as a learning opportunity; and to examine
the school notebooks of an ABE student, exploring their various uses and
possible meanings.


                                                                                            114

       The study made it possible to “employ multiple research strategies”
(RIBEIRO, 2003, p. 287), including literature review, documentary research, and
field research.
       The theoretical framework of this study is rooted in cultural history
(CHARTIER, 1990), with foundational authors including Oliveira (2008), Grinspun
(2008), Viñao-Frago (2008), Razzini (2008), and Julia (2001), among others.
       For the documentary research, printed sources were used, specifically two
school notebooks, materials that, according to Gil (2010, p. 31), are also capable
of “verifying a fact or event” and are considered documentary sources.
       In addition to bibliographic and documentary research, field research was
employed, drawing on oral history procedures—a methodology that “can be used
in research on recent topics, within the scope of the interviewees’ memories,
involving events that occurred over a period of approximately 50 years,” as Vieira
(2015, p. 372) aptly explains.
       Oral history, according to Alberti (2014), “consists of conducting interviews
[...] with individuals who participated in, or witnessed, events and circumstances
of the past and present,” a fact that allows “access to ‘stories within History,’
broadening the possibilities for interpreting the past” (ALBERTI, 2014, p. 155).
       Constantino (2004) clarifies that in addition to “capturing much more than
just some data,” through oral history it is possible to “capture the narrators’
experiences, their traditions, myths, perhaps fictional narratives that lay deep in
memory, as well as the beliefs existing within their group” (CONSTANTINO,
2004, pp. 63–64).
       The study was divided into three chapters: the first presents school
notebooks as research sources for the History of Education; the second
describes Adult Basic Education (ABE) as a learning opportunity for those who
did not complete their studies at the standard age; and the final chapter presents
a analysis of the records of a senior citizen who attended adult education classes.


2. SCHOOL NOTEBOOKS: RESEARCH SOURCES FOR THE HISTORY OF
EDUCATION


       School notebooks, like other materials, have come to be recognized as
significant documentary sources since the advent of cultural history (CHARTIER,


                                                                                115

1990). Grinspun (2008) notes that “research into school notebooks provides an
inexhaustible source of knowledge” (GRINSPUN, 2008, p. 259).
       According to Viñao-Frago (2008), studies conducted on the focus, themes,
and uses of school notebooks have demonstrated that they were used as: a
source for understanding images and social representations, instruments of
written acculturation, vehicles for transmitting values and attitudes, a means of
ideological and political indoctrination, a medium for studying the curriculum and
various school subjects and activities, an educational innovation within the New
School movement, and an instrument of personal and subjective expression for
students.
       Viñao-Frago (2008, p. 18) further highlights that, from the moment school
notebooks began to be considered historical sources, interest also arose in “the
study of their material aspects (format, dimensions, layout of graphic spaces,
etc.), their iconography (interiors and covers, whether printed or created by the
student), and their various uses,” with the aim of “developing a typology that
organizes and classifies the various types of notebooks,” as well as
understanding the possibilities and limitations that this study allows.
       The study of school notebooks can contribute to the contextualization of
school practices, “here understood as part of what has been historically defined
over the last decade as school culture” (RAZZINI, 2008, p. 92), which, according
to Julia (2001), is “a set of norms that define knowledge to be taught and
behaviors to be instilled, and a set of practices that enable the transmission of
this knowledge and the incorporation of this knowledge” (JULIA, 2001, p. 10).
       In light of this understanding, Viñao-Frago (2008) considers the notebook
as a product of school culture, explaining that:


                      Whether one considers the history of childhood, written culture, or
                      education, one must never lose sight of the fact that, ultimately, the
                      notebook is a product of school culture—of a specific way of organizing
                      classroom work, of teaching and learning, and of introducing students
                      to the world of academic knowledge and to the rhythms, rules, and
                      norms of school life.
                      As a school product, the notebook reflects the specific culture of the
                      grade level, stage, or educational cycle in which it is used (VIÑAO-
                      FRAGO, 2008, p. 22).


       Grinspun (2008) explains that “the notebook involves visible and invisible
issues, ideas, and content that go beyond what we see and touch,” that is, school


                                                                                         116

notebooks have meanings that go beyond what is written in them, “allowing us to
reflect on learning processes, the curriculum, memories, life stories, records of
taught and assessed content, and communication between parents and
guardians” (GRINSPUN, 2008, p. 264). Thus, studies on school notebooks “make
it possible to examine educational trajectories, learning records, corrections, and
even the student’s interest in lived learning” (GRINSPUN, 2008, p. 259).
      Furthermore, according to Viñao-Frago (2008), “school notebooks should
be situated as a historical source within the context of the school, social, and
cultural practices and norms of their time; their use must be supplemented and
combined with other historical sources” (VIÑAO-FRAGO, 2008, p. 27). In this
sense, Grinspun (2008) adds that the richness of the notebook “transcends the
teaching-learning process to become part of both the training of the
teacher/educator and the expectations and interests of the students”
(GRINSPUN, 2008, p. 259).
      For Grinspun (2008, pp. 259–260), the preserved notebooks also record
the memory of an era, hold incredible stories of a past that will never return, and
allow us to glimpse the rhythms of daily life at that time across different periods,
emphasizing that:


                      If we consider that the notebook is the living history of a particular
                      educational experience, of a particular school or teacher, and if we are
                      interested in understanding how this education takes place, we are
                      faced with a new life lesson. It is enough to observe what the pages say
                      or do not say, the blank pages found on some pages, the retained
                      silences that no writing will ever be able to convey (GRINSPUN, 2008,
                      p. 263).


      Faced with the inexhaustible source of knowledge that research on
Regarding the insights provided by school notebooks, Grinspun (2008) states:
“The more I delve into them, the more I discover about who taught and who
learned” (GRINSPUN, 2008, p. 259). This statement is corroborated by Viñao-
Frago (2008), who notes that there is no object, phenomenon, event, or subject
that, when viewed from different perspectives, does not reveal previously
unnoticed aspects. “Everything depends, therefore, on the position adopted by
the observer. The place from which one looks conditions not only what is seen,
but also how what is seen is perceived” (VIÑAO-FRAGO, 2008, p. 15).




                                                                                          117

      For these reasons, this study on school notebooks, as historical sources
in the context of teaching and learning practices, as well as in the context of
academic, social, and cultural frameworks, was conducted in conjunction with
other historical sources, including information derived from oral history.


3. ADULT BASIC EDUCATION (ABE): AN OPPORTUNITY FOR LEARNING


      With the enactment of the Law on Guidelines and Foundations of National
Education (Law No. 9,394/96), Youth and Adult Education (EJA) came to be
considered a distinct form of Basic Education, “intended for those who did not
have access to or were unable to continue their studies in elementary and
secondary school at the appropriate age” (BRAZIL, 1996, p. 18). In Article 37,
      § 1, Law No. 9,394/96 establishes that:


                      § 1 Educational systems shall provide, free of charge, appropriate
                      educational opportunities to young people and adults who were unable
                      to pursue their studies at the regular age, taking into account the
                      characteristics of the student body, their interests, and their living and
                      working conditions, through courses and examinations (BRAZIL, 1996,
                      p. 18).


      As a result of these legal provisions, on May 10, 2000, the National
Curriculum Guidelines for Youth and Adult Education, developed by the National
Education Council, were enacted, and on January 9, 2001, the Federal
Government included EJA in the National Education Plan (BRAZIL, 2001).
      This form of education is characterized by the diversity of its learners’
profiles (adolescents, young people, adults, and the elderly), “in terms of age,
current level of schooling, socioeconomic status, and “cultural background,
occupations, and the motivation that drives them to seek out school” (PARANÁ,
2006, p. 27).
      Understanding the profile of the EJA learner requires:


                      [...] knowing their history, culture, and customs, understanding them as
                      individuals with diverse life experiences who, at some point, left school
                      due to social, economic, political, and/or cultural factors. Among these
                      factors, the following stand out: early entry into the workforce, school
                      dropout, or grade repetition (PARANÁ, 2006, p. 29).




                                                                                            118

       EJA, therefore, “must include specific pedagogical actions that take into
account the profile of young, adult, and elderly learners who did not receive
schooling or did not continue their studies due to factors often beyond their
control” (PARANÁ, 2006, p. 30).
       Thus, one of the groups deserving special attention in the EJA educational
process is the elderly, who have a specific timeline in the learning process: “they
seek school to develop or expand their knowledge, as well as to engage in other
opportunities for social interaction and personal fulfillment” (PARANÁ, 2006, p.
30). The adolescents, young people, adults, and older adults who seek out EJA
bring with them a wealth of knowledge from other social contexts, “life
experiences that are significant and must be considered in the development of
the school curriculum, which employs a distinct methodology because it
       exhibits characteristics different from those of regular education”
(PARANÁ, 2006, p. 30).
       According to the Curriculum Guidelines for Youth and Adult Education in
the State of Paraná (2006), EJA, as an educational modality, has as its aims and
objectives “a commitment to human development and access to general culture,
so that learners enhance their critical awareness and adopt ethical attitudes and
political commitment for the development of their intellectual autonomy”
(PARANÁ, 2006, p. 27).
       EJA has the responsibility to provide the necessary support so that its
students become active, critical, creative, and democratic individuals, within a
framework that encompasses different cultures, forms of knowledge, and
specificities to be prioritized. It also plays a fundamental role in the socialization
of individuals, “incorporating elements and values that lead them toward
emancipation and the affirmation of their identity “cultural” (PARANÁ, 2006, p.
29).
       According to the Curriculum Guidelines for Youth and Adult Education in
the State of Paraná (2006):


                      Youth and Adult Education (EJA) must have a flexible structure and be
                      capable of incorporating innovations that offer meaningful content.
                      From this perspective, there is a differentiated learning timeline rather
                      than a single timeline for everyone. The limits and possibilities of each
                      learner must be respected; therefore, it is a challenge [...] to present




                                                                                           119

                      viable proposals so that the learner’s access, retention, and success in
                      studies are ensured (PARANÁ, 2006, p. 28).


       It is necessary to foster the involvement of EJA students in school
practices, with access to knowledge in its various forms. “Such practices must be
closely aligned with their needs, expectations, and life trajectories, and must
serve as an incentive for them to continue their studies,” so that, in this way, they
become active participants in the construction of knowledge “through an
understanding of the processes of work, creation, production, and culture”
(PARANÁ, 2006, p. 28).
       The Curriculum Guidelines (2006) also emphasize issues related to
students attending EJA and their relationship with time, content, perspectives,
and life plans:


                      The time a student spends in EJA has its own intrinsic and significant
                      value; therefore, the school must move beyond encyclopedic teaching,
                      which focuses more on the quantity of information than on the
                      qualitative relationship with knowledge. As for the specific content of
                      each subject, it should be grounded in reality, taking into account its
                      socio-historical dimension, linked to the world of work, science, new
                      technologies, among others.
                      With regard to students’ perspectives and their life plans, EJA can help
                      them expand their knowledge critically, enabling reflection through the
                      pursuit of rights to improve their quality of life (PARANÁ, 2006, p. 29).


       Each student who seeks out EJA “brings with them a lived social and
school experience, which implies the need to reorganize the curriculum, school
schedules, and spaces in pursuit of their emancipation,” and [...] “it can be said
that learners have lived and continue to live through individual and collective
times, which encompass the stages of childhood, youth, and adulthood within the
context of multiple social relationships.” It is also worth noting that “the
organization of school times and spaces influences the formation of learners,
whether “to shape or to generate other practices of meaning” (PARANÁ, 2006, p.
33).
       Many students, upon entering adult education, bring with them internalized
models of school experiences or other experiences. “In these models, the idea of
a traditional school predominates, where the educator plays the role of the holder
of knowledge and the learner that of a passive recipient of that knowledge”; for




                                                                                           120

this reason, “many assume that the school is responsible for their learning”
(PARANÁ, 2006, p. 30).
      The role of the EJA educator stands out during the educational process,
stimulating students’ intellectual autonomy so that they may continue their
studies. “It is the educator’s role to encourage the constant pursuit of knowledge
produced by humanity, found in other sources of study or research,” as well as to
stimulate individual study, which is necessary “when it comes to managing the
student’s time spent at school and is important in building autonomy” (PARANÁ,
2006, p. 29).
      According to the Curriculum Guidelines (2006), this intellectual autonomy
must be built so that students become active participants in the educational
process:


                      Human emancipation will result from the development of this autonomy
                      achieved through school education. The exercise of democratic
                      citizenship by EJA students will reflect a cognitive, critical, and
                      emancipatory process, based on values such as mutual respect,
                      solidarity, and justice (PARANÁ, 2006, p. 29).


      The challenge of developing processes of human formation, linked to
socio-historical contexts, in order to reverse exclusion and guarantee learners
access, retention, and success at the start or upon their return to basic schooling,
thus forms the foundation of EJA’s pedagogical work.


4. SCHOOL NOTEBOOKS: A STUDENT’S RECORDS IN ADULT BASIC
EDUCATION (ABE)


      Forgotten for some time were two school notebooks that belonged to an
elderly woman and were used during 2003 and 2004, when she attended an adult
education class at a school in the Curitiba/PR Municipal School System. These
school supplies—or rather, these historical artifacts—were found at the end of
2016, at the back of an old wooden bookshelf, among other documents.
      Upon finding these school notebooks, somewhat by chance, during a
renovation of the property where this woman lives, the desire arose to continue
preserving them, initially with the sole intention of caring for the physical items,
without expecting that one day they might be useful for any reason, as well as for


                                                                                      121

the significance they held, the sentimental value, and the memories they brought
and represented for her—who today is still an independent and hardworking
woman, an active homemaker, seventy-five years old, full of life, and who strives
every day to achieve her goals.
      After observing these materials a few times, it became clear how much
historical data a more detailed analysis of them could provide. Given this
situation, an interest arose in conducting this research, with the aim of capturing
more than just some printed data, but rather attempting to capture the
significance of these notebooks in this woman’s life story. To this end, the oral
history methodology was employed, through interviews with the author of the
notebooks herself, with due ethical care, from the “invitation and assignment of
rights regarding the testimony for use of the data in the research” (VIEIRA, 2015,
p. 372), to transcription and feedback of the data to the interviewee.
      During the interviews, the woman reported that she had a very humble
childhood and was unable to pursue her studies at the typical age. From a very
young age, she had already contributed to the household’s livelihood, helping her
parents with farmwork and at sawmills in the municipality of Faxinal, in northern
Paraná, and thus had not had the opportunity to attend school regularly.
      For a time, around the age of seven or eight, she had studied in a multi-
grade classroom at a rural school located on the grounds of a sawmill. The
conditions for studying at that time, she explained, were very precarious, as her
home was on a farm far from the school. According to the interviewee, she and
her younger sister had to walk about three kilometers to reach the rural school,
without proper shoes, poorly dressed, unaccompanied by their guardians, and
exposed to all kinds of dangers along the way (animal attacks, encounters with
herds of cattle, bad weather, accidents, etc.). Sometimes, she added, hunger and
the physical exhaustion caused by that long journey also took their toll on the two
girls, so they had to stop along the way to rest and eat the snacks they prepared
at home and stored in makeshift lunchboxes, which were old margarine tins.
      Even while facing such difficulties in getting to school, the interviewee
fondly recalled that time, noting that she loved studying and felt proud when her
teacher asked her to help her classmates with their work or to look after the
classroom.



                                                                               122

       Despite her efforts to attend school, even if only for a short period during
her childhood, the woman did not possess a diploma, certificate, transcript, or
any other document proving her education, which she regretted.
       In 2003, however, a group of elderly women living in the Alto Boqueirão
neighborhood of Curitiba, Paraná—whose life stories were similar to the
interviewee’s—learned about an Adult Education (EJA) course being offered at
one of the schools in the Municipal Education Network. They decided to form a
group to resume their studies and invited her to join them. Right at the beginning,
she recounted, she had been a little scared, reluctant to accept the invitation, as
she didn’t believe she was capable of going back to school. After much
encouragement from family and friends, however, she decided to take on the
challenge.
       The course was held at a school near her home. The group of women met
every night, from 7:00 p.m. to 10:00 p.m., and one classmate encouraged the
other. They attended EJA classes during 2003 and 2004, with a common goal: to
obtain the long-awaited diploma for grades 1 through 4.
       During the analysis of the two school notebooks used by the interviewee,
it was possible to reflect on the use of these school materials as a source for
research, focused on the study of daily school life and what exists within it that
differs from what is expected and standardized. By delving into her notebooks,
traces of her uniqueness were discovered, which contributed to a reflection on
how she expressed knowledge, feelings, and uncertainties. Her relationships with
elements of effective pedagogical work regarding school content and official
school activities, as well as social roles, among other things, were observed.
       These two school notebooks were also analyzed in terms of their physical
characteristics: they are of the university-style type, intended for a single subject,
without dividers, spiral-bound; both have the same vertical format, measuring 203
x 280 cm, with 96 sheets each, and simple covers illustrated with images of young
athletes. The first notebook has a thin cardboard cover, while the second
notebook has a hardcover made of thicker cardboard. According to the
interviewee, they were purchased randomly, without any consideration of the
listed characteristics, simply because the notebooks were basic items she
needed to attend classes. The notebook covers bore no identification with the
student’s name or the class to which she belonged.


                                                                                  123

       The records revealed routine use of ballpoint pens, alternating between
blue and black ink, as well as pencils and erasers. The use of colored pencils,
crayons, and colored pens was observed only very sporadically. The use of a red
ballpoint pen was exclusive to the teacher, during individual corrections and to
record some praise at the end of the exercises, such as: “Congratulations! Very
good!”, which leads one to believe that this practice was likely just a result of rules
established in the classroom.
       Written in clear handwriting, her records showed almost no erasures,
demonstrating that they were completed with care. It was evident that the student
was concerned about not making mistakes and about organization, neatness,
attention to detail, efficient use of space, and discipline in the use of materials,
likely following aesthetic standards that had been imposed on her in the past. All
the notes recorded by the interviewee in her notebooks were dedicated
exclusively to the content covered in class.
       The student demonstrated seriousness in her studies and a concern to do
everything that was requested. Texts, activities, prompts, and exercises were
recorded in full, completed, and corrected, with almost no embellishments or
other details, always in a legible, clear, and organized manner.
       The marked presence of interdisciplinarity in the development of the
lessons is evident. The content was taught within projects. Based on themes such
as: Heart-shaped cake; The history of money; Papyrus; Folklore; Historical
sources; Work in Brazil; Learning about the history of coffee; Building a healthy
environment; Christmas, its meaning and symbols; among others, the teacher
presented the projects by linking them to the content of the subjects Portuguese,
Mathematics, History, Geography, Science, and Art, drawing on information that
was meaningful to her students, which made sense and related to their life
experiences.
       During the development of the “Heart-Shaped Cake” project, for example,
it is noted that the teacher presented the project proposal based on emotional
connection and leveraging the bonds of friendship within that group to primarily
stimulate the production and interpretation of texts, while also incorporating
research and analysis of other cake recipes, accentuation, fractions, the
measurement system, problem-solving situations, healthy eating, modes of
production, etc.


                                                                                   124

        With the “History of Money” project, the teacher introduced topics such as:
measures of value, the monetary system, Brazilian currency, decimal numbers,
ascending and descending order, writing numbers in words, text production and
interpretation,    problem-solving        situations    involving     addition,    subtraction,
multiplication, and division, fractions, prices, and goods, drawing connections
between the types of currency that had served as monetary standards in Brazil
and which of these the students in that class had encountered.
        In the project “Work in Brazil,” the teacher presented the types or forms of
labor: slave labor, servile labor, and wage labor, also bringing to the discussion
issues regarding indigenous labor, immigrant labor, women’s labor, child labor,
compensation, workers’ hours, significant changes in labor relations in Brazil,
labor laws, workers’ rights and duties, rural workers’ organizations, and the
relationship between educational attainment and the labor market, using
problem-solving scenarios, drawing, painting, captions, text production and
interpretation, graph interpretation and creation, percentages, etc. The photos
below are examples illustrating some of the connections between the “Work in
Brazil” project and the interviewee’s life experiences:


   Figure 1: The description of the activity proposed in the project “Work in Brazil” outlines the
research objective: “To determine, through job advertisements, what the labor market’s current
  requirements are in terms of educational attainment” and the procedure used: “We collected
100 job advertisements from the newspaper and classified the requirements sought by the labor
 market, as shown in the chart below: High school diploma; middle school diploma; incomplete
                            middle school education” (SILVA, 2003).




                                      Source: The authors




                                                                                              125

Figure 2: Chart representing the level of education required by the labor market, legends: dark
blue: incomplete elementary school; red: completed elementary school; light blue: high school;
  green: higher education; brown: no education required (Research results from the “Work in
                                Brazil” project) (SILVA, 2003).




                                     Source: The authors

Figure 3: Text production: Conclusion regarding the graph on the level of education required by
            the labor market (Results of the “Work in Brazil” project) (SILVA, 2003).




                                     Source: The authors


       One of the notebooks analyzed provides some insight into how the teacher
encouraged interactive processes among her students, how interpersonal
relationships developed, and how these interactions took place.
       It was possible to perceive the student’s difficulty—or perhaps simply her
insecurity—in producing texts. Records regarding this are minimal, and some of


                                                                                            126

the fictional characters were given the names of family members or classmates,
with almost no connection to reality.
       It became evident that half of one of the notebooks was designated for
“remedial work,” specifically set aside for the subject of Mathematics. The
multiplication table featured prominently on the back cover; the activities and
exercises were not linked to interdisciplinary projects, and various exercises were
recorded, completed, and corrected in a more mechanical manner.
       Also noteworthy was the presence of a large section with blank pages,
resulting from a period when the student had not attended classes because her
daughter was hospitalized with a serious health issue.
       During the study, therefore, it was possible to gain a deeper understanding
of this student’s academic behavior, her relationship with the school, and with the
curriculum. It was also possible to observe some of her unique traits as she
interacted with these materials, which served as spaces for expressing her
individuality and some of her criteria and values.


5. CONCLUDING REMARKS


       Given the expansion and diversity of documentary sources fostered by
cultural history, school notebooks have come to be recognized as such,
representing a vast field for research in the history of education. From this
perspective, this study analyzed visible and invisible issues discernible in school
notebook records, highlighting the potential for using these materials as historical
sources.
       The context studied was that of EJA—Youth and Adult Education, a form
of education considered an alternative learning opportunity for those who did not
complete their studies at the standard age, characterized by the diversity of its
students’ profiles (adolescents, young adults, adults, and seniors), who bring with
them a wealth of knowledge from other social contexts. EJA is responsible for
providing the resources for its students to become active, critical, creative, and
democratic individuals, taking into account different cultures, forms of knowledge,
and specificities that need to be prioritized in the socialization of these individuals.
       Based on the analysis of two notebooks used by a student who attended
an EJA class at a school in the Curitiba/PR Municipal Education Network during


                                                                                    127

the 2003–2004 academic year, it was possible to contextualize school practices,
reflecting on the use of these artifacts and what they represent in daily school life,
in the relationship between the prescribed and the standardized. The research
also brought to light issues related to content, subjects, and the relationships
between them, perceived by delving into the lines and between the lines of the
studied material.
       By analyzing these notebooks, it was possible to uncover traces of their
uniqueness and the way in which the student expressed knowledge, feelings, and
uncertainties. Her relationships with elements of effective pedagogical work, with
school content and official school activities, as well as with social roles, were
observed.
       During the course of the research, evidence emerged that could be directly
related to the reality in which the student was embedded: information about daily
school life, the subjects, the norms, the school environment, its practices, and its
objectives.
       In short, the study of school notebooks allowed for a deeper understanding
of school notebooks, their use, and what they represent in the daily life of the
school, as spaces for the expression of the student’s individuality.




                                                                                  128

                                   REFERENCES

ALBERTI, Verena. Histórias dentro da História. In: PINSKY, Carla Bassanezi (Org.).
Fontes históricas. São Paulo: Contexto, 2014, p. 155-202.

BRASIL. Lei nº 9.394, de 20 de dezembro de 1996. Estabelece as diretrizes e bases
da educação nacional. Diário Oficial da União, Brasília, DF, 20/12/1996. Disponível
em: http://www.planalto.gov.br/ccivil_03/leis/L9394.htm Acesso em: 20 jun. 2017.

BRASIL. Lei nº 10.172, de 9 de janeiro de 2001. Aprova o Plano Nacional de
Educação e dá outras providências. Diário Oficial da União, Brasília, DF, 09/01/2001.
Disponível em: http://portal.mec.gov.br/arquivos/pdf/L10172.pdf Acesso em: 20 jun.
2017.

CHARTIER, Roger. A história cultural. Entre práticas e representações. Trad. Maria
Manuela Galhardo. Lisboa: Difel, 1990.

CONSTANTINO, Nuncia Santoro de. Teoria da História e reabilitação da oralidade:
convergência de um processo. In: ABRAHÃO, M. H. M. B. (org.). A aventura
(auto)biográfica: teoria e empiria. Porto Alegre: EDIPUCRS, 2004. p. 37-74.

GIL, Antonio Carlos. Como elaborar projetos de pesquisa. São Paulo: Atlas,
2010.

GRINSPUN, Mírian Paura Sabrosa Zippin. Velhos cadernos, novas emoções. In:
MIGNOT, A. C. V. (org.). Cadernos à vista: escola, memória e cultura escrita. Rio de
Janeiro: EdUERJ, 2008, p. 257-265.

JULIA, Dominique. A cultura escolar como objeto histórico. Revista Brasileira
de História da Educação. Campinas, n. 1, jan./jun. 2001, p. 9-43. Disponível
em: <http://rbhe.sbhe.org.br/index.php/rbhe/article/view/273/281> Acesso em: 12 abr.
2017.

OLIVEIRA, Inês Barbosa de. Aprendendo com os cadernos escolares: sujeitos,
subjetividades e práticas sociais cotidianas da escola. In: MIGNOT, A. C. V. (org.).
Cadernos à vista: escola, memória e cultura escrita. Rio de Janeiro: EdUERJ, 2008,
p. 130-142.

PARANÁ. Secretaria de Estado da Educação. Diretrizes Curriculares
da Educação de Jovens e Adultos. Secretaria de Estado da Educação.
Curitiba: 2006. Disponível em:
http://www.educadores.diaadia.pr.gov.br/arquivos/File/diretrizes/dce_eja.pdf
Acesso em: 21 jun. 2017.

RAZZINI, Marcia de Paula Gregorio. Instrumentos de escrita na escola elementar:
tecnologias e práticas. In: MIGNOT, A. C. V. (org.). Cadernos à vista: escola,
memória e cultura escrita. Rio de Janeiro: EdUERJ, 2008, p. 91-113

RIBEIRO, José da Silva. Métodos e técnicas de investigação em
Antropologia. Lisboa: Universidade Aberta, 2003.

SILVA, Izabel Afonso da. Caderno escolar da EJA. Curitiba: 2003.




                                                                                   129

VIEIRA, Alboni Marisa Dudeque Pianovski. A história cultural e as fontes de pesquisa.
Revista HISTEDBR On-line. Campinas, nº 61, p. 367-378, mar. 2015. Disponível em:
https://periodicos.sbu.unicamp.br/ojs/index.php/histedbr/article/view/8640533/809 2
Acesso em: 08 mai. 2017.

VIÑAO-FRAGO, Antonio. Os cadernos escolares como fonte histórica: aspectos
metodológicos e historiográficos. In: MIGNOT, A. C. V. (org.). Cadernos à vista:
escola, memória e cultura escrita. Rio de Janeiro: EdUERJ, 2008, p. 15-33.




                                                                                   130

CHAPTER 8
 TEACHING TISSUE ENGINEERING
 THROUGH PROJECT-BASED LEARNING: AN
 EXPERIENCE REPORT FROM A TEACHING
 AND PEER-TUTORING PROJECT

Caroline Medeiros Laffitte
Master’s Degree in Dental Sciences/Experimental Biology
Universidade Federal do Rio Grande do Norte (UFRN)
E-mail: carollaffitte@gmail.com

Isabella de Souza Pires
Undergraduate Student in Dentistry
Universidade Federal do Rio Grande do Norte (UFRN)
E-mail: isabella.pires.179@ufrn.edu.br

Emanoel Alves Cabral
Undergraduate Student in Medicine
Universidade Federal do Rio Grande do Norte (UFRN)
E-mail: emanoel.cabral.124@ufrn.edu.br

Alison Gessinger Guedes Morais
Undergraduate Student in Medicine
Universidade Federal do Rio Grande do Norte (UFRN)
E-mail: gessinger.morais.092@ufrn.edu.br

João Victor Freire de Paula
Dental Surgeon
Universidade Federal do Rio Grande do Norte (UFRN)
E-mail: joaovictorfreire46@gmail.com

Marcos Vinicius de Carvalho Sousa Rosado
Master’s Candidate in Dental Sciences/Experimental Biology
Universidade Federal do Rio Grande do Norte (UFRN)
E-mail: marcos.rosado.701@ufrn.edu.br

Carlos Augusto Galvão Barboza
Doctor of Dental Science/Oral Pathology
Universidade Federal do Rio Grande do Norte (UFRN)
E-mail: carlos.augusto.barboza@ufrn.br


ABSTRACT: Tissue engineering is a rapidly evolving field focused on the
development of biological substitutes in laboratory settings. Its inherently
interdisciplinary nature requires pedagogical strategies capable of integrating
biomedical and technological concepts in a cohesive and meaningful way. The


                                                                           131

course Fundamentals of Tissue and Organ Engineering, offered at the Federal
University of Rio Grande do Norte (UFRN), Brazil, has no prerequisites and
therefore attracts students from diverse health and technology programs,
enriching multiprofessional discussions. This experience report describes the
implementation of project-based learning combined with a teaching and peer-
tutoring initiative during academic semesters from 2023.1 to 2025.2, with the aim
of enhancing teaching quality and student performance. At the beginning of each
semester, students were challenged to design a tissue or organ and progressively
refine their projects as new theoretical concepts were introduced. This dynamic
required continuous supervision and fostered active discussion, conceptual
consolidation, and clarification of questions. Teaching assistants played a central
role by developing educational materials, supporting digital learning activities,
and providing guided assistance under faculty supervision. This experience
suggests that close integration among faculty members, teaching assistants, and
students is essential for knowledge consolidation and for promoting a dynamic,
collaborative, and motivating learning environment. This experience contributed
to students’ academic development, strengthened the pedagogical training of
teaching assistants, and reinforced the teaching–learning process in tissue
engineering.

KEYWORDS: tissue engineering, project-based learning, peer tutoring, teaching
assistants, higher education, health profession education.




                                                                               132

1. INTRODUCTION


         Tissue engineering is an interdisciplinary field that integrates principles
from engineering and life sciences to develop in vitro biological substitutes for
damaged or lost tissues and organs (Langer, 2000). Although its conceptual roots
have extended back centuries, tissue engineering became more firmly
established as a biomedical field in the late twentieth century, driven in part by
the growing demand for innovative strategies to repair or replace injured tissues
(Levin et al., 2019; Zhang & Yelick, 2018). This global context has intensified the
need to train professionals capable of navigating the scientific, technological, and
ethical complexities that characterize the field.
         With respect to undergraduate education, however, teaching tissue
engineering presents important challenges. Because the field draws on
knowledge from anatomy, histology, embryology, cell biology, biochemistry,
biomaterials, scientific methodology, and bioethics, students are required to
integrate concepts that are traditionally taught in separate disciplinary domains.
Conventional teaching approaches may therefore be insufficient to support
meaningful learning in such a dynamic and multifaceted area (Marques et al.,
2021).
         At the Federal University of Rio Grande do Norte (UFRN), Brazil, the
course Fundamentals of Tissue and Organ Engineering is offered as an elective
by the Department of Morphology for undergraduate students in biomedicine,
biological sciences, and dentistry. Because the course has no prerequisites, it
also attracts students from other health- and technology-related programs,
including biomedical engineering, medicine, pharmacy, and physical therapy.
This academic diversity creates valuable opportunities for interdisciplinary
exchange while also increasing the need for pedagogical strategies that promote
engagement, conceptual integration, and collaborative learning.
         To address these demands, project-based learning was adopted as the
core teaching strategy in the course. In health and biomedical education, this
active-learning approach has been recognized for its potential to connect theory
with practice, promote student autonomy, and foster the development of scientific
and professional competencies (Pranjol, Oprandi, & Watson, 2024). Its
successful implementation, however, depends on sustained guidance, close


                                                                                133

monitoring of group work, and structured support throughout the learning process
(Kokotsaki, Menzies, & Wiggins, 2016). In this setting, the peer-tutoring initiative
played a key pedagogical role by supporting students’ progress, facilitating
interaction between faculty and students, and contributing to the educational
development of the teaching assistants themselves (Souza & Oliveira, 2023;
Sanday, Silva, & Mocellin, 2024).
      Against this background, this chapter reports the experience of
implementing project-based learning in association with a peer-tutoring initiative
in tissue engineering education during academic semesters from 2023.1 to
2025.2. Specifically, it describes the pedagogical strategies adopted, examines
their contributions to the teaching–learning process, and discusses their impact
on the academic and pedagogical development of teaching assistants.


2. EDUCATIONAL AND CONCEPTUAL FOUNDATIONS


      As a field within regenerative medicine, tissue engineering is supported by
three fundamental pillars: a cell source capable of forming the target tissue, a
biocompatible scaffold that provides structural support and a favorable
environment for cell growth, and bioactive molecules or growth factors that direct
cellular proliferation and differentiation (Langer & Vacanti, 2016). The success of
tissue engineering strategies depends on multiple interconnected factors,
including the appropriate selection of cell sources and methods for cell collection,
isolation, and stimulation (Lira et al., 2024); the choice of biomaterials and
scaffold synthesis and functionalization techniques that favor cell adhesion,
migration, and differentiation (Bakhshandeh et al., 2017); and the identification of
effective agents capable of stimulating cellular activity (Sabino et al., 2020). In
addition, the field involves discussion of in vitro and in vivo evaluation methods,
as well as ethical and translational issues. For this reason, tissue engineering
education requires an interdisciplinary and multidisciplinary approach capable of
integrating scientific, technological, and ethical perspectives (Sarvazyan, 2020;
Bateman & Sherman, 2025).
      This need becomes even more relevant when considering the profile of
students currently entering higher education. Recent cohorts, particularly those
commonly described as belonging to Generation Z, have been associated with


                                                                                134

strong familiarity with digital technologies, preference for practical and immersive
experiences, expectation of rapid feedback, appreciation of autonomy, and
interest in collaborative and meaningful learning processes (Chaudhuri, 2020).
Such characteristics help explain why many students tend to engage more
effectively when they participate actively in knowledge construction rather than
remaining limited to the passive reception of content.
       In this context, active-learning methodologies become especially relevant.
Rather than emphasizing the accumulation of information, these approaches
prioritize knowledge construction and skills development, with instructors creating
meaningful learning situations that promote initiative, participation, and student
responsibility (Monteiro, Caires, & Almeida, 2025). Active learning may therefore
be understood as an approach that encourages students to assume a central role
in their own education by engaging critically in the search for, analysis of, and
application of knowledge (Moran, 2018). It also supports the development of
essential professional competencies by integrating theory and practice and
fostering critical thinking and decision-making (Silva et al., 2025).
       Among active-learning methodologies, project-based learning (PBL)
stands out as a student-centered approach that emphasizes engagement,
collaboration, and critical thinking through the exploration of real-world
challenges (Kokotsaki, Menzies, & Wiggins, 2016; Guo et al., 2020). Grounded
in constructivist principles, PBL positions students as active participants in the
learning process and values their prior knowledge, experiences, and
perspectives (Revelle et al., 2020). By introducing authentic and complex
problems that resemble professional situations, this methodology encourages
students    to     formulate    questions,   conduct     investigations,   and   develop
collaborative solutions (Jones, 2019; Almulla, 2020; Warr & West, 2020).
       In health profession education, PBL has been shown to promote
knowledge        integration,   interdisciplinary   collaboration,   and   adaptability—
competencies that are increasingly important in a rapidly changing global context
(Shah, Patel, & Chhatriwala, 2021; Si, 2020). It also strengthens essential abilities
such as critical thinking, problem solving, and teamwork while increasing student
motivation and engagement (Chang et al., 2022). More recently, PBL has gained
further relevance through digital technologies, especially in the post-COVID-19
educational landscape, in which virtual learning environments and collaborative


                                                                                     135

software have expanded opportunities for teamwork, problem solving, and joint
project development (Samala et al., 2024).
      The effectiveness of PBL, however, depends on systematic follow-up and
continuous pedagogical support. In the context of Brazilian higher education, this
support is often provided through institutional teaching assistantship programs,
which have been recognized in educational policy since Law No. 5.540/1968 and
reaffirmed by the Law of Directives and Bases of National Education (LDB No.
9.394/1996) as activities that promote integration among teaching, research, and
extension (Sanday, Silva, & Mocellin, 2024). More than being an auxiliary
resource, such programs have increasingly been understood as formative
educational practices that benefit both the students receiving support and the
teaching assistants themselves. Studies indicate that teaching assistants can act
as mediators between faculty and students, fostering collaborative learning, self-
regulation, and student agency (Frison, 2016). This horizontal interaction
contributes to a more accessible and participatory learning environment in which
knowledge exchange and joint problem solving strengthen conceptual
understanding and student confidence (Oliveira & Vosgerau, 2021).
      From an institutional perspective, teaching assistantship programs
represent a strategic resource for improving teaching quality, stimulating critical
reflection on educational methodologies, and strengthening a culture of academic
cooperation (Sanday, Silva, & Mocellin, 2024; Santos & Silva, 2025). With respect
to teaching assistants, the experience provides an opportunity for early
pedagogical development by expanding their understanding of the educational
process, strengthening communication and instructional skills, and often
stimulating interest in an academic career (Silva et al., 2021; Souza & Oliveira,
2023; Kavalek & Pessoa, 2023). This formative dimension extends beyond
technical support to the instructor and becomes relevant to the construction of
the teaching assistant’s professional and pedagogical identity. By collaborating
with faculty, teaching assistants may participate in the planning, implementation,
and evaluation of educational activities, thereby consolidating theoretical and
practical knowledge about teaching and learning while developing mediation,
empathy, pedagogical responsibility, and professional confidence (Silva et al.,
2021; Souza & Oliveira, 2023; Kavalek & Pessoa, 2023).



                                                                               136

       Taken together, these educational and conceptual foundations suggest
that integrating project-based learning with structured teaching assistantship and
peer-tutoring support is a coherent pedagogical strategy for teaching complex
and interdisciplinary content such as tissue engineering. From this perspective,
the course Fundamentals of Tissue and Organ Engineering at UFRN provided an
appropriate setting for the implementation and consolidation of these approaches
and served as the foundation for the teaching and peer-tutoring project reported
in this chapter.


3. METHODOLOGY


       This experience report describes the implementation of an instructional
strategy integrating project-based learning and a peer-tutoring initiative in the
course Fundamentals of Tissue and Organ Engineering at the Federal University
of Rio Grande do Norte (UFRN), Brazil, between academic semesters 2023.1
and 2025.2. Over this period, the course was offered in seven sections—five in
the afternoon and two in the evening—with a total enrollment of 255
undergraduate students. Each year, the project involved two teaching assistants
working within the peer-tutoring initiative under the supervision of the same
faculty member. The chapter is based on a reflective account of the pedagogical
process supported by qualitative evidence gathered during the implementation of
the activities.
       At the beginning of each semester, students were challenged to propose
the in vitro development of a tissue or organ. This task functioned as the
organizing framework for the course and guided the integration of theoretical and
practical content. As new concepts were introduced, student groups
progressively refined and expanded their proposals by articulating biomedical
and technological knowledge. The project-based learning activities were
designed by the instructional team, which included the faculty supervisor, the
teaching assistants, and a graduate student engaged in a supervised teaching
practicum, to ensure alignment with the course learning objectives.
       The course was delivered in person and combined synchronous and
asynchronous activities. Synchronous sessions included interactive lectures,
roundtable discussions, and thematic analysis of scientific articles. Asynchronous


                                                                              137

activities were offered through the university’s virtual learning environment,
allowing additional time for project development and collaborative group work.
Students had access to all essential learning materials and submitted
assignments for each stage through the university’s electronic academic
management platform, the Integrated Academic Activities Management System
(SIGAA).
       The project-based learning strategy was organized into five stages—
preparation, implementation, presentation, evaluation, and revision—following
the framework proposed by Taiebine, Al Hassani, and Nejjari (2024). Across the
semester, the student projects were developed through six sequential thematic
axes, each with specific objectives and guiding strategies (Table 1).


Table 1. Thematic axes guiding the development of student projects on in vitro tissue or organ
                                       construction
Axis     Focus/Objective                             Guiding strategy
     Identification of the target    Justification of the proposal based on clinical need and the
 1
           tissue or organ                          limitations of available therapies
        Selection of the most         Description of cell collection and culture techniques and
 2
        appropriate cell type                   analysis of relevant biological properties
      Selection of the scaffold Analysis of the physical, mechanical, chemical, and biological
 3
              biomaterial                        properties of the selected biomaterial
      Scaffold preparation and         Examination of scaffold features, including topography,
 4
           characterization                              porosity, and wettability
                                    Selection of assays to assess cell viability, proliferation, and
 5     In vitro study methods
                                               differentiation in contact with the scaffold
                                       Identification of the most appropriate animal model and
 6     In vivo study methods       corresponding assays, including ethical considerations related
                                                        to animal experimentation
                                  Source: Prepared by the authors.


       Within each thematic axis, the five stages of project-based learning were
operationalized through guiding challenges delivered via the institutional
platforms SIGAA and Multiprova. Students who worked in small groups
completed the activities with direct support from the teaching assistants, whose
role was central to pedagogical mediation and methodological guidance. The
assignments submitted at each stage were reviewed by the instructional team,
which included the faculty member, the teaching assistants, and the graduate
student, and formative feedback was provided to support revision before
progression to the next thematic axis.




                                                                                                 138

       Because the methodology required sustained pedagogical support,
students were followed continuously by the instructional team throughout the
semester. To facilitate communication, a WhatsApp group was created to allow
rapid interaction between students and staff. Weekly goals were also established
to promote steady progress and prevent the accumulation of tasks.
       This follow-up was intended not only to clarify conceptual and
methodological issues related to tissue engineering but also to encourage
student progression across the different stages of project development. In
parallel, the approach fostered creativity, autonomy, and decision-making;
strengthened collaborative learning; and contributed to the pedagogical
development of the teaching assistants.


4. RESULTS AND DISCUSSION


       The implementation of project-based learning (PBL) in association with the
peer-tutoring initiative in tissue engineering education yielded positive outcomes
in terms of student engagement, meaningful learning, and the development of
cognitive and socioemotional competencies. Among the 328 students enrolled in
the course sections included in this project, 317 passed, corresponding to a pass
rate of 96.6%. Although pass rates alone do not fully capture the quality of
learning, this high rate, combined with the strong adherence of students to the
proposed activities, suggests a favorable academic environment marked by
motivation and sustained engagement, in line with the observations of Almulla
(2020). As students were challenged to design and progressively develop an in
vitro tissue or organ project, they became more active in discussions and
demonstrated increasing intellectual autonomy throughout the semester. This
pattern reinforces the potential of PBL to promote student agency and active
learning, as highlighted by Kokotsaki, Menzies, and Wiggins (2016) and Chang
et al. (2022).
       Group-based activities encouraged collaboration among students from
different academic backgrounds and supported the integration of multiple
domains of knowledge, reflecting the interdisciplinary nature of tissue
engineering. In this context, students were able to articulate concepts from cell
biology, materials engineering, bioethics, and scientific methodology in response


                                                                              139

to the proposed challenges, demonstrating a broader and more integrated
understanding of course content. The progressive development of the projects
was therefore essential not only for intellectual growth but also for the
strengthening of practical competencies applicable beyond the classroom. This
close connection between theory and practice is consistent with the findings of
Pranjol, Oprandi, and Watson (2024), who describe PBL as an effective strategy
for developing scientific and professional competencies in complex and
interdisciplinary educational settings. In our experience, the integration of active
learning, critical reflection, and collaborative problem solving confirmed the
pedagogical value of PBL as a transformative strategy in higher education, as
also emphasized by Lee, Yoon, and Hwang (2024).
       Continuous follow-up by the teaching assistants and the faculty member
proved to be a key element in consolidating the methodology. The pedagogical
support provided by the teaching assistants was particularly important because it
facilitated communication between faculty and students, promoted the
clarification of conceptual and procedural questions, and contributed to a more
accessible and collaborative learning environment. As noted by Frison (2016)
and Silva et al. (2021), teaching assistants can play an important mediating role
in the learning process by fostering self-regulation and autonomy among their
peers. In the present experience, this role became evident in the monitoring of
weekly tasks and goals, as well as in the mediation of conceptual difficulties and
interpersonal challenges within the groups. These contributions strengthened the
pedagogical relationship between students and the instructional team and helped
maintain continuity across the different stages of project development.
       Another relevant finding was the formative impact of the initiative on the
teaching assistants themselves. Participation in PBL activities expanded their
pedagogical, communicative, and organizational competencies, offering early
teaching experience in a real educational context. By monitoring group progress,
preparing instructional materials, and participating in assessment and feedback
processes, the teaching assistants developed greater capacity for planning,
empathy, and critical reflection on teaching and learning. This experience
supports the contributions described by Silva et al. (2021), Souza and Oliveira
(2023), and Sanday, Silva, and Mocellin (2024), who characterize teaching
assistantship as a formative practice that can foster initial pedagogical


                                                                                140

development and consolidate educational knowledge. Constant interaction with
both faculty and students also appeared to promote professional maturation, in
agreement with Kavalek and Pessoa (2023) and Santos and Silva (2025), who
identify these experiences as meaningful spaces for the construction of teaching
identity.
       Overall, the findings suggest that the integration of PBL with a peer-
tutoring    initiative   strengthened   the   teaching–learning   process    in   the
Fundamentals of Tissue and Organ Engineering course by promoting a dynamic,
collaborative, and student-centered environment. The methodology stimulated
scientific curiosity, intellectual autonomy, and students’ sense of responsibility
while also contributing to the pedagogical development of the teaching assistants
and to reflective teaching practices. Taken together, these results indicate that
the combination of active-learning methodologies and structured teaching
assistants can be a viable and effective strategy for teaching complex and
interdisciplinary content, contributing to the quality of academic training and to
the consolidation of a collaborative learning culture in higher education.


5. CONCLUSION


       The experience reported in this chapter demonstrated that the integration
of project-based learning (PBL) with a peer-tutoring initiative constitutes an
effective strategy for teaching complex and interdisciplinary content such as
tissue engineering. The implementation of this approach fostered a dynamic,
collaborative, and student-centered learning environment in which knowledge
was constructed progressively and in a meaningful context. The organization of
the projects into thematic axes, together with continuous follow-up by the
teaching assistants and the faculty member, supported the consolidation of
theoretical content, the development of practical skills, and the strengthening of
teamwork and problem-solving competencies.
       The participation of the teaching assistants proved essential to the
success of the proposal, functioning both as pedagogical support for students
and as a formative space for early teaching development. This experience
contributed to the improvement of the teaching assistants’ communicative,
reflective, and instructional skills, promoting the construction of their teaching


                                                                                  141

identity and strengthening their commitment to educational practice in higher
education.
       Overall, the initiative proved relevant not only for improving the quality of
tissue engineering education but also for fostering the development of critical,
creative, and engaged future professionals and educators committed to
innovation and interdisciplinarity in the health sciences.




                                                                                142

                                    REFERENCES


ALMULLA, M. A. The effectiveness of the project-based learning (PBL) approach as a
way to engage students in learning. Sage Open, v. 10, n. 3, p. 2158244020938702,
2020.

BAKHSHANDEH, B. et al. Tissue engineering; strategies, tissues, and biomaterials.
Biotechnology and Genetic Engineering Reviews, v. 33, n. 2, p. 144-172, 2017.

BATEMAN, K. M.; SHERMAN, B. Cultivating transdisciplinary orientations in science
education research and practice: reflexivity, pragmatism, and dialogue. Science &
Education, v. 34, p. 4741-4759, 2025.

CHANG, T. S. et al. Enhancing student creativity through an interdisciplinary, project-
oriented problem-based learning undergraduate curriculum. Thinking Skills and
Creativity, v. 46, p. 101173, 2022.

CHAUDHURI, J. D. Stimulating intrinsic motivation in millennial students: a new
generation, a new approach. Anatomical Sciences Education, v. 13, n. 2, p. 250-271,
2020.

FRISON, L. M. B. Monitoria: uma modalidade de ensino que potencializa a
aprendizagem colaborativa e autorregulada. Pro-Posições, v. 27, n. 1, p. 133-153,
2016.

GUO, P. et al. A review of project-based learning in higher education: student
outcomes and measures. International Journal of Educational Research, v. 102, p.
101586, 2020.

JONES, B. Good practice: scaffolded, collaborative project-based learning. Journal of
the European Honors Council, v. 3, n. 1, p. 1-16, 2019.

KAVALEK, D. S.; PESSOA, J. L. A monitoria acadêmica e a colaboração entre monitor
e professora como norteadora da identidade profissional do estudante. Brazilian
Journal of Production Engineering, v. 9, n. 6, p. 26-29, 2023.

KOKOTSAKI, D.; MENZIES, V.; WIGGINS, A. Project-based learning: a review of the
literature. Improving Schools, v. 19, n. 3, p. 267-277, 2016.

LANGER, R.; VACANTI, J. Advances in tissue engineering. Journal of Pediatric
Surgery, v. 51, n. 1, p. 8-12, 2016.

LANGER, R. Tissue engineering. Molecular Therapy, v. 1, n. 1, p. 12-15, 2000.

LEE, S.; YOON, J. Y.; HWANG, Y. Collaborative project-based learning in global
health: enhancing competencies and skills for undergraduate nursing students. BMC
Nursing, v. 23, n. 1, p. 437, 2024.

LEVIN, G. et al. Medicina regenerativa e engenharia de tecidos. Genética na Escola,
v. 14, n. 1, p. 26-33, 2019.

LIRA, J. A. S. et al. The proliferation and viability of human periodontal ligament stem
cells cultured on polymeric scaffolds can be improved by low-level laser irradiation.
Lasers in Medical Science, v. 39, n. 1, p. 261, 2024.


                                                                                      143

MARQUES, H. R. et al. Inovação no ensino: uma revisão sistemática das
metodologias ativas de ensino-aprendizagem. Avaliação: Revista da Avaliação da
Educação Superior (Campinas), v. 26, n. 3, p. 718-741, 2021.

MONTEIRO, S. C.; CAIRES, S. M. G.; ALMEIDA, L. S. Teaching and learning among
students’ diversity: a project-based learning experience in higher education. Revista
Brasileira de Educação, v. 30, p. e300051, 2025.

MORAN, J. Metodologias ativas para uma aprendizagem mais profunda. In:
Metodologias ativas para uma educação inovadora: uma abordagem teórico-prática.
Porto Alegre: Penso, p. 2-25, 2018.

OLIVEIRA, J.; VOSGERAU, D. S. R. Práticas de monitoria acadêmica no contexto
brasileiro. Educação: Teoria e Prática, v. 31, n. 64, e18, 2021.

PRANJOL, M. Z. I.; OPRANDI, P.; WATSON, S. Project-based learning in biomedical
sciences: using the collaborative creation of revision resources to consolidate
knowledge, promote cohort identity and develop transferable skills. Journal of
Biological Education, v. 58, n. 5, p. 1048-1064, 2024.

REVELLE, K. Z. et al. Realizing the promise of project-based learning. The Reading
Teacher, v. 73, n. 6, p. 697-710, 2020.

SABINO, V. G. et al. Laser therapy increases the proliferation of preosteoblastic
MC3T3-E1 cells cultured on poly(lactic acid) films. Journal of Tissue Engineering
and Regenerative Medicine, v. 14, n. 2, p. 1792-1803, 2020.

SAMALA, A. D. et al. Emerging technologies for global education: a comprehensive
exploration of trends, innovations, challenges, and future horizons. SN Computer
Science, n. 5, p. 1175, 2024.

SANDAY, B. H.; SILVA, F. T.; MOCELLIN, L. P. Monitoria de metodologia científica:
relato de experiência em um componente curricular de saúde coletiva. Revista
Brasileira de Educação Médica, v. 48, n. 2, e053, 2024.

SANTOS, T. S. P.; SILVA, I. S. A importância da monitoria acadêmica no processo
ensino-aprendizagem do monitor. Caderno Pedagógico, v. 22, n. 5, e14553, 2025.

SARVAZYAN, N. Tissue Engineering: Principles, Protocols, and Practical
Exercises. Cham: Springer, 2020. 154 p.

SHAH, H. N.; PATEL, D. S.; CHHATRIWALA, M. N. Project-based learning, an
effective tool for the active teaching-learning method for first-year medical students.
International Journal of Current Research and Review, v. 13, p. 41-46, 2021.

SI, J. Course-based research experience of undergraduate medical students through
project-based learning. Korean Journal of Medical Education, v. 32, n. 1, p. 47,
2020.

SILVA, G. O. et al. Active methodologies in teaching the nursing process: scoping
review. Nurse Education in Practice, v. 83, p. 104274, 2025.

SILVA, J. F. et al. A monitoria como processo de reflexão na formação docente.
Revista Profissão Docente, v. 21, n. 46, p. 1-23, 2021.


                                                                                          144

SOUZA, J. P. N.; OLIVEIRA, S. Monitoria acadêmica: uma formação docente para
discentes. Revista Brasileira de Educação Médica, v. 47, n. 4, e127, 2023.

TAIEBINE, M.; AL HASSANI, W.; NEJJARI, C. The experience of project-based
learning among first-year health sciences students in Morocco. Cureus, v. 16, n. 10,
2024.

WARR, M.; WEST, R. E. Bridging academic disciplines with interdisciplinary project-
based learning: challenges and opportunities. Interdisciplinary Journal of Problem-
based Learning, v. 14, n. 1, p. 28590, 2020.

ZHANG, W.; YELICK, P. C. Craniofacial tissue engineering. Cold Spring Harbor
Perspectives in Medicine, v. 8, n. 1, p. a025775, 2018.




                                                                                   145

CHAPTER 9
 MOLECULAR STRUCTURES IN
 ACTION: USING GAME TO ASSIST
 IN LEARNING THE FUNDAMENTALS
 OF ORGANIC CHEMISTRY

Karlos Alexandre Martins
Master's Degree in Chemistry
Universidade Federal do Triângulo Mineiro (UFTM)
E-mail: karlosalexandremartins@gmail.com

Alexandre Rossi
Doctor in Organic Chemistry
Universidade de São Paulo
E-mail: alexandre.rossi@uftm.edu.br

Evandro Roberto Alves
Doctor in Analytical Chemistry
Universidade de São Paulo
E-mail: evandro.alves@uftm.edu.br


ABSTRACT: Teaching Chemistry has been a challenging task for the subject
teacher, who must stimulate learning and spark students' interest in the content
in an engaging way. Organic Chemistry is considered complex by high school
students, as it is abstract and requires memorization of formulas and
nomenclature, in addition to understanding the representations of the three-
dimensional molecular structures of organic compounds. Several factors have
been identified as responsible for the lack of success in learning Organic
Chemistry, such as the use of traditional teaching methodologies which include
demotivating classes that disregard students' everyday experiences, resulting in
a lack of interest in the subject. The playful game "Molecular Structures in Action"
(MSA) was designed to assist high school Chemistry teachers in their classroom
work, making it easier for students to review and understand key concepts of
Organic Chemistry, enhancing learning. MSA is composed of pieces similar to a
puzzle, made of colored acrylic and designed to represent the atoms of the main
chemical elements that form organic compounds. The colors of the pieces follow
the CPK standardization. After the implementation of MSA for a class of 37 3rd-
year high school students, the review and consolidation of Organic Chemistry
fundamentals were evaluated by high school teachers as positive and engaging,
as it minimized the abstraction of the content. Students also found MSA to be an
interesting teaching approach, suggesting that teachers from other subjects could
also use this method of teaching.



                                                                                146

KEYWORDS: organic chemistry, gamification, game, chemistry teaching.

RESUMO: Lecionar Química tem sido uma tarefa desafiadora para o professor,
que deve estimular a aprendizagem e despertar o interesse dos alunos pelos
conteúdos de forma atrativa. A Química Orgânica é considerada pelos alunos do
Ensino Médio como complexa, por ser abstrata e exigir a memorização de fór-
mulas e nomenclaturas, além do entendimento das representações das estrutu-
ras moleculares tridimensionais dos compostos orgânicos. Alguns fatores foram
apontados como responsáveis pelo insucesso da aprendizagem de Química Or-
gânica, tais como o uso de metodologias tradicionais de ensino que contemplam
aulas desmotivadoras que desconsideram a vivência cotidiana dos alunos, re-
sultando no desinteresse pela disciplina. O jogo lúdico “Estruturas Moleculares
em Ação” (EMA) foi concebido com o objetivo de auxiliar o professor de Química
do Ensino Médio durante o seu trabalho em sala de aula e facilitar a revisão e
assimilação dos conteúdos fundamentais da Química Orgânica, fortalecendo a
aprendizagem. EMA é composto por peças semelhantes às de um quebra-ca-
beça, confeccionadas em acrílico colorido e idealizadas para representar os áto-
mos dos principais elementos químicos formadores dos compostos orgânicos.
As cores das peças obedeceram a padronização CPK. Após a aplicação do EMA
para uma turma de 37 alunos do 3º ano do Ensino Médio, a revisão e a consoli-
dação dos fundamentos de Química Orgânica foram avaliadas pelos professores
das escolas de Ensino Médio como positiva e engajada, tendo minimizado a abs-
tração dos conteúdos. Os alunos avaliaram o EMA como uma proposta interes-
sante de ensino, mencionando que os professores de outras disciplinas também
poderiam utilizar essa maneira de ensinar.

PALAVRAS-CHAVE: química orgânica, gamificação, jogo, ensino de química.




                                                                            147

1. INTRODUCTION


       Teaching chemistry has been a challenging task for chemistry teachers,
who must stimulate learning in an engaging way and spark students’ interest in
content that is often abstract, given that most students are no longer interested
in classes taught in the traditional format (Carbo et al., 2019; Silva, Loja, & Pires,
2020; Pinheiro, Cardoso, 2022; Lima, 2024). Traditional teaching is often based
on pedagogical activities that require memorization, intensifying abstraction and
hindering the development of critical and scientific learning (Vieira; Silva, 2017;
Assai et al.,   2018; Rossi et al., 2024). Abstraction and the emphasis on
memorizing symbols, formulas, and the nomenclature of organic compounds
make the content even more complex, resulting in tiring and uninteresting
classes.   Teaching    processes     that   rely   on   memorization    mechanisms
disconnected from students’ everyday reality can inhibit their ability to
comprehend new information and demotivate them during learning (Capellato;
Ribeiro; Sachs, 2019; Delou; Albano, 2023).
       Although Organic Chemistry is present in our daily lives at all times and in
various forms, the content is considered difficult by high school students due to
the abstraction involved and the diversity of similar organic functions, which often
cause confusion (Pereira; Fernandes; Bizerra, 2020; Delou; Albano, 2023). Given
the importance of knowledge related to Organic Chemistry, mastery of the
fundamental basic concepts of this subfield of Chemistry is relevant and
indispensable for understanding everyday phenomena, as well as the chemical
properties and reactivity of its compounds.
       A lack of interest in learning Organic Chemistry may be related to a lack of
understanding and the disconnect between the content and everyday life, as it
does not establish a close connection to students’ reality (Pricinotto; Primo, 2020;
Almeida, 2022; Silva et al., 2024). In everyday life, there are various chemical
transformations involving organic compounds; however, most students do not
know how to associate them with chemical knowledge.
       The traditional approach to teaching has been considered incompatible
with contemporary needs (Cunha, 2012; Souza; Cantero, 2024). In this context,
educational games have been gaining prominence in the teaching and learning
process, as they incorporate motivational elements that spark students’ interest


                                                                                  148

and enthusiasm. Recreational games value creativity, interaction, and
imagination (Conde et al., 2021; Arnaud, 2024).
       According to Ferreira et al. (2012), engaging in a playful activity produces
satisfaction and entertains the participant. If there are rules for carrying out this
activity, it can be considered a game, provided that it fosters closeness and
interaction among participants. Playful activities provide an engaging experience
through the use of dynamic and mechanical elements (Ortiz; Dorneles, 2018).
Thus, playful games become educational when used in the classroom,
considering that playfulness stimulates students’ ability to analyze, think, and
develop their logical reasoning (Bezerra; Silva, 2024).
       Cunha (2012) notes that educational games can be used to present and
illustrate relevant aspects of content, assess previously taught material, review
and synthesize chemical concepts, and organize and integrate topics in an
interdisciplinary and contextualized manner. Franco et al. (2018) report various
benefits of games when applied in the classroom as a teaching strategy,
highlighting the development of self-esteem, improved interaction between
teacher and student, student and peers, as well as student and community. They
also foster the development of cognitive skills, autonomy, self-reflection,
creativity, self-assessment, increased attention, concentration, and the ability to
complete schoolwork. The same authors emphasize that respect, boundaries, the
incorporation of values, the expansion of logical reasoning and motor
coordination, and the development of spatial organization and a spirit of
cooperation were also observed during the application of this pedagogical tool.
       In light of the above, this study aimed to develop the educational game
“Molecular Structures in Action (EMA)” as a low-cost educational resource
designed to assist teachers in the classroom during the review of fundamental
concepts in Organic Chemistry. During EMA games, students manipulated the
physical game pieces, stimulating touch, sight, and imagination, in order to
facilitate the process of cognitive construction and the review of concepts and
content.




                                                                                 149

2. METHODOLOGY


      This study was conducted in stages involving the conception, construction,
and implementation of the EMA educational game with 37 11th-grade students
from Public High Schools A, B, and C, located in the city of Uberaba (MG).
      The EMA aimed to attract students’ attention to the learning of introductory
Organic Chemistry content, using an innovative, attractive, and interesting
pedagogical tool with dynamics distinct from those found in traditional teaching
(Saleem et al., 2022; Bezerra, 2024). Below is a description of the stages of
development of the EMA educational game:
      Stage 1 (Analysis of responses to a questionnaire administered to
chemistry teachers to design the EMA educational game): The teachers
interviewed in this stage answered 8 multiple-choice questions regarding the
teaching methodology and digital resources they use in their classes, the profile
of the student groups they teach, and the reasons for their students’ lack of
interest in the subject of chemistry. The questions were created on the Google
Forms platform, with the aim of clarifying for the teacher-researcher what type of
activity should be adopted to facilitate the teaching of introductory Organic
Chemistry content in an engaging and stimulating manner.
      Stage 2 (Development of the EMA educational game): The EMA
educational game was developed based on a preliminary analysis of the
structures of organic compounds covered in the initial phase of Organic
Chemistry studies, taking into account the types of chemical bonds between
atoms, molecular geometry, organic functions, as well as the responses provided
by the teachers interviewed in Stage 1.
      Stage 3 (Application of the EMA educational game and analysis of
results). To implement the EMA, the teacher-researcher divided the classes into
groups of 4 students, who received instructions on how to play the games via a
video created by the researcher and integrated into the game.          The video
displayed cards containing instructions on how to assemble the structures of
organic compounds, information regarding types of carbon chains and the
number of carbons they contain, types of chemical bonds (saturated or
unsaturated chains), the nature of the atoms present (homogeneous or
heterogeneous     carbon    chain),   the   closure    of   the   carbon     chain


                                                                               150

(open/acyclic/aliphatic or closed/cyclic or aromatic), and the arrangement of the
atoms (linear or branched chain). During the rounds of the EMA game, students
were qualitatively assessed regarding enjoyment, prior knowledge of organic
chemistry, mastery of fundamental organic chemistry concepts, teamwork, and
interest in the proposed methodology (gamification). The teacher-researcher also
interviewed teachers from schools A, B, and C involved in the study, asking them
to report whether the EMA educational game could be considered a teaching
resource that facilitates the teaching and learning process of fundamental organic
chemistry concepts.


3. RESULTS AND DISCUSSIONS


      The responses provided by each of the teachers from Schools A, B, and
C interviewed during the first stage helped the teacher-researcher in designing
the EMA educational game, particularly in understanding the students’ learning
difficulties in the subject of Chemistry. Furthermore, the responses clarified the
type of appropriate activity that should be planned as a strategy for reviewing the
fundamental content of Organic Chemistry. When asked about the reason for
students’ failure to learn Organic Chemistry content, 70% of the interviewed
teachers cited the spatial abstraction of organic compound structures as the
content with which students have the greatest difficulty learning. The other
responses cited were a lack of understanding of natural phenomena at the
macroscopic and microscopic levels (18%) and a failure to contextualize the
content within students’ daily lives (12%). In another question, which addressed
the use of active methodologies by teachers in their teaching practice, it was
found that 40% of them use blended learning, gamification, the flipped classroom,
problem-based learning, and peer instruction, albeit infrequently. Among the 60%
of respondents who have never used active methodologies, three reported being
unaware of the meaning of the term, eight had heard of it ( ), seven intend to use
it, and one has no intention of doing so. School teachers were also asked in which
area of Chemistry they used gamification, with 67% and 53% of respondents
citing the application of this methodology in Organic Chemistry and Physical
Chemistry content, respectively. The higher percentage of gamification use in
Organic Chemistry is likely due to the fact that students consider this area of


                                                                               151

chemistry to be “difficult” and because it depends on understanding prior content,
such as molecular geometry, chemical bonds, and compound nomenclature,
which are easy to gamify.
       The choice of gamification was justified because it is an engaging
methodology that differs from traditional teaching activities, in addition to
facilitating student learning by stimulating curiosity and a desire for challenge.
These responses provided by the interviewed teachers are corroborated by the
authors Cleophas; Soares, 2018; Silva; Pires, 2020; Eugenio, 2024.
       The second stage involved the development of the EMA educational
game. Figures 1 and 2 show, respectively, the plastic packaging for the
instruction cards and the colored EMA pieces, in accordance with the CPK model
convention developed by Corey, Pauling, and Koltun (1965), which uses
standardized colors to distinguish atoms of different chemical elements.
       The cards containing the game instructions, as well as the methane and
ethane structures assembled according to the EMA game instructions—to
illustrate how they should fit together—are shown in Figures 3 and 4.


Figure 1. Packaging for the EMA educational game, containing the instruction cards and pieces.




                              Source: Prepared by the authors.




                                                                                          152

    Figure 2. Pieces of the EMA educational game with the colors of the chemical elements
 standardized according to the IUPAC convention . (The colors of the pieces represent carbon
  (black), hydrogen (white), oxygen (red), nitrogen (blue), sulfur (yellow), fluorine (turquoise),
chlorine (green), bromine (burgundy), iodine (purple-blue), and the types of chemical bonds that
 must occur between carbon atoms to form the carbon chain (single, double, and triple covalent
                                 bonds represented in white).




                               Source: Prepared by the authors.


      Figure 3. Sample letter of instructions for the rounds of the EMA educational game.




                               Source: Prepared by the authors.




                                                                                              153

              Figure 4. Pieces assembled to form methane and ethane molecules.




                              Source: Prepared by the authors.


          Made of colored acrylic at a local print shop and designed to represent the
main chemical elements that form organic compounds, such as carbon,
hydrogen, nitrogen, oxygen, sulfur, and halogens (chlorine, bromine, and iodine),
the pieces of the EMA educational game were produced at a cost of R$ 80.00.
Round in shape and featuring openings for the joints designed to resemble
molecular geometry, the pieces were constructed according to the color of each
chemical element (Figure 2). Sticks representing single, double, and triple
covalent chemical bonds were also produced in acrylic to facilitate their
interlocking , ensuring greater durability and a better demonstration of carbon
chain formation.
          Analysis of the results, following the administration of the EMA educational
game to the students participating in the study during Stage 3, demonstrated their
improved understanding regarding the fact that carbon’s tetravalence can be
established through single, double, or triple covalent bonds. This insight enabled
them to comprehend the formation of different types of carbon chains and their
classification.
          The students mentioned that the instructions for the EMA games
presented in the video were clear, easy to understand, and presented in a logical
sequence. They reported that the EMA game facilitated the review and learning
of fundamental content, expressing their views as follows: “If we had more
classes like this, we would learn a lot”; “More classes like this to learn more”; “It
was very good for better understanding the content”; “We should have it more
often!”
          The teachers responsible for the Chemistry course at Schools A, B, and C
observed high student engagement during classes, as well as greater interest
and motivation in reviewing introductory Organic Chemistry content when playing


                                                                                  154

the EMA games. The concepts of the subject were revisited and learned more
easily through the use of the interactive and challenging elements of the game,
which aided in building knowledge as a team. EMA encouraged cooperation,
which facilitated content comprehension and learning. The way the pieces were
configured, respecting the positioning of the joints and the colors of the chemical
elements, facilitated students’ visualization of the valence and composition of
each type of carbon chain (cyclic or acyclic, normal or branched, saturated or
unsaturated, homogeneous or heterogeneous), minimizing abstraction. The
same teachers considered that the EMA demonstrated its potential as a teaching
resource that facilitates the teaching and learning process of the fundamental
concepts of Organic Chemistry.


4. CONCLUSION


       The proposal to develop a playful activity aimed at helping students review
and understand the fundamental concepts of Organic Chemistry was
successfully implemented and broke the paradigm of uninteresting and
demotivating classes when conducted in the traditional teaching format.
       The EMA game, structured as an educational resource, minimized the
difficulty faced by teachers seeking to teach abstract concepts of Organic
Chemistry to their students, thereby emphasizing that gamification is an
attractive, dynamic, and enjoyable teaching methodology. The stimulation of the
human senses, particularly sight and touch, through colors and the manipulation
of 2D pieces representing each chemical element forming the carbon chains of
organic compounds, served as crucial resources for minimizing abstraction and
strengthening learning.
       The review of basic and fundamental concepts in Organic Chemistry was
facilitated by the exchange of knowledge and insights among the student players,
who were engaged during the rounds of the EMA game, demonstrating that it is
a relevant and effective activity in the teaching and learning process.
       Public school teachers viewed the EMA as an important educational tool
that helped students review and learn the fundamentals of organic chemistry.
Furthermore, given that the colored pieces symbolically represented the chains
of organic compounds, as well as the different types of chemical bonds involved,


                                                                               155

these game elements contributed to its evaluation as an effective educational
resource in the teaching and learning process.
      For future studies, it is suggested that the EMA educational game be used
as an assessment tool and applied to the teaching or review of other topics in
Organic Chemistry, such as the recognition of types of carbon chains and the
chemical bonds involved, the nomenclature of organic compounds, and the
geometric arrangement of atoms in organic structures and functions.


                           ACKNOWLEDGMENTS


To CAPES, for financial support (document: 086.025.386-42) and to the Profes-
sional Master’s Program in Chemistry in the National Network (PROFQUI-
UFTM).




                                                                           156

                                  REFERENCES

ALMEIDA, S. A. S. Química Orgânica: contextualização, interdisciplinaridade e o uso
do livro didático. 2022. Monografia (Graduação) – Curso de Licenciatura em Química –
Universidade Federal do Maranhão, São Luís, 2022.

ARNAUD, A. A. Jogos e atividades lúdicas no ensino de Química: a experiência de
planejar e implementar uma disciplina, Química Nova na Escola, No prelo. 2024.
http://dx.doi.org/10.21577/0104-8899.20160381

ASSAI, N. D. S.; GALVÃO, J. C. R.; DELAMUTA, B. H.; BERNARDELLI, M. S.
Funções químicas no 9 ano: proposta de sequência didática e uno químico, Revista
Valore, v. 3, p. 454-465, 2018.

BEZERRA, A. V. Duelo orgânico: uma proposta de jogo didático com abordagem de
conceitos da Química Orgânica. 2024. Monografia (Graduação) – Curso de
Licenciatura em Química – Instituto Federal da Paraíba, Sousa, 2024.

BEZERRA, R. D. S.; SILVA, G. C. Jogos lúdicos no ensino de Química: uma estratégia
de ensino utilizada por discentes do Programa Institucional de Bolsa de Iniciação à
Docência (PIBID), In: CONEDU – Congresso Nacional de Educação, Fortaleza, CE.
Anais [...]. Fortaleza, CE, 2024.

CAPELLATO, P.; RIBEIRO, L. M. S; SACHS, D. Metodologias Ativas no Processo de
Ensino – Aprendizagem Utilizando Seminários como Ferramentas
Educacionais no Componente Curricular Química Geral, Research, Society and
Development, v. 8, n. 6, p. 2525-3409, 2019.

CARBO, L.; TORRES, F. S.; ZAQUEO, K. D.; BERTON, A. Atividades práticas e jogos
didáticos nos conteúdos de Química como ferramenta auxiliar no ensino de Ciências,
REnCiMa – Revista de Ensino de Ciências e Matemática, v. 10, n.5, p. 53-69, 2019.

CLEOPHAS, M. G.; SOARES, M. H. F. B. Didatização Lúdica no Ensino de
Química/Ciências – Teorias de Aprendizagem e Outras Interfaces. São Paulo:
Editora Livraria da Física, 2018.

CONDE, I. B.; JACINTO JUNIOR, S. G.; SILVA, M. A. M.; VERAS, K.M. Percepções
de professores de química no período da pandemia de COVID-19 sobre o uso de
jogos virtuais no ensino remoto, Research, Society and Development, v. 10, n.10,
e550101019070, 2021.

COREY, R. B.; PAULING, L. Molecular models of amino acids, peptides, and proteins,
Review of Scientific Instruments, v. 24, p. 621-627, 1953.

CUNHA, M. B. Jogos no Ensino de Química: Considerações Teóricas para sua
Utilização em Sala de Aula. Química Nova na Escola, v. 34, n. 2, p. 98-98, 2012.

DELOU, C. M. C.; ALBANO, W. M. Principais dificuldades descritas na aprendizagem
de Química para o Ensino Médio: revisão sistemática, Debates em Educação, v. 16,
n. 38, 2024.

EUGENIO, T. Aula em jogo: descomplicando a gamificação para educadores. São
Paulo: Editora Évora, 2024.




                                                                                   157

FERREIRA, E. A.; GODOI, T. R. A.; SILVA, L. G. M.; SILVA, T. P.; ALBUQUERQUE,
A. V. Aplicação de jogos lúdicos para o ensino de química: auxílio nas aulas sobre
tabela periódica. In: ENCONTRO NACIONAL DE EDUCAÇÃO, CIÊNCIA E
TECNOLOGIA, 2012, Campina Grande, PB. Anais [...]. Campina Grande, PB:
Universidade Estadual da Paraíba, 2012.

FRANCO, M. A. D. O.; ZAMPIERI, M. F. O.; MACIEL, R. V.; SILVA, C. R. S.;
OLIVEIRA, L. Jogos como ferramenta para favorecer a aprendizagem. In: V CONEDU
– Congresso Nacional de Educação, 2018, Recife, PE. Anais [...]. Recife, PE, 2018.

KOLTUN, W. L. Space filling atomic units and connectors for molecular models.
1965.

LIMA, M. Perfil Estudantil e Estratégias Metodológicas no Ensino de Química Geral:
Um estudo de caso em um centro de ensino estadual no interior do Maranhão.
Revista Tópicos, v. 2, n. 10, 2024.

ORTIZ, J. O. S.; DORNELES, A. M. Uso da taxonomia de bloom digital gamificada em
atividades coletivas no ensino de química: reflexões teóricas e possibilidades. Revista
Eletrônica Ludus Scientiae, v. 2, n. 2, p. 14-25, 2018.

PEREIRA, A. W.; FERNANDES, P. R. D.; BIZERRA, A. M. C. A produção de sabão
como recurso pedagógico para o ensino de funções orgânicas. Research, Society
and Development, v. 9, n. 2, e84922119, 2020.

PINHEIRO, A. R.; CARDOSO, S. P. Perspectiva de professores sobre metodologias
ativas: demandas para o uso do método de caso no ensino de química. Investigação,
Sociedade e Desenvolvimento, v. 11, n. 12, e123111234256, 2022.

SILVA, A. T.; PIRES, D. A. T. Gincana das funções inorgânicas: uma proposta lúdica
para aulas de química. Revista Eletrônica Ludus Scientiae, v. 4, n. 1, p.1-17, 2020.

PRICINOTTO, G., PRIMO, J. O. Experimentando e “Adoçando” o Ensino de Química:
das dificuldades em estequiometria à confecção de alfajores. Educação Química en
Punto de Vista, v. 4, n. 1, p. 115-128, 2020.

ROSSI, M.; FELIPE, A. B.; SOUSA, E. R.; GOMES, K. A. L.; AMORIM, J. D.;
CORDEIRO, L. F. C.; SILVA, M. R.; FRANÇA, R. A.; SILVA, T. F. B.; WEIS, V. B.
Refletindo sobre o ensino tradicional: uma revisão narrativa, Recima 21 – Revista
Científica Multidisciplinar, v.5, n.3, 2024.

SALEEM, A. N.; NOORI, N. M.; OZDAMLI, F. Gamification Applications in E-learing: A
literature Review. Technology Knowledge Learning, v. 27, n. 1, p. 139-159, 2022.

SILVA, E. S.; LOJA, L. F. B.; PIRES, D. A. T. Quiz molecular: Aplicativo lúdico didático
para ensino de Química Orgânica. Revista Prática Docente, v. 5, n. 1, p. 172-192,
2020.

SILVA, D. S.; NASCIMENTO, K. D.; SILVA JUNIOR, J. B. A.; MOTA, L. A.; MOTA, A.
P. A.; NUNES, R. M. Feira de ciências: O aluno como protagonista e autor da sua
aprendizagem, Revista Ibero-Americana de Humanidades, Ciências e Educação.
v. 10, n. 09, p. 1616-1632, 2024.




                                                                                     158

SOUZA, I. S. V.; CANTERO, A. M. M. O ensino tradicional versus a educação
contemporânea: aspectos atuais, Revista Contribuciones a Las Ciencias Sociales,
v.17, n. 9, p. 01-16, 2024.

VIEIRA, C. A., SILVA, A. F. A História e a Química das Especiarias: Experiência de
Aula Interdisciplinar para Estudantes do Ensino Médio. Revista Brasileira de
Educação e Cultura, v.8, n.2, p. 57-70, 2017.




                                                                                     159

CHAPTER 10
 THE UNTIED KNOT IN THE
 CLASSROOM: A HYBRID
 NEUROPSYCHOANALYTIC
 PERSPECTIVE ON EMOTIONAL
 REGULATION IN BORDERLINE
 PERSONALITY DISORDER

Mário Cesar dos Santos Bersaline
Specialist in Teaching and Educational Practices
Instituto Federal do Paraná (IFPR)
E-mail: mario.bersaline.pr@gmail.com

Márcio Bersaline
Bachelor's degree in History
Centro Universitário Cidade Verde (UNICV)
E-mail: marberit1973@gmail.com

Leila Cleuri Pryjma
Doctor in Education
Universidade Estadual Paulista (UNESP)
E-mail: leila.pryjma@ifpr.edu.br

Karina Moniz Tavares
Master's Degree in Education
Universidade Estadual de Maringá (UEM)
E-mail: russamoniz@hotmail.com

Gabriel Felipe Pryjma Cardeal Vieira
Bachelor of Science in Civil Engineering
Universidade Tecnológica Federal do Paraná (UTFPR)
E-mail: gabrielpryjma@gmail.com

Diana Andrade dos Santos
Specialist in Teaching and Educational Practices
Instituto Federal do Paraná (IFPR)
E-mail: didika.andrade@gmail.com

Lino Batista de Oliveira
Doctor of Philosophy
Pontificia Università “San Tommaso d’Aquino” (PUST)
E-mail: lino.batista326@gmail.com




                                                      160

Arielle Cristine de Jesus
Postgraduate degree in Higher Education, Education
Instituto Passo 1
E-mail: ariellecristine@hotmail.com

Valmir Xavier de Oliveira
Bachelor of Arts
Fundação Faculdade de Filosofia, Ciências e Letras de Mandaguari (FAFIMAN)
E-mail: valmirox@gmail.com

Gilberto Prado Silvano
Doctor candidate in Education
Universidade Estadual de Londrina (UEL)
E-mail: gilberto.prado@uel.br

Edilaine Cristina Brizola Brenzan
Graduate student in the Specialization Program in Teaching and Educational
Practices
Instituto Federal do Paraná (IFPR)
E-mail: edilainecbb@gmail.com


ABSTRACT: The school environment frequently presents itself as a setting of
crises for students with Borderline Personality Disorder (BPD), where emotional
dysregulation severely impacts learning and social coexistence. The complexity
of BPD challenges traditional pedagogical approaches, demanding an
understanding that transcends the isolated biological or the purely subjective.
The objective of this article is to propose emotional regulation strategies within
the school context through a hybrid neuropsychoanalytic perspective, articulating
the neurobiology of emotions with Freudian technique and Lacanian topology.
The methodology adopted was a theoretical essay, integrating data on
frontolimbic circuits with a reading of the subject based on free association and
the structure of the Borromean Knot. The results indicate that instability in BPD
can be understood as a failure in the knotting between the Real, the Symbolic,
and the Imaginary, correlated with amygdala hyperactivation. The discussion
points out that pedagogical listening, inspired by dream interpretation and free
association, can act as a symbolic buffer, aiding in the stabilization of the knot
and, consequently, in neural modulation. It is concluded that the hybrid approach
offers innovative tools for school inclusion, allowing the educator to act not as a
therapist, but as a facilitator of the circulation of speech, reducing the impact of
emotional short-circuits and promoting a sustainable learning environment.

KEYWORDS: neuropsychoanalysis, borderline personality disorder, borromean
knot, emotional regulation, school inclusion, psychoanalysis, classroom.

RESUMO: O ambiente escolar apresenta-se frequentemente como um cenário
de crises para estudantes com Transtorno de Personalidade Borderline (TPB),
onde a desregulação emocional impacta severamente a aprendizagem e a con-
vivência. A complexidade do TPB desafia as abordagens pedagógicas tradicio-




                                                                                161

nais, exigindo uma compreensão que transcenda o biológico isolado ou o subje-
tivo puro. O objetivo deste artigo é propor estratégias de regulação emocional no
contexto escolar através de uma perspectiva neuropsicanalítica híbrida, articu-
lando a neurobiologia das emoções com a técnica freudiana e a topologia laca-
niana. A metodologia adotada foi ensaio teórico, integrando dados sobre circui-
tos frontolímbicos a uma leitura do sujeito baseada na associação livre e na es-
trutura do Nó Borromeano. Os resultados indicam que a instabilidade no TPB
pode ser compreendida como uma falha na amarração entre o Real, o Simbólico
e o Imaginário, correlacionada a uma hiperativação da amígdala. A discussão
aponta que a escuta pedagógica, inspirada na interpretação dos sonhos e na
livre associação, pode atuar como um anteparo simbólico, auxiliando na estabi-
lização do nó e, consequentemente, na modulação neural. Conclui-se que a
abordagem híbrida oferece ferramentas inovadoras para a inclusão escolar, per-
mitindo que o educador atue não como terapeuta, mas como um facilitador da
circulação da palavra, reduzindo o impacto dos curto-circuitos emocionais e pro-
movendo um ambiente de aprendizagem sustentável.

PALAVRAS-CHAVE: neuropsicanálise, transtorno de personalidade borderline,
nó borromeano, regulação emocional, inclusão escolar, psicanálise, sala de aula.




                                                                             162

1. INTRODUCTION


       The contemporary educational landscape faces the pressing challenge of
incorporating perspectives that go beyond the boundaries of traditional
pedagogies. Among these, Borderline Personality Disorder (BPD) stands out not
only for its prevalence but also for the disruptive impact that emotional
dysregulation has on the learning environment.
       The phenomenon presents itself as a coin with two inseparable sides.
Neurobiologically, these students exhibit hyperactivation of the amygdala
correlated with hypoactivation of the prefrontal cortex, resulting in emotional
responses that “hijack” cognition. In parallel, psychoanalysis describes this same
dynamic as a failure in tying the Borromean Knot—where the Real (nameless
anxiety) invades the scene without the mediation of the Symbolic.
       However, current literature often operates in isolation: neuroscience
focuses on the brain, while psychoanalysis focuses on the subject. This
dichotomy creates a gap in pedagogical practice: the purely biological reading
offers no tools for relational management to the teacher, and the purely
psychoanalytic reading may seem too abstract for the urgency of the classroom.
       Faced with this impasse, this article is structured as a Theoretical Essay
to answer the following Research Question: How can a hybrid perspective, which
articulates the regulation of frontolimbic circuits with the topology of the
Borromean Knot, underpin effective pedagogical strategies for students with
PDD?
       The relevance of this study lies in translating clinical knowledge into
education without turning the teacher into a therapist. The central thesis defended
here is that access to neural modulation (calming the amygdala) can be facilitated
through symbolic intervention (pedagogical listening). It is proposed that, by
welcoming the student’s disordered discourse via adapted free association, the
educator erects a ‘symbolic barrier’ capable of preventing emotional short-
circuiting.




                                                                               163

1.1 GENERAL OBJECTIVE


      To analyze how the integration of the neurobiology of emotions and
Lacanian psychoanalytic topology can inform pedagogical practices of emotional
regulation for students with Borderline Personality Disorder.


1.2 SPECIFIC OBJECTIVES


    ● To articulate the neurobiological correlates of dysregulation (amygdala-
      prefrontal axis) with their implications for learning;
    ● Relate the instability described by neuroscience to Lacan’s clinical concept
      of the “unknotted knot,” establishing a transdisciplinary vocabulary;
    ● To establish guidelines for “pedagogical listening” and the construction of
      causal narratives as devices for emotional regulation in school settings.


2. THEORETICAL FRAMEWORK


2.1 THE NEUROBIOLOGICAL SUBSTRATE: THE “FLESH” OF EMOTION


      For Roberto Lent, emotion is not an ethereal event, but the product of
precise neural orchestration. He defines the stage where this phenomenon
occurs, describing the Limbic System not merely as a location, but as a
coordination system.
      “The limbic system refers to the set of structures in the central nervous
system that participate in the subjective and behavioral coordination of emotions
[...] including the hypothalamus, the amygdala, and the cingulate cortex” (LENT,
2010, p. 257).
      From this perspective, the “flesh” of emotion is composed of subcortical
circuits that ensure survival. The amygdala, for example, acts as a sentinel,
processing emotional salience even before full consciousness. Lent argues that
without this anatomical substrate, the subjective experience (“the feeling”) would
lack a physiological anchor to trigger autonomic and motor responses.
      However, the mere activation of limbic structures would result in
uncontrolled behavior. This is where Morais intervenes, introducing the cortical


                                                                              164

and functional layer. For Morais, the anatomy described by Lent needs to be
managed so that it fulfills its evolutionary role. He emphasizes that emotion is not
noise in the cognitive system, but part of its learning mechanism.
       "Executive functions and emotions are mechanisms responsible for the
evolution and adaptation of individuals in society. [...] Human behavior is directly
influenced by executive functions and emotions, with emotional regulation being
crucial for learning" (MORAIS, 2020, Ch. 3).
       Morais argues that the “standard anatomy” necessarily includes the
connection pathways to the prefrontal cortex. Emotional health, therefore,
depends on the ability of these executive functions to modulate limbic intensity,
transforming instinctive reactions into socially adjusted behavior.
       The clinical counterpoint is provided by Mauro Hegenberg. While Lent
describes the system and Morais describes its ideal regulation, Hegenberg
describes the collapse of this circuit in the figure of the Borderline patient. In such
cases, the “flesh” of emotion seems to be raw, lacking the psychic skin of
regulation mentioned by Morais.
       Hegenberg illustrates how the failure to integrate these structures results
in unbearable psychic pain, where the anatomy of emotion manifests as
destructive impulsivity.
       "The borderline individual has explosive and impulsive reactions precisely
because of the fear of losing the object of support. [...] There are generally chronic
feelings of emptiness and a propensity to engage in intense and unstable
relationships" (HEGENBERG, 2000, p. 53).
       For Hegenberg, the physiology of emotion in the borderline state is marked
by excessive intensity. The “neurobiological substrate” ceases to be a warning
system (as proposed by Lent) or an adaptation system (as proposed by Morais)
and becomes a source of suffering, revealing a functional disconnection where
the intensity of affect (amygdala/hypothalamus) overpowers the capacity for
containment (cortex/executive functions).
       The “standard” anatomy of emotions, therefore, does not reside in an
isolated structure, but in the integrity of the circuit that connects limbic reactivity
(Lent) to executive regulation (Morais). When this circuit fails, the raw and
painful “ ” face of emotion described in the clinical presentation of borderline
states (Hegenberg) is revealed, confirming that the biological substrate is


                                                                                   165

inseparably the foundation of both mental health and pathology.
       Western pedagogical tradition has often operated under the premise that
learning is a strictly cognitive phenomenon, where emotion figures as a noise to
be silenced in favor of reason. However, contemporary neuroscience, grounded
in the work of António Damásio, subverts this logic by demonstrating that
rationality is not self-sufficient. In Descartes’ Error, Damásio posits the Somatic
Marker Hypothesis, arguing that the decision-making process—essential for
academic learning—depends on bioregulatory signals from the body.
       Damásio demonstrates that the ability to reason and plan for the future is
drastically compromised in the absence of emotional feedback. “Pure reason,”
disconnected from the affective substrate, becomes ineffective. The author
describes how emotion acts in the selection of biological and social options,
stating that:
       "Feelings guide us in the right direction, leading us to the appropriate place
within the decision-making space where we can make use of the tools of logic"
(DAMÁSIO, 2012, p. 238).
       Therefore, “academic reason”—the ability to focus, decide to study, and
block out distractions—does not exist without the foundation of emotion. If the
somatic marking system fails, the architecture of rational decision-making
collapses.


2.2 THE TOPOLOGY OF THE SUBJECT: THE UNLEASHED “SYMBOLIC”


       If the previous section demonstrated that the biology of the Borderline
student operates in a state of neurophysiological “short-circuit,” it is now
appropriate to question the programming that precedes the body. Why does
biology fail? To answer this question without falling into organicist reductionism,
it is imperative to move from anatomy to topology. The hypothesis put forward
here is that limbic dysregulation is the somatic echo of an unraveling in the
subject’s structure. Where neuroscience sees a hyperactive amygdala,
psychoanalysis identifies a failure in the function of the word.
       Understanding this dynamic requires a return to Jacques Lacan’s *The
Seminar, Book 11: The Four Fundamental Concepts of Psychoanalysis*. In
contrast to the * * intuitive notion of a “deep” or instinctual “place,” Lacan posits


                                                                                 166

the unconscious as a structure homologous to language. The healthy subject is
one capable of capturing the drive (the Real of the body) within the networks of
the signifier (the Symbolic).
         However, in the Borderline phenomenon or in a student’s outburst in the
classroom, we observe the breakdown of this mechanism. Lacan warns that the
absence of symbolic mediation condemns the subject to “show” what they cannot
“say.”
         "The unconscious is structured like a language [...] but when the subject
cannot constitute himself in speech, he plunges into the act. Acting out is the
display of that which cannot be recalled in words" (LACAN, 1979, p. 129 [approx.
in the Zahar Ed.]; see also the concept of passage to the act).
         The student who attacks or cries convulsively is not merely “out of control”;
he is exposing the precariousness of his Borromean Knot. In late Lacanian
topology, mental health depends on the firm entanglement between the Real
(organism/drive), the Symbolic (language/law), and the Imaginary (ego/body).
The aggressive act is evidence that the ring of the Symbolic has come loose,
allowing the Real of the drive to invade the body without any barrier or mediation.
Biology fails because the Symbolic has come undone.
         Moving toward a contemporary and pioneering perspective, we ask: what
causes this symbolic unraveling? Why does this specific subject fail to constitute
the word? Here, we engage with Galit Atlas and her work Emotional Inheritance.
Atlas proposes that many of the “disorders” we diagnose individually are, in fact,
manifestations of traumas not processed by previous generations.
         The key concept here is the “radioactivity” of the family secret. Atlas argues
that what was not resolved in the parents’ psyche returns as a symptom in the
children’s bodies.
         "The people we love and those who raised us live within us; we feel their
pain, we dream their memories [...] We literally carry our parents’ secrets and
unprocessed traumas" (ATLAS, 2022, p. 1-2).
         From this perspective, the Borderline student brings to school not only their
own regulatory deficit, but the “ghosts” of a traumatic family history. The “ghost in
the classroom” is the invisible presence of unresolved grief, silenced violence,
and unspeakable pain that surrounds the child.
         The “failure in the constitution of the subject” occurs, therefore, because


                                                                                   167

the child has been designated to bear the weight of their parents’ traumatic Real,
without having received the symbolic tools to narrate it. The child’s developing
brain is flooded by an anguish that does not entirely belong to them, yet which
they are forced to process. Biological dysregulation (excess cortisol, executive
dysfunction) is the physiological response to this intrusion of a massive,
unsymbolized emotional legacy.
       The integration of these theoretical vectors allows for a revolutionary
reading of disruptive behavior. The student is not merely a “defective brain”
(Lent/Morais) or an “undisciplined” child. He is the bearer of an unbound
Symbolic (Lacan) due to an Emotional Inheritance (Atlas) too heavy to be
articulated.
       Pedagogical and clinical intervention, therefore, must aim to “re-tie” the
knot. It is not merely a matter of containing behavior (the Imaginary) or medicating
the brain (the Real), but of offering a space where words can circulate,
transforming the “phantom” into history and the raw act into a shared narrative.


3. THE HYBRID SYNTHESIS IN THE SCHOOL CONTEXT


       The articulation between the neurobiology of emotions and Lacanian
topology should not serve merely for diagnosis, but should underpin a new ethics
of classroom management. If, as seen, the student with PD suffers from an
overactivation of the amygdala correlated with a disengagement of the Symbolic
register, the pedagogical intervention must act as a temporary prosthesis for this
failed function. Three lines of action are proposed here that constitute the “hybrid
approach”: the Teacher as Symbolic Shield, Decompressive Pedagogical
Listening, and Narrative as Cortical Modulation.
       The first challenge in crisis management is “imaginary capture.” When the
student explodes in aggression or tears, they summon the teacher to a mirror
duel (Imaginary). Neurobiologically, the student’s brain is in survival mode,
seeking in the other a reaction that confirms the danger (feeding back to the
amygdala). If the educator reacts with anger or excessive authoritarianism, they
validate the dysregulation.
       The “Symbolic Shield” approach requires the educator not to respond to
the provocation (content level), but to embrace the distress (structural level). The


                                                                                168

teacher must lend their own prefrontal regulation to the student. This means
maintaining a monotone voice and a non-threatening posture, acting as the
missing link for the student. By refusing to enter into the symmetry of aggression,
the educator introduces an “interval” between the impulse (Real) and the action,
allowing the neural alert circuit to begin cooling down due to the absence of
threatening feedback.
       The technique of free association, fundamental in clinical practice, can be
adapted to the school context not as an investigative method, but as an outlet. In
pre-crisis moments, it is observed that the speech of the Borderline student
becomes fragmented or accelerated.
       "Pedagogical Listening" consists of allowing the student to verbalize the
disordered flow of thoughts without the immediate demand for logic or
pedagogical coherence. Unlike the traditional classroom, which requires silence
for learning, the crisis requires speech for regulation. By offering a safe space for
“disordered speech” to flow, the teacher facilitates what neuroscience calls
labeling (naming the emotion). Studies show that the act of transforming emotion
into words engages the ventrolateral prefrontal cortex, inhibiting amygdala
reactivity. The educator does not interpret “family trauma”—a role for the
therapist—but bears witness to the speech, validating the subject’s existence
beyond their disruptive behavior.
       After the acute phase of dysregulation, the hybrid pedagogical approach
focuses on reconstructing historical context. The student with BPD lives in an
“eternal present” of emotional intensity, unable to access the temporal
perspective necessary for planning (executive function).
       The strategy here is to help the student construct a causal narrative about
the event: “What happened before? What did you feel? What did you do?” This
Socratic questioning is not punitive, but structuring. It forces the recruitment of
the hippocampus (memory) and the prefrontal cortex (logic), helping to “re-tie”
the Real of the drive with the Symbolic of the explanation. By transforming the
impulsive act into a story with a beginning, middle, and end, the student ceases
to be a hostage to pure biological discharge and begins to inhabit language,
restoring— , albeit precariously—the stability of the Borromean Knot necessary
for learning.



                                                                                 169

4. CONCLUSION


       This study sought to demonstrate that the pedagogical challenge posed
by Borderline Personality Disorder cannot be overcome by a one-dimensional
interpretation. Neither neurobiology alone, which risks reducing the student to a
synaptic deficit, nor pure psychoanalysis, which might ignore the urgency of
executive dysfunction, is sufficient. The “hybrid” perspective proposed here
proves not only viable but necessary.
       It is concluded that the “untied knot” in the classroom—the explosive crisis
or deep apathy—is the behavioral correlate of a dual failure: limbic (biological)
hyperactivation and the insufficiency of symbolic (psychic) binding. In this
scenario, the teacher’s role transcends that of a mere content transmitter to
assume the function of a regulatory buffer. By lending their own prefrontal stability
and offering the spoken word as a mediating resource, the educator acts directly
on the student’s neural plasticity and subjective structure.
       The proposal is not that schools should become clinics, but that pedagogy
should incorporate clinical intelligence to fulfill its social function. The adoption of
strategies such as “decompressive listening” and “causal narrative” allows
students with PD to move from being held hostage by their emotions to becoming
active participants in their own learning. Ultimately, tying this knot means
ensuring that school inclusion is not merely the physical presence of the body at
a desk, but the symbolic inscription of the individual within the social bond.




                                                                                    170

                                 REFERENCES

ATLAS, Galit. Herança emocional: uma terapeuta, seus pacientes e o legado do
trauma. Rio de Janeiro: Alta Life, 2022.

DAMÁSIO, António R. O erro de Descartes: emoção, razão e o cérebro humano. São
Paulo: Companhia das Letras, 2012.

HEGENBERG, Mauro. Borderline. São Paulo: Casa do Psicólogo, 2000.

LACAN, Jacques. O seminário, livro 11: os quatro conceitos fundamentais da
psicanálise. Rio de Janeiro: Zahar, 1979.

LENT, Roberto. Cem bilhões de neurônios: conceitos fundamentais de neurociência.
2. ed. São Paulo: Atheneu, 2010.

MORAIS, E. A. Neurociência das emoções. Curitiba: Intersaberes, 2020.




                                                                               171

CHAPTER 11
 A POSITIVE CLASSROOM CLIMATE
 AS A CONTEMPORARY
 PEDAGOGICAL STRATEGY:
 IMPACTS ON LEARNING,
 ENGAGEMENT, AND STUDENT
 WELL-BEING

Ricardo Luiz Alves
Master’s Student in Education
Universidade Federal de Alfenas (UNIFAL)
E-mail: ricardoluizalves.psi@gmail.com

Marcelo Damião Amoras Nascimento
Master’s Student in Emerging Technologies in Education
Metropolitan University of Science and Technology (MUST)
E-mail: mdsnascimento@hotmail.com

Ana Clara de Sousa Meirelles
PhD Candidate in Biotechnology
Universidade Federal do Delta do Parnaíba (UFDPAR)
E-mail: anameirelles83@gmail.com

Jennifer Nascimento da Silva
PhD Candidate in Biosciences and Health
Universidade Tiradentes (UNIT)
E-mail: enf.jennifernascimento@outlook.com

Ronaldo Pereira da Silva
Graduate in ICU and Urgent and Emergency Care
Faculdade Iguaçu (FI)
E-mail: naldopsm@gmail.com

Michel dos Reis da Silva
Master’s Candidate in Education Sciences
Logos University International (UNILOGOS)
E-mail: michel_dsilva@outlook.com

Micilandia Pereira de Sousa
Postgraduate in Applied Humanities and Social Sciences and the World of Work
Instituto Federal do Piauí (IFPI)
E-mail: micilandiasousa@gmail.com




                                                                         172

Lucas Gabriel Pereira da Silva
Undergraduate Student in Biological Sciences
Universidade Estadual de Alagoas (UNEAL)
E-mail: lucas.silva14@alunos.uneal.edu.br


ABSTRACT: A positive classroom climate has been recognized as an important
factor in strengthening learning, academic engagement, and student well-being
in the contemporary educational context. This study aimed to analyze the impacts
of a positive classroom climate on students’ academic, emotional, and social
development, highlighting the relevance of humanized pedagogical practices and
social-emotional competencies in the educational process. This is an integrative
literature review conducted in the ERIC, SpringerLink, Latindex, and SciELO
databases, considering articles published between 2020 and 2026 in Portuguese
and English. The results showed that welcoming, collaborative, and emotionally
safe school environments foster greater student participation, strengthen
interpersonal relationships, improve academic performance, and reduce school
conflicts. Furthermore, it was found that participatory methodologies, social-
emotional learning, and welcoming practices significantly contribute to promoting
emotional safety and a sense of belonging. It is concluded that a positive
classroom climate represents an essential pedagogical strategy for the holistic
education and healthy development of students.

KEYWORDS: learning, student well-being, school climate, social-emotional
education, academic engagement.

RESUMO: O clima positivo em sala de aula tem sido reconhecido como um im-
portante fator para o fortalecimento da aprendizagem, do engajamento acadê-
mico e do bem-estar estudantil no contexto educacional contemporâneo. Este
estudo teve como objetivo analisar os impactos do clima positivo em sala de aula
no desenvolvimento acadêmico, emocional e social dos estudantes, destacando
a relevância das práticas pedagógicas humanizadas e das competências socio-
emocionais no processo educativo. Trata-se de uma revisão integrativa da lite-
ratura, realizada nas bases de dados ERIC, SpringerLink, Latindex e SciELO,
considerando artigos publicados entre os anos de 2020 e 2026, nos idiomas por-
tuguês e inglês. Os resultados evidenciaram que ambientes escolares acolhedo-
res, colaborativos e emocionalmente seguros favorecem maior participação dis-
cente, fortalecimento das relações interpessoais, melhoria do desempenho aca-
dêmico e redução de conflitos escolares. Além disso, verificou-se que metodolo-
gias participativas, educação socioemocional e práticas de acolhimento contri-
buem significativamente para promoção da segurança emocional e do senti-
mento de pertencimento. Conclui-se que o clima positivo em sala de aula repre-
senta uma estratégia pedagógica essencial para formação integral e desenvol-
vimento saudável dos estudantes.

PALAVRAS-CHAVE: aprendizagem, bem-estar estudantil, clima escolar,
educação socioemocional, engajamento acadêmico.




                                                                             173

1. INTRODUCTION


       The creation of a positive classroom climate has established itself as an
indispensable contemporary pedagogical strategy for strengthening teaching and
learning processes, especially in light of the social, emotional, and technological
transformations permeating the current educational context. More than just a
physically organized environment, the school climate involves healthy
interpersonal relationships, respectful communication, emotional security, a
welcoming atmosphere, and pedagogical practices capable of promoting active
participation, motivation, and the holistic development of students. In this context,
the school comes to be understood not only as a space for the transmission of
knowledge, but also as an environment for human and socio-emotional
development (Martinsone et al., 2023).
       Recent studies demonstrate that a positive classroom climate directly
influences academic performance, student engagement, and students’ emotional
well-being.   According    to   (García-Peinado,      2023),   welcoming      school
environments foster children’s emotional development, strengthening skills such
as empathy, self-regulation, and social interaction. Similarly, (Nazilah, Hayati &
Azizah, 2025) emphasize that the teacher’s role is fundamental in building a
classroom culture based on respect, dialogue, and cooperation—factors that
contribute to more meaningful and participatory learning.
       Furthermore, contemporary methodologies centered on meaningful,
conscious, and enjoyable learning have reinforced the need for humanized and
motivating pedagogical practices. As evidenced by (Feriyanto & Anjariyah, 2024),
approaches that promote joyful and reflective learning experiences enhance
students’ interest and increase their participation in the educational process. In
this context, strengthening teachers’ pedagogical competencies also becomes
essential for creating inclusive and emotionally safe environments (Susmawati &
Sukinah, 2025).
       However, despite the relevance of the topic, many institutions still face
difficulties related to indiscipline, student demotivation, interpersonal conflicts,
and weaknesses in teacher-student relationships, compromising the school
climate and educational outcomes. As Guedes (2021) points out, students’



                                                                                 174

perceptions of the school environment exert a significant influence on their sense
of belonging and academic participation.
       Given this, this study is justified by the need to understand how a positive
classroom climate can serve as a contemporary pedagogical strategy capable of
fostering learning, engagement, and student well-being. Thus, the objective of
this study is to analyze the impacts of a positive classroom climate on students’
academic, emotional, and social development, highlighting the importance of
humanized pedagogical practices in promoting more inclusive, participatory, and
healthy educational environments.


2. THEORETICAL FRAMEWORK


       A positive classroom climate has been widely discussed in contemporary
educational literature as a fundamental element for students’ academic,
emotional, and social development. Understanding this concept goes beyond the
idea of organizing the physical space, encompassing relational, emotional, and
pedagogical factors that directly influence learning experiences. In this regard,
Júnior et al. (2023) state that positive learning environments foster active student
participation, strengthen motivation, and contribute to the development of
healthier interpersonal relationships in the school setting.
       The literature shows that strengthening social-emotional competencies is
one of the main pillars for promoting a healthy school climate. According to
Durlak, Mahoney & Boyle (2022), school programs focused on social-emotional
learning have significant impacts on academic performance, the reduction of
problematic behaviors, and the development of skills such as empathy, self-
control, and cooperation. The authors emphasize that such skills are essential for
the holistic development of students and for building more welcoming and safe
educational environments.
       Complementing this perspective, Brush et al. (2022) highlight that social-
emotional learning must be incorporated into pedagogical practices in a
continuous and contextualized manner, allowing students to develop skills in
social interaction, conflict resolution, and collective participation. This approach
reinforces the need for humanized teaching practices capable of promoting a
sense of belonging and valuing the unique qualities present in the classroom.


                                                                                175

       In the context of contemporary pedagogical practices, the teacher’s role
takes center stage in fostering a positive classroom climate. According to
Contreras & Maussa (2025), pedagogical strategies based on dialogue, active
listening, and participatory methodologies strengthen the bond between teachers
and students, promoting greater engagement and meaningful learning. Similarly,
Holanda & Beranger (2025) argue that contemporary teaching requires flexible,
collaborative, and student-centered methodological practices, taking into account
the emotional and social demands present in today’s school environment.
       Collaborative leadership is also identified as a key factor in improving the
school climate. As Mondal (2020) analyzes, building cooperative relationships
among administrators, teachers, and the school community contributes to more
democratic environments, strengthening collective participation and institutional
commitment to educational quality. This perspective highlights that fostering a
positive climate does not depend exclusively on the teacher, but on the
coordination among different educational stakeholders.
       Furthermore, recent studies demonstrate that the classroom climate has a
direct influence on student engagement and academic self-efficacy. According to
Khuhro (2024), welcoming and emotionally safe school environments foster
greater student confidence in their abilities, stimulating participation, persistence,
and improved academic performance. Similarly, Majumder & Beri (2024) found
that a positive classroom climate significantly influences academic performance,
especially in the process of learning English, reinforcing the relationship between
emotional aspects and educational performance.
       Another relevant aspect concerns the promotion of well-being and
emotional safety in the school environment. As highlighted by Guimarães et al.
(2025), pedagogical interventions focused on teacher mediation and the
strengthening of interpersonal relationships contribute to reducing tensions,
improving social interaction, and enhancing learning. In the same vein, Marques
(2026) emphasizes that acceptance and a sense of belonging are fundamental
pillars for building a positive school climate, fostering inclusion and valuing
students.
       Finally, positive education has been identified as a relevant strategy for
reducing conflicts and strengthening school relationships. According to Silva et
al. (2026), pedagogical practices grounded in empathy, respect, and emotional


                                                                                  176

development contribute to more harmonious and collaborative environments.
Furthermore, Aguiar et al. (2026) argue that social-emotional learning represents
an essential tool for promoting student well-being and inclusive educational
planning, highlighting the importance of pedagogical practices committed to the
holistic development of students.


3. METHODOLOGY


       This study is characterized as an integrative literature review, a research
method that allows for the collection, analysis, and synthesis of results from
scientific studies on a specific topic, contributing to the construction of knowledge
and the identification of evidence relevant to educational practice. This type of
review enables a broad understanding of the positive classroom climate as a
contemporary pedagogical strategy, considering different methodological
approaches and theoretical perspectives.
       The integrative review was developed through the following stages:
definition of the theme and the guiding question, establishment of inclusion and
exclusion criteria, selection of databases, search and organization of studies,
critical analysis of scientific literature, and synthesis of the findings.
       The research was guided by the following research question: “What are
the impacts of a positive classroom climate on learning, engagement, and student
well-being in the contemporary educational context?” Defining the research
question allowed us to direct the selection of scientific studies related to the
investigated topic.
       The literature search was conducted in the ERIC (Education Resources
Information Center), SpringerLink, Latindex, and SciELO databases, chosen for
their academic relevance in the fields of education, educational psychology, and
social-emotional development. Articles were collected from publications available
in Portuguese and English.
       The following search terms were used, combined using the Boolean
operators “AND” and “OR”: “classroom climate,” “positive classroom climate,”
“school climate,” “student engagement,” “student well-being,” “social and
emotional learning,” “clima escolar,” “clima positivo em sala de aula,”
“engajamento      estudantil,”   “bem-estar      estudantil,”   and    “aprendizagem


                                                                                 177

socioemocional.” The search strategy aimed to broaden the identification of
studies related to the influence of school climate on the teaching-learning process
and on students’ emotional development.
       The inclusion criteria adopted included: full-text scientific articles available
for free; studies published between 2020 and 2026; research in Portuguese and
English; studies related to positive classroom climate, learning, student
engagement, emotional well-being, and contemporary pedagogical strategies; as
well as studies presenting results relevant to the educational context. Quantitative
and qualitative studies, systematic reviews, and mixed-methods research were
included.
       As exclusion criteria, we disregarded duplicate articles in the databases,
incomplete studies, simple abstracts, final course projects, dissertations, theses,
editorials, book chapters, and publications that had no direct relation to the
proposed theme. We also excluded studies published outside the established
time frame and articles in languages other than those selected.
       The selection of studies occurred in three stages: reading of titles, analysis
of abstracts, and full reading of potentially eligible articles. After applying the
inclusion and exclusion criteria, the selected studies were organized into
spreadsheets for descriptive analysis and thematic categorization, allowing for
the identification of the main findings related to the impact of a positive classroom
climate on learning, engagement, and student well-being.
       The selection process for the articles used in this integrative review is
illustrated in Figure 1, which is based on the stages of identification, screening,
eligibility, and inclusion of the scientific studies analyzed.




                                                                                   178

        Figure 1 – Flowchart of the study selection process for the integrative review.




                           Source: Authored by the authors (2026)


       Since this is an integrative review based on secondary data in the public
domain, there was no need to submit it to the Research Ethics Committee, in
accordance with the guidelines established for research that uses exclusively
material already published in scientific journals.


4. RESULTS AND DISCUSSION


       After applying the previously established inclusion and exclusion criteria,
20 scientific studies published between 2020 and 2026, in Portuguese and
English, were selected. These studies addressed positive classroom climate and
its impacts on student learning, engagement, and well-being. The analyzed
studies include qualitative and quantitative research, systematic reviews, and
mixed-methods studies, allowing for a comprehensive understanding of the




                                                                                          179

investigated topic. The characteristics of the selected articles regarding authors,
year of publication, objectives, and main results are presented in Table 1.


  Table 1 – Characterization of the selected studies on positive classroom climate, learning,
                            engagement, and student well-being.
       Author/Year                 Study Objective                      Main Results

      Mondal (2020)           To analyze the impact of           It showed that collaborative
                             collaborative leadership on     leadership strengthens institutional
                                school improvement.         communication, improves the school
                                                                   climate, and fosters more
                                                                   participatory educational
                                                                         environments.

      Guedes (2021)             To investigate students’        It was found that a sense of
                               perceptions of the school        belonging and interpersonal
                              climate in municipal public      relationships directly influence
                                        schools.                engagement and school life.

   Durlak, Mahoney, and         Reviewing universal            It has been demonstrated that
       Boyle (2022)           social-emotional learning     social-emotional programs improve
                               programs in the school        students’ academic performance,
                                       setting.                   social skills, and behavior.

    Brush et al. (2022)        Discussing the practical      Highlighted that social-emotional
                                application of social-          competencies foster healthy
                               emotional learning in a      relationships, participation, and the
                                   global context.           holistic development of students.

  García-Peinado (2023)      Analyze the impacts of the     Found that welcoming environments
                               classroom climate on           strengthen empathy, emotional
                                children’s emotional           security, and social-emotional
                                    development.                        development.

  Martinsone et al. (2023)    Proposing a conceptual          It demonstrated that institutional
                              model for the sustainable       policies and teacher training are
                               promotion of a positive          fundamental to healthy school
                                  school climate.                       environments.

       Aslan (2023)            Developed a conceptual             Emphasized that effective
                              model of school climate in     classroom management promotes
                              early childhood education.         learning, organization, and
                                                                    children’s well-being.

    Júnior et al. (2023)          Investigating the               Identified that welcoming
                                importance of positive       environments promote motivation,
                               learning environments.         social interaction, and academic
                                                                         participation.

  Feriyanto and Anjariyah     Analyzing approaches to            Found increased student
          (2024)               meaningful, conscious,        engagement and participation in
                              and enjoyable learning.        student-centered methodologies.

      Khuhro (2024)                 To investigate          Demonstrated that emotionally safe
                                relationships between       environments enhance confidence,
                               school climate, student         participation, and academic
                               engagement, and self-                   persistence.
                                        efficacy.




                                                                                              180

 Majumder and Beri (2024)       Reviewed studies on         Identified a positive relationship
                            school climate and English    between a welcoming school climate
                              language performance.            and improved academic
                                                                      performance.

   Nazilah, Hayati, and      To investigate the role of     Demonstrated that collaborative
     Azizah (2025)           the teacher in building a       teaching practices strengthen
                            positive classroom culture.     discipline, respect, and student
                                                                       motivation.

  Susmawati and Sukinah        To evaluate teacher            Demonstrated that learning
        (2025)                 training strategies in          communities strengthen
                                inclusive contexts.         pedagogical competencies and
                                                                  school inclusion.

  Contreras and Maussa         Analyzing teaching              Identified that participatory
          (2025)              strategies to enhance        methodologies promote meaningful
                                 student learning.        learning and teacher-student bonds.

  Holanda and Beranger       Discuss challenges and           They highlighted the need for
         (2025)              trends in contemporary       flexible and humanized pedagogical
                                   education.                practices in the current context.

  Guimarães et al. (2025)   Investigate the impacts of        They found improvements in
                            pedagogical interventions     students’ emotional security, teacher
                              on the school climate.            mediation, and learning.

     Marques (2026)          Discussing acceptance           Demonstrated that emotional
                            and belonging as pillars of      support strengthens student
                            a positive school climate.        motivation, inclusion, and
                                                                    participation.

    Aguiar et al. (2026)     Analyze social-emotional       They demonstrated that social-
                            learning and the promotion    emotional practices promote mental
                               of school well-being.       health and educational inclusion.

     Silva et al. (2026)      To investigate positive         They identified a reduction in
                             education strategies for        conflicts and a strengthening of
                            reducing school conflicts.      interpersonal relationships in the
                                                                   school environment.

  García-Peinado (2023)     To assess the influence of      Concluded that a positive school
                              the school climate on       climate promotes emotional stability
                             children’s emotions and         and healthy social relationships.
                                    behavior.
                                  Source: Author (2026)


       The results showed a predominance of studies focused on the influence
of interpersonal relationships and humanized pedagogical practices in the
creation of more welcoming and participatory educational environments. In this
context, Nazilah, Hayati & Azizah (2025) identified that teachers who use
strategies of dialogue, cooperation, and positive mediation contribute significantly
to the formation of a more organized, participatory, and emotionally safe




                                                                                           181

classroom culture. The authors emphasize that the teacher’s attitude has a direct
influence on students’ motivation and behavior.
       Regarding emotional development, García-Peinado (2023) demonstrated
that a positive classroom climate fosters the strengthening of socio-emotional
skills in childhood, particularly aspects related to empathy, emotional self-
regulation, and social interaction. Similar results were observed by Aguiar et al.
(2026), who highlighted social-emotional learning as an essential strategy for
promoting student well-being and reducing emotional vulnerabilities in the school
environment.
       The studies also revealed a strong relationship between a positive school
climate and academic performance. As noted by Majumder & Beri (2024),
welcoming and organized school environments foster higher academic
achievement, particularly in English language learning, due to increased student
participation and confidence. Corroborating these findings, Khuhro (2024) found
that students in emotionally safe environments exhibit greater self-efficacy,
academic persistence, and engagement in school activities.
       Another recurring aspect in the analyzed studies concerns the importance
of contemporary student-centered methodologies. According to Feriyanto &
Anjariyah (2024), pedagogical approaches grounded in meaningful, conscious,
and enjoyable learning promote greater student engagement and enhance
knowledge construction. Similarly, Contreras & Maussa (2025) observed that
participatory teaching practices strengthen teacher-student interaction and foster
active learning.
       In the context of school management and organization, Martinsone et al.
(2023) emphasized that the sustainable promotion of a positive school climate
depends on the integration of institutional policies, teacher training, and the
strengthening of interpersonal relationships. Furthermore, Mondal (2020) noted
that collaborative leadership has a significant impact on improving the school
environment, fostering communication, cooperation, and conflict resolution.
       The importance of pedagogical training was also widely highlighted. As
demonstrated by Susmawati & Sukinah (2025), learning communities focused on
teacher professional development strengthen pedagogical competencies related
to inclusion, welcoming students, and emotional management in the classroom.
In this regard, Holanda & Beranger (2025) emphasize that the challenges of


                                                                              182

contemporary teaching require teachers prepared to handle increasingly complex
emotional, social, and cognitive demands.
       Furthermore, the studies analyzed revealed that practices of welcoming
and belonging are fundamental factors for building healthy school environments.
According to Marques (2026), students who feel valued and that they belong in
the school environment demonstrate greater participation, motivation, and
engagement with the learning process. Similar results were found by Júnior et al.
(2023), who demonstrated that positive environments contribute to strengthening
trust, social interaction, and student retention.
       The reduction of school conflicts also emerged as one of the main benefits
associated with a positive classroom climate. As noted by Silva et al. (2026),
positive education strategies based on empathy, active listening, and emotional
support foster more harmonious relationships between students and teachers.
Complementarily, Guimarães et al. (2025) found that teacher-mediated
pedagogical interventions contribute to greater emotional security, reduced
tensions, and improved learning.
       Finally, there was consensus among the studies regarding the need for
integrated, inclusive, and emotionally supportive pedagogical practices to
promote students’ holistic development. The results demonstrated that a positive
classroom climate represents an essential element for strengthening learning,
academic engagement, and student well-being, establishing itself as an
indispensable pedagogical strategy in the contemporary educational context.
       The findings of this integrative review highlight that a positive classroom
climate represents one of the key elements associated with the quality of the
contemporary educational process, simultaneously influencing academic
performance, student engagement, and emotional well-being. The analyzed
literature demonstrates consensus regarding the need for welcoming,
collaborative, and emotionally safe school environments as a fundamental
condition for meaningful learning and for students’ holistic development.
       In this context, there is agreement among the studies in pointing out that
the relational dimension of the school environment has a direct impact on student
participation and on the construction of more effective pedagogical bonds.
Nazilah, Hayati, and Azizah (2025) argue that teaching practices based on
dialogue, respect, and cooperation foster the creation of a positive school culture


                                                                               183

capable of encouraging greater student involvement in educational activities. This
perspective aligns with the reflections of Contreras and Maussa (2025), who
emphasize    that        participatory   methodologies    strengthen    teacher-student
interaction, fostering more democratic and collaborative environments.
      The relevance of social-emotional competencies also appears repeatedly
among the authors analyzed. Durlak, Mahoney, and Boyle (2022) state that
social-emotional learning programs contribute significantly to improving students’
behavior, social interaction, and academic performance. In line with this
approach, Brush et al. (2022) highlight that integrating social-emotional education
into pedagogical practices enhances skills related to empathy, self-regulation,
and conflict resolution, fostering healthier interpersonal relationships within the
school setting.
      Furthermore, studies demonstrate that a positive school climate is directly
associated with promoting students’ emotional safety. García-Peinado (2023)
emphasizes        that    welcoming      environments    foster   children’s   emotional
development, allowing students to express feelings, build trust, and develop
social skills essential for school life. Similarly, Guimarães et al. (2025) identify
that pedagogical interventions mediated by welcoming practices and active
listening contribute to reducing tensions and strengthening students’ emotional
balance.
      Another relevant aspect concerns the relationship between school climate
and academic engagement. The findings of Khuhro (2024) show that students in
positive environments exhibit greater self-efficacy and persistence in the face of
academic challenges, which leads to better educational outcomes. This analysis
is reinforced by Majumder and Beri (2024), who demonstrate that school climate
directly influences academic performance, especially in contexts that require
active participation and constant interaction between students and teachers.
      The authors also agree in recognizing that contemporary social and
educational transformations require new pedagogical approaches on the part of
teachers. For Holanda and Beranger (2025), contemporary teaching demands
methodological practices that are more humanized, flexible, and centered on
students’ emotional and cognitive needs. From this perspective, the teacher
ceases to act merely as a transmitter of content and begins to play a mediating
role in building more inclusive and participatory pedagogical relationships.


                                                                                     184

       Teacher training thus emerges as an essential element for consolidating
positive school environments. According to Susmawati and Sukinah (2025), the
development of pedagogical competencies related to inclusion, sensitive
listening, and emotional management fosters more welcoming and effective
educational practices. This understanding aligns with the contributions of
Martinsone et al. (2023), who advocate for the need for institutional policies aimed
at the sustainable promotion of a positive school climate, integrating continuing
education, institutional support, and the strengthening of interpersonal
relationships.
       Another point widely discussed in the literature concerns the sense of
belonging in the school environment. Marques (2026) argues that pedagogical
practices grounded in acceptance and individual recognition strengthen student
identity and foster greater academic participation. This analysis is supported by
the findings of Júnior et al. (2023), who highlight the importance of positive
learning environments for strengthening motivation, social interaction, and school
retention.
       Additionally, the reduction of school conflicts is one of the main benefits
associated with a positive classroom climate. Silva et al. (2026) demonstrate that
positive education strategies promote more harmonious relationships among
students, reducing aggressive behaviors and strengthening practices of
respectful coexistence. These results indicate that emotionally safe environments
contribute not only to learning but also to the promotion of mental health and a
culture of peace in the educational context.
       Thus, the analysis of the studies shows that a positive classroom climate
cannot be understood as a secondary element of the educational process, but
rather as a structural component of contemporary pedagogical practice. The
integration of a welcoming environment, social-emotional skills, participatory
methodologies, and teacher training proves fundamental for promoting
educational environments that are more inclusive, motivating, and capable of
fostering students’ academic, emotional, and social development.




                                                                                185

5. CONCLUSION


      This study has shown that a positive classroom climate constitutes a
fundamental contemporary pedagogical strategy for strengthening student
learning, engagement, and well-being. Based on the analysis of the selected
studies, it was possible to identify that welcoming, participatory, and emotionally
safe school environments foster not only academic performance but also
students’ social-emotional development. Thus, the research answered the
guiding question by demonstrating that a positive classroom climate directly
influences the quality of educational experiences and the relationships
established within the school context.
      The results demonstrated that pedagogical practices based on dialogue,
respect, acceptance, and active participation contribute significantly to the
development of healthier bonds between teachers and students. Furthermore, it
was observed that student-centered methodologies associated with the
development of social-emotional competencies foster greater motivation,
confidence, school retention, and engagement in educational activities. These
aspects reinforce the importance of understanding the school environment as a
space for holistic education, in which emotional and relational factors have a
direct impact on the teaching-learning process.
      Another relevant finding concerns the role of teachers and school
administration in fostering a positive classroom climate. The reviewed literature
highlighted that teacher training, pedagogical mediation, and the implementation
of inclusive strategies are essential elements for creating more democratic,
collaborative, and humanized environments. In this sense, it was found that the
teacher’s role extends beyond the transmission of content, assuming a mediating
function in students’ emotional, social, and academic development.
      Additionally, the studies showed that strengthening socio-emotional
competencies and positive education practices contributes to reducing school
conflicts, increasing emotional security, and promoting a culture of peace in the
educational environment. Thus, it is concluded that valuing interpersonal
relationships and a sense of belonging is an indispensable factor for consolidating
school environments that are more inclusive, healthy, and conducive to human
development.


                                                                               186

      Finally, we suggest that future research focus on the practical analysis of
the implementation of pedagogical strategies related to a positive school climate
across different educational levels and sociocultural contexts. Longitudinal
studies investigating the impacts of these practices on academic performance,
mental health, and school retention could deepen our understanding of this topic
and contribute to the development of more human-centered and effective
educational policies.




                                                                             187

                                    REFERENCES

AGUIAR, F. S., et al. (2026). Social-emotional education and the promotion of well-
being in the school environment: perspectives, challenges, and strategies for inclusive
educational planning. Revista Tópicos, 4(32), 1–16.

ASLAN, N. (2023). Classroom climate in early childhood education: A conceptual
framework for effective classroom management. Universitepark Bulletin, 12(2).

Brush, K. E., et al. (2022). Social and emotional learning: From conceptualization to
practical application in a global context. In J. DeJaeghere & E. Murphy-Graham (Eds.),
Life skills education for youth (Vol. 5). Springer. https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-030-
85214-6_3

CONTRERAS, Y. del C. M., & MAUSSA, O. L. J. (2025). Teachers’ strategies to
strengthen student learning: an analysis of classroom practices. Saberes APUDEP
Journal, 8(1), 83–104. https://doi.org/10.48204/j.saberes.v8n1.a6786

Crompton, H., & Burke, D. (2023). Artificial intelligence in higher education: The state
of the field. International Journal of Educational Technology in Higher Education, 20,
22. https://doi.org/10.1186/s41239-023-00392-8

Durlak, J. A., Mahoney, J. L., & Boyle, A. E. (2022). What we know, and what we need
to find out about universal, school-based social and emotional learning programs for
children and adolescents: A review of meta-analyses and directions for future research.
Psychological Bulletin, 148, 765–782. https://doi.org/10.1037/bul0000383

FERIYANTO, F., & ANJARIYAH, D. (2024). Deep learning approach through
meaningful, mindful, and joyful learning: A library research. Electronic Journal of
Education, Social Economics and Technology, 5(2), 208–212.

GARCÍA-PEINADO, R. (2023). The impact of classroom climate on emotional
development in childhood. Environment and Social Psychology, 9(1), 1–17.

GUEDES, M. da S. E. P. (2021). The school climate from the perspective of students in
municipal public schools in Rio de Janeiro. Brazilian Journal of Development, 7(1),
6209–6228. https://doi.org/10.34117/bjdv7n1-422

GUIMARÃES, R. T., et al. (2025). School climate and the impact of pedagogical
interventions on teacher mediation, emotional security, and learning. Revista Educação
& Ensino, 9(1).

HOLANDA, J. S., & BERANGER, J. A. (2025). Challenges and trends in contemporary
teaching: strategies and methodological support for teachers. Revista Foco, 18(7),
e9183. https://doi.org/10.54751/revistafoco.v18n7-053

JÚNIOR, J. F. C., et al. (2023). The importance of a positive and effective learning
environment for students. Rebena - Brazilian Journal of Teaching and Learning, 6,
324–341. https://rebena.emnuvens.com.br/revista/article/view/116

Khuhro, N. (2024). Study of classroom climate, student engagement, self-efficacy, and
learning experiences: An analysis employing social cognitive theory. Academy of
Education and Social Sciences Review, 4, 118–126.
https://doi.org/10.48112/aessr.v4i1.722



                                                                                       188

Majumder, P., & Beri, N. (2024). Systematic review of classroom climate and its
influence on English language achievement. Multidisciplinary Reviews, 8, 2025134.
https://doi.org/10.31893/multirev.2025134

MARQUES, M. (2026). The pillars of a positive climate: welcoming and belonging as
pedagogical practices. International Integralize Scientific, 6(56).

Martinsone, B., et al. (2023). A conceptual framework for sustainable promotion of a
positive school climate: Context, challenges, and solutions. Journal of Teacher
Education for Sustainability, 25(1), 64–85. https://doi.org/10.2478/jtes-2023-0005

Mondal, B. (2020). Collaborative leadership and its impact on school improvement: A
critical analysis.

NAZILAH, E. N., HAYATI, N. N., & AZIZAH, R. N. (2025). The role of teachers in
building a positive classroom culture: A study of classroom management in the era of
modern learning. Proceedings Series on Social Sciences & Humanities, 24, 269–272.
https://conferenceproceedings.ump.ac.id/pssh/article/view/1605

SILVA, L. M. da, et al. (2026). Positive education strategies to reduce school conflicts.
Ibero-American Journal of Humanities, Sciences, and Education, 12(1), 1–11.
https://doi.org/10.51891/rease.v12i1.23773

SUSMAWATI, E., & SUKINAH, S. (2025). Enhancing pedagogical competence in
inclusive kindergarten settings: The effectiveness of learning communities as a
professional development strategy. Journal of Innovation and Research in Primary
Education, 4(4), 2401–2411. https://doi.org/10.56916/jirpe.v4i4.2297




                                                                                       189

CHAPTER 12
 THE MEASUREMENT OF
 PROFESSIONAL BURNOUT AMONG
 ALGERIAN UNIVERSITY TEACHERS:
 THE CASE OF THE UNIVERSITY OF
 CONSTANTINE1, ALGERIA


Amrani Mourad
Doctor in Electromechanics
Hygiene and Safety Institute, Mostefa Ben Boulaid University
E-mail: m.amrani@univ-batna2.dz

Bouzerara Ramdane
Professor in Electrotechnics
Transport and Environmental Engineering Laboratory, Constantine1 University
E-mail: bouzerara.ramdane@umc.edu.dz

Chaib Rachid
Professor in Mecanic
Transport and Environmental Engineering Laboratory, Constantine1 University
E-mail: r3chaib@yahoo.fr

Ion Verzea
Professor in Mecanic
Department of Engineering and Management, "Gheorghe Asachi" Technical
University of Iasi
E-mail: verzea2000@yahoo.com


ABSTRACT: Professional burnout is one of the major issues relating to quality
of life and working conditions. It can affect the health of workers and organizations
as well. In recent years, the higher education sector in Algeria has experienced
major constraints, especially with the implementation of new reforms. All these
constraints have put more pressure on teachers, making their work more stressful
than before. This situation has led to psychosocial risks such as burn-out, and to
occupational illnesses (overwork, depression, etc.). In this work, we are
interested in measuring the degree of burnout among university teachers. We are
trying to make the links between burnout and this new change and to see the
pedagogical performance of university teachers both in the classroom and in
scientific research. As a case study, we chose the Faculty of Science and
Technology at the University of Constantine1, Algeria, with a population of 314
teachers. This study, the first of its kind in Algeria, enabled us to unfold the
relationship between burnout and the academic environment. The results showed
that a large number of teachers suffer from this syndrome, resulting in reduced
job satisfaction, demoralization, impaired health, and permanent stress. This had


                                                                                 190

an impact on teaching performance and increased the cost of work stoppages
due to teacher illness. These impacts justify the objective of this research, namely
to propose an analysis of teachers' health and identify which department is most
affected by burnout and the influence of burnout on teacher health in order to
increase their performance and thus create a sustainable university.

KEYWORDS: professional burnout, university teaching, measurement, stress,
sustainable university.

RESUMO: O esgotamento profissional é um dos principais problemas
relacionados à qualidade de vida e às condições de trabalho. Ele pode afetar a
saúde dos trabalhadores e também das organizações. Nos últimos anos, o setor
de ensino superior na Argélia passou por grandes restrições, especialmente com
a implementação de novas reformas. Todas essas restrições colocaram mais
pressão sobre os professores, tornando seu trabalho mais estressante do que
antes. Essa situação levou a riscos psicossociais, como o esgotamento, e a
doenças ocupacionais (excesso de trabalho, depressão etc.). Neste trabalho,
estamos interessados em medir o grau de esgotamento entre os professores
universitários. Estamos tentando estabelecer as ligações entre o esgotamento e
essa nova mudança e observar o desempenho pedagógico dos professores
universitários tanto na sala de aula quanto na pesquisa científica. Como estudo
de caso, escolhemos a Faculdade de Ciências e Tecnologia da Universidade de
Constantine1, na Argélia, com uma população de 314 professores. Esse estudo,
o primeiro desse tipo na Argélia, nos permitiu desdobrar a relação entre o
esgotamento e o ambiente acadêmico. Os resultados mostraram que um grande
número de professores sofre dessa síndrome, resultando em redução da
satisfação no trabalho, desmoralização, saúde debilitada e estresse permanente.
Isso teve um impacto no desempenho do ensino e aumentou o custo das
interrupções de trabalho devido a doenças dos professores. Esses impactos
justificam o objetivo desta pesquisa, ou seja, propor uma análise da saúde dos
professores e identificar qual departamento é mais afetado pelo burnout e a
influência do burnout na saúde dos professores, a fim de aumentar seu
desempenho e, assim, criar uma universidade sustentável.

PALAVRAS-CHAVE: esgotamento profissional, ensino universitário, medição,
estresse, universidade sustentável.




                                                                                191

1. INTRODUCTION


      Teacher professional well-being and teaching quality are two key aspects
of teaching research that have been rarely studied together (Klusmann et al.,
2008). Previous research has shown that teachers' professional knowledge and
motivation are closely linked. Teachers' symptoms of stress and burnout (e.g.
emotional exhaustion) are also thought to influence teacher performance, but no
empirical studies have tested this prediction (Klusmann et al., 2016). The Algerian
higher education sector has undergone significant changes in recent years,
especially with the implementation of the new LMD (License, Master, doctorate)
reform. This reform has created new constraints for some scientific
establishments, such as the number of subjects to be taught each semester, the
large number of students in charge, teaching tasks, and hybrid teaching (face-to-
face and distance "tele-teaching"), especially after the advent of the Covid 19
pandemic and its consequences on teacher burnout (Klusmann et al., 2023);
(Baeriswyl et al., 2021), and also scientific research: the new teaching system.
All these constraints have put more pressure on teachers, making their work more
stressful than before. These constraints have triggered a number of changes that
have had repercussions on the teaching profession, and as a result, professional
pathologies (stress, overwork, and depression) have set in. It's natural to assume
that these changes to teachers' work have had a negative effect on their well-
being at work. This is worrying, as teachers were already perceiving their
profession as stressful and reporting high levels of burnout prior to these changes
(Klusmann et al., 2023); (Herman et al., 2020); (Iriarte Redín and Erro-Garcés,
2020). Moreover, teacher burnout is linked to their health, retention in the
profession, teaching quality, and student achievement (Klusmann et al., 2016);
(Klusmann et al., 2023); (Arens and Morin, 2016); (Klusmann et al., 2022).
      Burnout originates from work-related stress, which can be defined as a
negative psychological state with cognitive and emotional components that affect
both individual and group health (HASSARD J., 2011). It occurs when a person
realizes that he or she lacks the physical or mental strength or resources to cope
with excessive demands and pressures (Iriarte Redín and Erro-Garcés, 2020).
Burnout is a widespread concept, used to express a widespread malaise,
increasingly perceived through the prism of medical and psychological


                                                                               192

knowledge (Loriol. Marc, 2000). The current state of the university and burnout
are now closely linked (Verquerre, 2006).
      Given the complexity and scope of this syndrome, which is unfortunately
experienced by so many individuals from a wide range of professional
backgrounds, we felt it was vital to understand work in order to transform it and
to take the broadest possible view of this syndrome (Brühlmann, 2010).
Measurement and control activities are central to the establishment of
sustainable development practices.        To achieve the targeted objectives, the
problem will be tackled along three main axes (Maslach and Leiter, 2008) :
    • Burn-out from the point of view of the individual, with a focus on risk factors
      prior to and following health problems, and individual prevention;
    • Burn-out from the point of view of the collective, and the link with work
      organization, by investigating what prevention is put in place at this level;
    • Burn-out from an economic and political point of view, i.e. on a general
      structural level, by exploring the gradual deterioration in working
      conditions, and drawing a parallel between changes in the world of work
      and the increase in stress, and therefore the possible increase in burn-out.
      Today, no one disputes that the main symptom of burn-out is exhaustion
and that it can affect all human dimensions (cognitive, emotional, motivational,
and physical exhaustion). The result is depersonalization (we are no longer
ourselves, others perceive us as more distant, more negative, sometimes cynical)
and reduced performance, figure 1 (Bertels, D.S., 2010.). However, exhaustion
in the form of loss of energy is just as much a central symptom of depression
(despondency, sadness, impoverished thinking, loss of interest, loss of initiative).


                 Figure 1. Burn-out characteristic symptoms in sequence.




                              Source: Bertels, D.S., 2010.




                                                                                 193

      The sustainability movement now involves aspects parallel to the safety
and business ethics movements of years passed. Research in these fields
indicates that organizations need to implement a diverse set of practices, to fully
implement the desired changes (DIDRY Pascal, s. d.). As the choice is so vast,
we determined from the outset which population we would be most focused on.
As our field of application, we chose teachers from the Faculty of Science and
Technology at Constantine1 University, Algeria.


2. WORKING METHODOLOGY


      Our objective is to measure the level of professional burnout and provide
a strategic decision-making aid for the management of risks faced by teaching
staff. These risks have caused a number of changes that have had an impact on
the teaching profession, resulting in the emergence of professional pathologies
(stress, burnout, and depression). For this reason, this work is intended to be a
tool for measuring, raising awareness, and mobilizing for better prevention within
our universities. The working method consists in designing a questionnaire based
on dependent variables and their indicators linked to the hypotheses and
objectives of our work. It includes open-ended, closed-ended, and direct
questions to gather information likely to verify the hypotheses formulated. These
various elements provide guidelines for prioritizing improvement actions as part
of an overall program (Maslach and Leiter, 2008). The proposed approach will
therefore make it possible to unfold the relationship between this pathology and
the university environment, and even to identify the most influential factors in the
burnout of university teachers, to assess their job satisfaction and their degree of
burnout, and even to propose effective actions to improve the weaknesses
identified. We chose the teaching staff of the Faculty of Science and Technology
at Constantine University1 as our field of application. Our survey was carried out
in the various departments of the faculty, as well as in taleau1.




                                                                                194

                         Table 1. numbers of teachers by grade and by department.




                                                Senior lecturers class




                                                                         Senior lecturers class




                                                                                                  Assistant professor



                                                                                                                        Assistant professor




                                                                                                                                              Total number
           Departments




                                    Professor




                                                                                                        class A



                                                                                                                              class B
                                                          A




                                                                                   B
  Civil Engineering         11         07          10          25       12                                                                    65
 Climatic Engineering       06         01          05          15       02                                                                    29
      Electronics           28         14          22          12       10                                                                    86
    Electrotechnics         09         03          17          07       04                                                                    40
Mechanical Engineering      14         08          11          09       09                                                                    51
    Transportation
                            08         01          09          17       08                                                                    43
     Engineering
     Total number           76         34          74          85       45                                                                    314
                 Source: Elaborated by the authors using the database Excel


3. RESULTS AND DISCUSSION


       To carry out this work, we distributed a questionnaire to all teachers
(N=314) in the Faculty of Science and Technology, i.e. a rate of 100%. However,
only 164 teachers returned our questionnaire, representing a response rate of
52.30%.
       The questionnaire used in our study is the most commonly used for
measuring burnout syndrome. We have based ourselves primarily on the MBI:
Maslach Burnout Inventory (Maslach, C. et al., 1996) in its original version (MBI-
human services survey MBI-HSS). This is an easy-to-use instrument whose
psychometric qualities have been extensively studied and is highly satisfactory,
both in terms of the original scale (Maslach, C. et al., 1996); (Massou et al., 2013)
and its French version (Massou et al., 2013); (Dion and Tessier, 1994). The scale
comprises 22 items, each representing a facet of the evaluation of one's work.
The frequency with which each symptom is experienced is described on a 7-point
Likert scale (Dion and Tessier, 1994). The tool is subdivided into three sub-scales
such as:
    • Emotional exhaustion;
    • Depersonalization;
    • Professional fulfillment.




                                                                                                                                                             195

      We will now describe the socio-professional situation of teachers in the
Faculty of Science and Technology. The main component is males (65%), and
they are considered to be young, ranging in age from 30 to 40, with a percentage
approaching 40%. The majority of teachers surveyed are married (71%), with no
more than 10 years of service in the teaching profession. Lecturers Class B and
assistant lecturers Class A are the two grades held by the majority of teachers,
with percentages of 38% and 47% respectively.


                           Figure 2. survey distribution by grade

                                               Grade
                                                           Assistant
                                   Professor           professor class B
                                     16%                     14%

                Senior lecturers
                    class A
                     18%                                            Assistant
                                                                professor class A
                                                                      29%
                    Senior lecturers
                        class B
                         23%
              Source: Elaborated by the authors using the database Excel


      To study the burnout of teachers, we looked at the relationship between
the various players who make up the university, i.e. the administration, the
students and, of course, the teachers. 74% of those questioned answered that
the working atmosphere was limited. As a result, we noted that teachers are
reserved and keep their distance from everyone, both horizontal (among
themselves) and transversal (management and students). This can lead to
considerable stress, coping and even depersonalization. It can also be said that
the nature of teachers' jobs makes them prone to burnout.




                                                                                    196

       Figure 3. atmosphere between teachers and the various actors at the university
                  Atmosphere between the teachers and the various actors of the
                                            faculty
       150

       100

       50

        0
                       excellent                limited                    bad

                      Teacher-teacher    Teacher-Dierction    Teacher - Student

                   Source: Elaborated by the authors using the database Excel


4. MEASURING MBI (MASLACH BURN OUT INVENTORY) TEST RESULTS


      The graphs below show the results of each teacher's scores on the
MASLACH scales (Maslach and Leiter, 2008) . As a reminder, a teacher is
considered to be subject to burnout when the three scales SEP (Emotional
Exhaustion) (>30), SD (Depersonalization) (>12) are in a high state and SAP in
a low state (Professional Achievement) (<33).


                         Figure 4. masclach burn out inventory mbi Curve
             60
             50
             40
             30
             20
             10
              0
                     TEAT 1
                     TEAT 6


                    TEAT 21




                    TEAT 66
                    TEAT 11
                    TEAT 16

                    TEAT 26
                    TEAT 31
                    TEAT 36
                    TEAT 41
                    TEAT 46
                    TEAT 51
                    TEAT 56
                    TEAT 61

                    TEAT 71
                    TEAT 76
                    TEAT 81
                    TEAT 86
                    TEAT 91
                    TEAT 96
                   TEAT 101
                   TEAT 106
                   TEAT 111
                   TEAT 116
                   TEAT 121
                   TEAT 126
                   TEAT 131
                   TEAT 136
                   TEAT 141
                   TEAT 146
                   TEAT 151
                   TEAT 156
                   TEAT 161




                                        SEP       SD         SAP

                   Source: Elaborated by the authors using the database Excel


      Based on the work of Demerouti et al (Bakker, A. B. Demerouti, E. et al.,
2003), we have identified five configurations using cluster analysis:
    • A non-exhausted group;
    • A burnout group and;
    • Three other groups called "incomplete burnout", each characterized by the
      presence of only one of the three burnout symptoms.




                                                                                        197

          Based on the graphical curves and the results of the SEP, SD and SAP
calculations for each teacher, we applied a methodology in our analysis that
involved first grouping together the three "incomplete burnout" groups, and then
the "burnt-out" group. We then grouped the four groups together under the
heading of "burnt-out teacher", with the remaining group referred to as "non-
exhausted teacher".
          The results were as follows: 127 staff in the faculty are burnt out out of a
total of 164, i.e. a rate of 77% figure 5. This shows that the level of stress in this
faculty is high, as well as from what we found earlier that the majority of reserved
teachers are subject to burnout.


                                    Figure 5. burnout teachers

                                     Burnout teachers

                                     non-exhausted
                                       teachers
                                          23%
                                                       exhausted
                                                        teachers
                                                          77%




                            exhausted teachers       non-exhausted teachers

                   Source: Elaborated by the authors using the database Excel


          The relative results of each teacher's scores on the burnt-out teacher
scales are shown in Figure 6.


        Figure 6. Overall result Masclach Burn Out Inventory MBI curve Burned-out teachers
                                      overall teacher burnout curve

   50
   40                                                                           SEP
   30                                                                           SD
   20                                                                           SAP
   10
                                                                                SEP Limit
    0
           TEAT 1
           TEAT 5
           TEAT 9
          TEAT 13
          TEAT 17
          TEAT 21
          TEAT 25
          TEAT 29
          TEAT 33
          TEAT 37
          TEAT 41
          TEAT 45
          TEAT 49
          TEAT 53
          TEAT 57
          TEAT 61
          TEAT 65
          TEAT 69
          TEAT 73
          TEAT 77
          TEAT 81
          TEAT 85
          TEAT 89
          TEAT 93
          TEAT 97
         TEAT 101
         TEAT 105
         TEAT 109
         TEAT 113
         TEAT 117
         TEAT 121
         TEAT 125




                                                                                 SD Limit
                                                                                 SAP Limit

                   Source: Elaborated by the authors using the database Excel




                                                                                             198

      Having measured the scores of teachers affected by partial burnout, we
now turn our attention to the category of totally burnt-out teachers. Ten teachers
from different departments are affected by total burnout. The following table
shows the scores of these totally burnt-out teachers. The mechanical engineering
and electronics departments have the highest number of totally burnt-out
teachers, followed by the civil engineering and transport engineering
departments. The other departments, Climatic Engineering and Electrical
Engineering, have no teachers in total burnout.
      The following tables show the number of totally burnt-out teachers:


                                    Table 2. Scores of the most burnt-out teachers
    Teachers               GCV        GCV      ELC     ELC    ELC      GT GT GM                                         GM     GM

                           16           29                37          36            21          23      15       9      22     26

    SEP                      39              32            39           36          32          33       33      32     45     35

    SD                       25              20            25           15          15          12       21      18     12     17

    SAP                      31              32            31           33          27          32       33      22     32     32

                          Source: Elaborated by the authors using the database Excel


      The Figure 7 shows the score curve for totally exhausted teachers.


                         Figure 7. shows the score curve for totally exhausted teachers.
           50

           40

           30
                                                                                                                         SEP
           20                                                                                                            SD

           10                                                                                                            SAP


            0
                                                                                                 GM22


                                                                                                          GM26
                 GCV16


                            GCV29




                                                                      GT23


                                                                             GT15
                                     ELC37


                                                  ELC36


                                                           ELC 21




                                                                                         GM9




                          Source: Elaborated by the authors using the database Excel


      We note that the most burned-out teachers reached all the scales of total
burnout.        The         trajectory of                      this      burnout           is        typical:    from    burnout     to
depersonalization, once teachers feel depersonalized, they experience low levels
of professional accomplishment, making their performance and output
inadequate. The main causes of this total burnout are that teachers have higher


                                                                                                                                    199

levels of stress, anxiety, fatigue or sleep disorders, confirmed by the results found
by studies on stress in teachers established by Concha (Iriarte Redín and Erro-
Garcés, 2020). In addition, burnout highlighted the effect of high job demands on
poor health, work engagement also showed the effects of job resources on
organizational commitment, and finally burnout mediated the effects of lack of
resources on low commitment (Hakanen et al., 2006). Burnout is linked to work
demands and resources. Work demands refer to aspects of work that are
associated with physical and/or psychological costs because they require effort
or skill over long periods of time (Klusmann et al., 2023). Work resources are the
characteristics of a work environment that facilitate the achievement of work
objectives and stimulate personal growth, learning and development (Klusmann
et al., 2023).


5. MBI TEST SCORE MEASURES FOR BURNT-OUT TEACHERS BY
DEPARTMENT


          As we have already seen that 77% of teachers in the Faculty of
Engineering are burnt out, we will now look in detail at which departments are
most affected by the burnout syndrome. According to the results obtained in our
study, we note respectively that :


                     Table 3. Percentage of burnt-out teachers by department
                  Departement                 Percentage of burnt-out teachers
                   Electronics                              78%
                Civil Engineering                           81%
             Mecanical Engineering                          82%
                 Transportation                             84%
                  Engineering
                 Common Core                                90%
              Climatic Engineering                          92%
                 Electrotechnics                            93%
                   Source: Elaborated by the authors using the database Excel


          The profile of scores obtained for the Common Core and Transportation
Engineering departments cited as examples are represented in the following
figure:




                                                                                 200

     Figure 8. masclach burn out inventory mbi curve for the core curriculum department

                       Graphic curve of the Maslash specialty
                             Common Core test result
                                      SEP       SD       SAP

                                        TEAT 1
                               TEAT 14 50            TEAT 2
                                       40
                           TEAT 13     30               TEAT 3
                                       20
                         TEAT 12       10                     TEAT 4
                                        0
                         TEAT 11                              TEAT 5

                            TEAT 10                     TEAT 6
                                 TEAT 9              TEAT 7
                                            TEAT 8

                Source: Elaborated by the authors using the database Excel


  Figure 9. Maslach Burnout inventory MBI curve for transportation engineering department

               Graph curve of Maslash specialty test result
                      Transportation Engineering
     60
     50
     40
     30
     20
     10
      0




                                      SEP       SD       SAP

                Source: Elaborated by the authors using the database Excel


      Looking only at the Transportation Engineering Department, we found that
74% of teachers surveyed showed signs of "incomplete and exhausted" burnout.
This rate is very worrying, given that the number is so high. Figure 10 shows the
percentage of partially burnt-out teachers in all departments.




                                                                                          201

                      Figure 10. Teachers’ burnout at department level

                   Exhausted teachers according to departments
                                         Commun core

                                      Civil Engineering

                                              Electronics

                                        Electrotechnics

                                   Climatic Engineering

                                 Mecanical Engineering

                                        Transportation…

                                                            0     10   20    30


                                  exhausted      non- exhausted

                Source: Elaborated by the authors using the database Excel


       According to the results obtained in the different departments, we found that
the common core department had the highest rate of teachers affected by burnout,
with a percentage of 93%. This can be explained by the fact that the teachers
working at this level are subject to daily stress due to the high number of students,
as well as the working conditions (heavy workload, internal conflicts between
teachers and also teacher-management, many copies to correct,....). We can't
overlook the fact that teachers in this department (core curriculum) are also involved
in teaching in their home department. For the other departments, this exhaustion is
related to working conditions (supervision, certain illnesses, etc.).
       We also note that the total number of totally burnt-out teachers in the
Faculty of Science and Technology is 10.
       For the transport department, we give an example of a score for totally
burnt-out teachers


          Table 4. scores of the most burnt-out teachers in the transport department
           Degree              Low Degree         Medium degree           High degree
            SEP                     2                    8                    10
             SD                     6                    6                     8
            SAP                    13                    4                     3
                 Source: Elaborated by the authors using the database Excel


       The Figure 11 shows score curve for totally exhausted teachers in the
transport department




                                                                                        202

         Figure 11. score curve for totally exhausted teachers in the transport department
                                                                                               transportation genius score
           15

           10  Number of teachers

               5

               0
                                                                         SEP                                      SD                                      SAP

                                                                             low degree                   Medium degree                    High degree

                                                     Source: Elaborated by the authors using the database Excel


         This applies to all departments except for the HVAC engineering
 department, where there was no progression from teachers suffering from both
 burnout scales (SEP and SD) to low professional achievement.
         During the course of our work, we noted that each department has its own
 specificity, as we found that in some departments, teachers at the assistant
 master level were subject to burnout, even though they were young and had
 between 0 and 20 years' experience. This can be explained by the fact that they
 are new to teaching, so they have to put a lot more effort into mastering their
 subject areas, and even the task of preparing a course or TD (directed work)
 requires a considerable amount of time. Lack of experience can be a
 disadvantage, as they don't know how to deal with unruly students, which can
 make them more stressed.

                                                         Table 5. Experimental disorders influencing teacher burnout
                                                           Number of exhausted
                                    Number of teachers




                                                                                                               Grade
                                                                                                                                                        Age                     Experience
                                                                                  Percentage
                                                               teachers




  Speciality
                                                                                      %




                                                                                                                                            30≤.x <40

                                                                                                                                                         40≤.x<50




                                                                                                                                                                                10≤ x<20

                                                                                                                                                                                           20≤x <30
                                                                                                 APCB

                                                                                                        APCA

                                                                                                                SLCB

                                                                                                                       SLCA

                                                                                                                              Prof




                                                                                                                                                                          <10
                                                                                                                                     ≤30




                                                                                                                                                                    ≥50




                                                                                                                                                                                                      ≥30




Transportation
                                    29                        20                 68,96%          04     07      06     00     03     06     04           07         03    11    04         03         02
  Engineering
   Mecanical
                                    27                        23                 85,18 %         04     06      04     03     06     04     11           03         05    08    07         04         04
  Engineering
    Climatic
                                    15                        09                 60 ,00%         01     02      02     01     03     01     03           02         03    01    02         04         02
  Engineering
Common Core                         14                        13                 92,85%          02     05      04     02     00     02     04           04         03    05    03         03         02
      Civil
                                    30                        24                 80,00%          07     10      04     03     00     05     08           07         04    06    11         04         03
  Engineering
  Electronics                       37                        27                 72,97 %         05     06      11     01     04     03     14           04         06    10    09         4          04
Electrotechnics                     12                        09                 75,00%          01     00      06     02     00     00     08           00         01    06    02         01         00
                                                     Source: Elaborated by the authors using the database Excel


                                                                                                                                                                                               203

       It is also interesting to note that teachers in burnout at the end of their
training evolve towards a profile of emotional exhaustion at the beginning of their
professional life. In this way, they experience an improvement in their level of
depersonalization and self-fulfillment, and emerge from a "complete" burnout
(Admiraal and Kittelsen Røberg, 2023). Our empirical observations provide us
with some answers to this question: trainees often complain that they are
overworked, given the amount of time they are given to do the work they are
asked to do, or that the training is incoherent, with contradictory views on the job,
or that their relationship with tutors is poor. And the reform of the teaching system,
which juxtaposes Master's studies and preparation for a competitive examination,
has undoubtedly only amplified this work overload.


6. DISCUSSION AND RECOMMENDATIONS


       The results show that, despite being young and less experienced,
assistant lecturers are in burnout in certain departments, which is explained by
the efforts they make to demonstrate their skills, and therefore to do too much,
which leads to burnout right from the start of their careers. This category of
teachers therefore needs to be supervised, oriented and guided in the
performance of their duties.
       Based on our findings, we propose a number of areas for improvement in
order to alleviate the situation of burnout teachers and prevent other teachers
from falling into burnout.
    1. Improve teacher well-being;
    2. Raise awareness of the risk of burnout;
    3. Improve the working environment;
    4. Improve the relationship between teachers and their colleagues;
    5. Improve the relationship between teachers and management;
    6. Reduce teachers' workload (avoid excessive numbers of students);
    7. The use of more advanced technology, such as data shows and
       microphones in lecture theaters, to protect teachers' health;
    8. Replace all old blackboards with new ones that use markers instead of
       chalk;
    9. Motivate teachers to avoid depersonalization and negativism;


                                                                                  204

  10. Special action needs to be taken for teachers suffering from burnout,
       especially professors, by reducing their teaching load and leaving them to
       focus solely on scientific research and supervising doctoral students.


7. CONCLUSION


       In this study, we addressed an issue that poses a critically important risk
to the health of university teachers and the quality assurance of university
teaching: burnout and its influence on teacher performance. It's a subject that
affects all sectors of activity, including the university. This study is based on the
Maslach Burn out Inventory (MBI) model. We explored several axes, such as
emotional exhaustion, depersonalization and professional fulfillment. Following
this, we classified the teachers into three main categories: totally burnt-out
teachers, partially burnt-out teachers and, finally, non-exhausted teachers. When
we analyzed the results, we found that, from now on, an exhausted teacher
cannot perform well in his or her job, for a variety of reasons: stress,
disengagement, fatigue, absenteeism...
       We have found that physical, behavioral, emotional, intellectual and
experiential disorders are all factors in teacher burnout. These disorders have
varying degrees of impact on teachers' health.
       The department most affected by burnout is Electronics, followed by Civil
and Mechanical Engineering.
       In order to build on the results obtained in our study, we propose a number
of areas for improvement in order to alleviate the situation of burnt-out teachers
and prevent other teachers from falling into burnout.
       This study was carried out only in the Faculty of Engineering, so for future
work, we recommend extending the burnout study to other faculties and
identifying more teachers, in order to give further recommendations for
minimizing teacher burnout and increasing their performance and health.
       In this work, we have attempted to address an issue which is of vital
importance to the health of university teachers and the quality assurance of
university teaching. It is a subject that affects all sectors of activity, including the
university. The issue is burnout and its influence on teacher performance.



                                                                                    205

      Today's burnt-out teachers are unable to perform at their jobs, for a variety
of reasons: stress, disengagement, fatigue, absenteeism, etc.
      We have found that physical, behavioral, emotional, intellectual and
experiential disorders are all factors in teacher burnout. These disorders have
varying degrees of impact on teachers' health.




                                                                               206

                                     REFERENCE
ADMIRAAL, W., & KITTELSEN RØBERG, K.-I. (2023). Teachers’ job demands,
resources and their job satisfaction : Satisfaction with school, career choice and
teaching profession of teachers in different career stages. Teaching and Teacher
Education, 125, 104063. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.tate.2023.104063

ARENS, A. K., & MORIN, A. J. S. (2016). Relations between teachers’ emotional
exhaustion and students’ educational outcomes. Journal of Educational Psychology,
108(6), 800‑813. https://doi.org/10.1037/edu0000105

BAERISWYL, S., BRATOLJIC, C., & KRAUSE, A. (2021). How homeroom teachers
cope with high demands : Effect of prolonging working hours on emotional exhaustion.
Journal of School Psychology, 85, 125‑139. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jsp.2021.02.002

BAKKER, A. B. DEMEROUTI, E., VARDAKOU, I., & KANTAS, A. (2003). The
convergent validity of two burnout instruments : A multitrait-multimethod analysis.
European Journal of Psychological Assessment.

BERTELS, D.S. (2010). Ancrer le développement durable dans la culture
organisationnelle ; Guide pratique à l’intention des cadres supérieurs. Université Simon
Fraser et le REDD.

BRÜHLMANN, T. (2010). Burnout et dépression chevauchement, délimitation. Forum
Médical Suisse ‒ Swiss Medical Forum, 10(08).
https://doi.org/10.4414/fms.2010.07096

DIDRY PASCAL. (2007). La cartographie des risques a priori, un outil managérial pour
le cadre de santé. Université de Lorraine ESM – IAE Metz.

DION, G., & TESSIER, R. (1994). Validation de la traduction de l’Inventaire
d’épuisement professionnel de Maslach et Jackson. Canadian Journal of
Behavioural Science / Revue Canadienne Des Sciences Du Comportement, 26(2),
210‑227. https://doi.org/10.1037/0008-400X.26.2.210

HAKANEN, J. J., BAKKER, A. B., & SCHAUFELI, W. B. (2006). Burnout and work
engagement among teachers. Journal of School Psychology, 43(6), 495‑513.
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jsp.2005.11.001

HASSARD J., C. T. (2011). Work-related stress : Nature and management. European
Agency for Safety & Health at Work. https://irep.ntu.ac.uk/id/eprint/31240/

HERMAN, K. C., PREWETT, S. L., EDDY, C. L., SAVALA, A., & REINKE, W. M.
(2020). Profiles of middle school teacher stress and coping : Concurrent and
prospective correlates. Journal of School Psychology, 78, 54‑68.
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jsp.2019.11.003

IRIARTE REDÍN, C., & ERRO-GARCÉS, A. (2020). Stress in teaching professionals
across Europe. International Journal of Educational Research, 103, 101623.
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ijer.2020.101623

KLUSMANN, U., ALDRUP, K., ROLOFF, J., LÜDTKE, O., & HAMRE, B. K. (2022).
Does instructional quality mediate the link between teachers’ emotional exhaustion and
student outcomes? A large-scale study using teacher and student reports. Journal of
Educational Psychology, 114(6), 1442‑1460. https://doi.org/10.1037/edu0000703



                                                                                      207

KLUSMANN, U., ALDRUP, K., ROLOFF-BRUCHMANN, J., CARSTENSEN, B.,
WARTENBERG, G., HANSEN, J., & HANEWINKEL, R. (2023). Teachers’ emotional
exhaustion during the COVID-19 pandemic : Levels, changes, and relations to
pandemic-specific demands. Teaching and Teacher Education, 121, 103908.
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.tate.2022.103908

KLUSMANN, U., KUNTER, M., TRAUTWEIN, U., LÜDTKE, O., & BAUMERT, J.
(2008). Teachers’ occupational well-being and quality of instruction : The important role
of self-regulatory patterns. Journal of Educational Psychology, 100(3), 702‑715.
https://doi.org/10.1037/0022-0663.100.3.702

KLUSMANN, U., RICHTER, D., & LÜDTKE, O. (2016). Teachers’ emotional exhaustion
is negatively related to students’ achievement : Evidence from a large-scale
assessment study. Journal of Educational Psychology, 108(8), 1193‑1203.
https://doi.org/10.1037/edu0000125

LORIOL. MARC. (2000). Le temps de la fatigue : La gestion sociale du mal-ˆetre au
travail. Economica. https://core.ac.uk/download/pdf/52818896.pdf

MASLACH, C., JACKSON, S. E., & LEITER, M. P. (1996). Burnout Levels and
Personality Traits—The Case of Turkish Architectural Students (Maslach burnout
inventory manual (3rd ed.)). Consulting Psychologists Press. https://www.scirp.org/
ReferenceID=713472

Maslach, C., & Leiter, M. P. (2008). Early predictors of job burnout and engagement.
Journal of Applied Psychology, 93(3), 498‑512. https://doi.org/10.1037/0021-
9010.93.3.498

MASSOU, S., DOGHMI, N., BELHAJ, A., ABOULAALA, K., AZENDOUR, H.,
HAIMEUR, C., BALKHI, H., & KAMILI, N. D. (2013). Enquête sur le syndrome
d’épuisement professionnel chez les personnels d’anesthésie réanimation de quatre
hôpitaux universitaires marocains. Annales Médico-psychologiques, revue
psychiatrique, 171(8), 538‑542. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.amp.2012.02.024

VERQUERRE, R. (2006). E. Brangier, A. Lancry & C. Louche. Les dimensions
humaines du travail. Théories et pratiques en psychologie du travail et des
organisations : Nancy : Presses universitaires de Nancy. L’Orientation scolaire et
professionnelle, 35/3, 481‑483. https://doi.org/10.4000/osp.1036




                                                                                     208

CHAPTER 13
 PREVENTIVE SCHOOL
 COEXISTENCE FACILITATED BY
 ICT: A PATH TOWARD A SOCIAL
 ENVIRONMENT OF COEXISTENCE
 AND PEACE


Jairo Soledad
Master's Degree (candidate) in ICT Applied to Education
Universidad de Pedagógica y Tecnológica de Colombia
E-mail: jairo.soledad@uptc.edu.co

Alex Puertas González
Master's Degree in ICT Security
Universidad de Pedagógica y Tecnológica de Colombia
E-mail: Alex.puertas@uptc.edu.co

Ariel-Adolfo Rodriguez-Hernandez
PhD in Educational Technology
Universidad de Pedagógica y Tecnológica de Colombia
E-mail: ariel.rodriguez@uptc.edu.co


ABSTRACT: This study designs a multimedia program to serve as a
technological tool for improving students’ understanding of school rules through
a dynamic pedagogical strategy focused on socialization and the internalization
of school regulations. Due to the pandemic, the study utilized a sample of 30 high
school students from a public school in Duitama. Based on a nested research
design, descriptive approach, comparative design, and deductive method, a
diagnostic survey was administered covering the following topics: legal
foundations of school regulations, school democracy, students’ rights and
responsibilities, and due process, to conduct an initial assessment of the level of
understanding of the school regulations outlined in the student handbook. a
multimedia program with case studies was then implemented to disseminate the
regulations, and finally, the virtual educational tool was introduced, with the task
of measuring the change in the students’ understanding of school regulations.
The results showed that participating students are drawn to this type of
technology, and it surpasses their interest in traditional methods of disseminating
and studying coexistence rules. It was also determined that economic, cultural,
and social factors affect coexistence, in addition to the instructional, restrictive,
and punitive approach that traditionally governs school coexistence.

KEYWORDS: peaceful coexistence, rules, social environment, communication
technology.



                                                                                 209

RESUMO: Com o presente trabalho, desenha-se um programa multimédia que
serve de ferramenta tecnológica para melhorar o nível de apropriação das regras
de convivência com uma estratégia pedagógica dinâmica nas tarefas de
socialização e apropriação dos regulamentos escolares. No desenvolvimento,
por motivos de pandemia, foi utilizada uma amostra de 30 alunos do ensino
médio de uma instituição de ensino oficial em Duitama. Com base em uma
pesquisa aninhada, abordagem descritiva, desenho comparativo e método
dedutivo, aplicou-se uma pesquisa diagnóstica com os temas: fundamentos
jurídicos do regulamento escolar, democracia escolar, deveres e direitos dos
alunos e devido processo legal, para fazer uma mensuração inicial do nível de
apropriação do regulamento escolar consagrado no manual de convivência,
depois foi implementado um programa multimédia com estudos de caso para
socializar o regulamento e por fim a ferramenta didática virtual foi partilhada,
deixando a tarefa de medir a mudança na apropriação do regulamento escolar.
Os resultados mostraram que os alunos participantes são atraídos por esse tipo
de tecnologia e seu interesse ultrapassa os métodos tradicionais de divulgação
e estudo das regras de convivência. Também foi possível constatar que existem
fatores econômicos, culturais e sociais que afetam a convivência, aliados à
abordagem instrutiva, restritiva e sancionatória que tradicionalmente rege a
convivência escolar.

PALAVRAS-CHAVE: coexistência pacífica, norma, mídia social, tecnologia da
comunicação.




                                                                            210

1. INTRODUCTION


      Most educational institutions in the city of Duitama face problems with
school coexistence, manifested in various forms of aggression and rule-breaking.
Schools establish mandatory regulations and raise standards in an effort to
improve the school environment, but community support is insufficient to
overcome this problem. School regulations are a legal requirement that schools
must comply with to obtain accreditation and maintain the institution’s internal
and external relationships with the community (Mendoza & Barrera, 2018)
      Given the low level of parental involvement and students’ lack of interest
in activities aimed at socializing the rules of coexistence. It is necessary to
implement communication channels to increase participation in the dissemination
of school regulations. It is essential to foster unity or collaboration among
members of the educational community to achieve interpersonal development
across various aspects of school life (Acuña, Concha, De la Fuente, & Medina,
2018) .
      Teachers and administrators at the school have used various means to
invite the community to participate in activities aimed at disseminating school
regulations, seeking to improve the level of ownership in school life; however,
parents often respond with evasiveness and excuses. To achieve healthy
coexistence, it is necessary to simultaneously advance simple, consultative,
projective, and meta-participation, as these are not mutually exclusive but
complementary (Ochoa & Pérez, 2019)
      The task is not to assign blame and shift the responsibility for school
violence onto others, but rather to identify which sector of the educational
community needs to take action to promote the adoption of institutional policies
and improve the level of ownership regarding school coexistence. School
coexistence must be approached in a preventive and ongoing manner.
      Members of the educational community must properly address the
fundamental aspects of school regulations, such as: legal foundations, school
democracy,   rights   and   responsibilities, disciplinary offenses and their
consequences, and due process. Additionally, they must have a clear
understanding of the concepts of school coexistence, the coexistence handbook,
classroom agreements, and the use of ICT for mediation in students’ educational


                                                                            211

processes.   The    assertive   handling   of   basic   concepts   facilitates   the
comprehension and internalization of content. Vocabulary reveals meaning and
provides greater textual understanding (Olivares, 2018)
      Regarding the implementation of communication channels with the
educational community, a program of multiple representations is proposed. The
purpose is to facilitate and energize the dissemination of school regulations so
that students can internalize them and improve the school’s experiential
environment. This program is based on the analysis and resolution of coexistence
cases, in which students must give their opinion and choose the solution they
consider appropriate.
      The social and economic issues present in the community under study
create challenges in managing school coexistence. Therefore, motivation and the
creation of spaces for the socialization and internalization of institutional
regulations are required. School coexistence, as manifested in the interactions of
the educational community, impacts students’ ethical, social, psychological, and
academic spheres (Cerda, Salazar, Guzman, & Narvaez, 2018)
      The integration of technological development into the socialization and
adoption of school coexistence not only minimizes the occurrence of violence but
also impacts students’ academic performance and retention. The use of ICT as
a means to carry out continuous and preventive work innovates and motivates
the understanding of regulations. Furthermore, it allows for the development of
educational and inclusive actions in all areas of school life; teachers must
incorporate them in a creative, inclusive, and democratic manner into their
pedagogical practice (Navarro & Ricardo, 2018)
      This section covers the conceptualization of key themes for this research,
theoretical foundations from previous studies, and the historical background of
similar research conducted by authors, along with their corresponding
bibliographic references.
      It contains the most relevant concepts to be addressed in this study, as
the thematic focus depends on their interpretation and situates us within the
context of the research topic, namely the level of adherence to school regulations
among students at the Simón Bolívar Municipal Technical School.




                                                                                 212

1.1 SCHOOL COEXISTENCE


        Coexistence is interpreted as the peaceful coexistence of members of the
educational community. It implies a positive interrelationship among them and
enables the fulfillment of educational objectives in an environment that fosters the
holistic development of students. Similarly, it is defined as the act of living
alongside others in the school setting in a peaceful and harmonious manner.
(Ministry of National Education, 2014)
        Positive coexistence is life in common within the school community ,
composed of parents, students, and teachers. It involves living with one another
through respect and commitment; agreeing on relationship norms that facilitate
and improve social interactions; addressing the emergence of conflicts;
preventing potential acts of violence; and mediating to resolve them (Aragón,
2017)
        In a broad sense, coexistence refers to the different ways in which human
beings interact; hence, the aim is for relationships to be as harmonious as
possible, that is, respecting differences, rights, and duties. When discussing
school coexistence, the emphasis is on the positive environment that must be
maintained in schools and colleges, grounded in legality and legitimacy, where
the members of the school community come together, each bearing the
responsibility to prevent and mitigate factors that affect the school climate
(Redondo & Jaramillo, 2019)


1.2 SCHOOL COEXISTENCE AGREEMENT


        It is the set of rules developed by consensus among the members of the
educational community. Once approved, they regulate the behavior of students
and teachers in the school environment, academic performance, and student
participation in representative roles. The school coexistence pact reflects the
lived experience of the educational community; therefore, it must be developed,
disseminated, and embraced by the community members themselves. It is a
pedagogical, didactic, and political strategy used by students and parents to
adhere to and determine commitments, duties, and rights (Caicedo, Garcia, &
Quintero, 2018)


                                                                                213

       The classroom pact is more than an agreement between students and
teachers, as it involves not only the exchange of knowledge, the negotiation of
learning, and the sharing of individual or collective understandings, conceptions,
and ideals about life that shape them as social, cultural, and rights-bearing
subjects, but also the recognition of the social context in which the classroom is
embedded (Rivera & Mejia Correa, 2019) It is an agreement between two or more
parties seeking to benefit from a joint decision that generally aims for the greater
good. In the context of school life, the family cannot be dismissed as an influential
and determining factor in social behavior (Gallardo, Hernandez, Monsalve, &
Barrientos, 2019)


1.3 SOCIAL ENVIRONMENT OF PEACE


       A social environment of peace is conceived as the set of conditions
enabling a human group to live in a context free from manifestations of violence,
intolerance, exclusion, and injustice, and under the protection and respect of
human rights. The social environment of peace is a cultural construct based on
participatory agreements that determine a social experience of widespread well-
being (Arcia, Pilar, Añaños, & Medina, 2020)
       Citizen competencies regarding peace and coexistence stem from
recognizing others as human beings and from the pursuit of addressing and
resolving problems in their environment through nonviolent means, as well as
creating a new way of thinking, feeling, and acting in the face of the reality of their
environment (Adame, García, & Gómez, 2017)
       Conflicts are inherent to social dynamics; therefore, they cannot be
eradicated but must be addressed assertively to channel that energy and
generate circles of coexistence that strengthen social bonds. In social circles of
peace and coexistence, regardless of age, educational level, or cultural
background, they function as a framework to maintain a safe environment for
dialogue (León, 2019)
       Promoting a harmonious school environment is a responsibility of the
educational community that extends to the broader social context; the family
plays a decisive role in creating peaceful and harmonious environments. It
provides the foundational parenting guidelines that shape students’ behavior and


                                                                                   214

is also affected by school-related issues, making it both a source and a recipient
of matters concerning social interaction. For this reason, families seek balance
and the fairest solutions to problems, although currently, due to media influence
and the manipulation of their children, parents act in a protective manner; they do
not seek to mitigate conflicts but rather to justify the actions of their children, and
in this way, school problems spill over into society with negative impacts. School
is the setting for the formation of values and the preparation of children for life in
society and, therefore, has the responsibility to create social spaces for
coexistence (Sinisterra, 2019)


1.4 MULTIMEDIA PROGRAMS


        Multimodal or multimedia programs are defined as digital tools that engage
the senses—such as sight and hearing—to convey an effective message that
fosters interest, communication, self-learning, and visuomotor development,
while capturing the student’s attention (Senevoa & Alex, 2005) They are also
defined as technologies that have facilitated the integration of various media,
such as text, graphics, sound, voice, and video, with full motion or animation in a
computer application (Amaya, 2010)
        The incorporation of multimedia resources, thanks to the support of
information and communication technologies in the work of educational
institutions, demonstrates the desired pedagogical shift; it is a trend that
contributes to the teaching-learning process, enabling students to be active
participants and protagonists in the development of school activities (Tomalá,
2018)


2. METHODOLOGY


        The research design is nested, with a quantitative focus, because the
objective is to verify the impact of developing and implementing a multiple
representations program on the adoption of coexistence norms and the reduction
of school violence. It is characterized by the use of both quantitative and
qualitative components and seeks to apply or utilize acquired knowledge while
simultaneously acquiring new knowledge, after implementing and systematizing


                                                                                   215

research-based practice. The use of knowledge and research findings results in
a rigorous, organized, and systematic way of understanding reality (Delgado,
Gadea, & Vera, 2018)
       However, research work        cannot be limited to the development of a
technological tool or the measurement of data; rather, it must reflect an attitudinal
change in students, which is qualitative in nature, since qualitative research
encompasses the study, use, and collection of a variety of empirical materials—
case studies, personal experiences, interviews, surveys, and direct visual
observation—that describe problematic moments and their meanings in
individuals’ lives (Otero, 2018)
       This research is designed with a descriptive or diagnostic approach, as it
seeks to characterize a specific phenomenon or situation by highlighting its most
distinctive or differentiating features. The purpose is to understand prevailing
situations and attitudes through the precise description of activities, objects,
processes, and people; it is not limited to data collection but extends to predicting
and identifying existing relationships. The research is not merely a tabulation of
data; rather, it gathers information based on a hypothesis or theory, and the
results are then thoroughly analyzed to extract meaningful generalizations that
contribute to knowledge and the implementation of actions (Arantzamendi,
López, Carole, & Carrasco, 2016)
       Following the quantitative component, the study begins with an
assessment of the current situation regarding the educational community’s
knowledge of school regulations, interest in transforming the school environment,
the community’s legal knowledge regarding the design of regulations, as well as
their willingness to undertake tasks related to revising the handbook, socializing,
and adopting school regulations on coexistence. This requires the design and
administration of surveys, analysis of institutional statistical data, accounts from
members of the educational community, meeting minutes, and bibliographic
sources to help measure the educational community’s perception of the school
environment and the adoption of coexistence rules.
       Qualitatively, the study will consider personal and attitudinal progress
before and after the implementation of the multiple representations program in
the socialization of institutional regulations.



                                                                                 216

       The study is designed using a comparative methodological approach;
consequently, since it seeks to compare two moments in institutional life
regarding the adoption of the norms enshrined in the coexistence manual, these
moments will be defined by the implementation of a multiple representations
program in the socialization of institutional norms.
       Comparative hypotheses are designed in research aimed at establishing
comparisons between groups and moments to determine whether there is
difference. Additionally, they explain the reasons for these differences based on
their causes or reasons; thus, they are classified as hypotheses of explanatory
studies (Balcazar, 2019)
       It falls within the deductive method, given that this research does not seek
to establish universal laws but rather to conduct an experimental test on a specific
population to collect data, process it, and interpret the effect of implementing a
multiple representations program on reducing rates of school violence.
       The deductive method, in terms of its linguistic roots, means to lead or
extract; it is based on reasoning, just like the inductive method. However, it is
entirely different, as in this case it allows one to move from general principles to
specific facts. It essentially involves analyzing the general principles of a specific
topic to be tested, verified, and applied to particular contexts. The deductive
method is grounded in specific theoretical foundations, ultimately leading to the
configuration of particular facts or practices (Prieto, 2017)
       In developing the assessment of the state of school coexistence within the
educational institution, the premises are outlined upon which actions are
developed to ensure that the educational community of the institution, the Simón
Bolívar Municipal Technical School, embraces the rules of school coexistence
through a socialization phase that includes a program of diverse representations
designed to facilitate and energize the understanding of the normative content
and encourage the adoption and adherence to the school coexistence manual.


2.1 UNIT OF ANALYSIS


       The study population is a defined, limited, and accessible set of cases that
will serve as the reference for sample selection. It is necessary to clarify that when
referring to a study population, the term does not refer exclusively to human


                                                                                  217

beings; it may also correspond to animals, files, objects, families, organizations,
or institutions; for the latter, it might be more appropriate to use an analogous
term, such as study universe (Otzen & Carlos, 2017) .
       Due to the effects of the pandemic, the study population or universe
consisted of lower secondary students at the Simón Bolívar Municipal Technical
School, with priority given to those with internet access and electronic devices
capable of running multimedia programs.
       All students are digital natives with an interest in new technology. Their
situation reflects their families’ demographic conditions; however, a significant
number are, due to their parents’ occupations or family issues, under the care of
a private caregiver or a relative other than their parents. Their ages range from
11 to 16; there are students outside the typical age range for these grades, but
due to exceptional circumstances, they are admitted into the regular education
system despite this being a factor that influences aggression. There are also
students with special educational needs who require individualized support, but
who, due to economic circumstances, do not receive assistance, and whose
behavior affects the school environment.


2.2 SAMPLE


       The sample is a subset of the population to which we have access and
must be representative of it, because it is on this sample that the relevant
measurements are made (López & Fachelli, 2017) .
       Due to the effects of the COVID-19 pandemic, the population sample for
this study had to be limited to lower secondary students who had access to
technological   devices,    permission from      their   legal   guardians,   internet
connectivity, and a willingness to participate in the required activities. A sample
of 36 students from the seventh, eighth, and ninth grades at the Simón Bolívar
Municipal Technical School was obtained, representing a variety of ages,
genders, academic levels, and socioeconomic backgrounds. Teaching staff were
also involved, but in the role of facilitators for the dissemination of information.




                                                                                   218

2.3 PROCEDURES


      To achieve this objective, the project was carried out in three stages:
diagnosis or data collection; implementation or program design and documen ;
and a stage of sharing and operationalizing the dynamic tool to disseminate and
foster ownership of school regulations.


2.4 IDENTIFICATION OF THE LEVEL OF KNOWLEDGE REGARDING
SCHOOL COEXISTENCE RULES


      To identify the level of knowledge, a Likert-type survey was administered
online to a sample population of small groups of high school students at the
Simón Bolívar Municipal Technical School. The survey covers three topics related
to school coexistence: school democracy, students’ rights and responsibilities,
and due process. Each topic includes questions rated on a scale of one to three,
corresponding to the categories of disagree, partially agree, and fully agree.
      During the diagnostic phase, data from the Likert-scale survey was
compiled, using a 1-to-3 rating scale and three variables: school democracy,
rights and responsibilities, and due process. This information was entered into a
statistical table in Excel, where the median, mode, mean, and percentage of
correct and incorrect responses were calculated to identify weaknesses in the
adoption of school regulations. Based on this, the multiple representations
program was implemented as a teaching tool using ICT mediation to disseminate
and promote the school coexistence manual (see Table 1).


              Table 1. Details of the data obtained from the survey evaluation




                                     Source: Authors




                                                                                 219

2.5 IMPLEMENTATION OF A MULTIPLE REPRESENTATION PROGRAM
WITH VIRTUAL PEDAGOGY


       Once the information from the diagnostic phase was analyzed, we
proceeded to study the feasibility of a multiple representations program to
disseminate the school regulations contained in the coexistence manual. We took
into account aspects such as free access, accessibility, reusability, novelty, and
appeal to students.
       Following this analysis and experimentation with various platforms, we
opted to develop a program using NPM, JavaScript, and Node.js technology. This
program presents hypothetical scenarios of coexistence involving different types
of misconduct, which students must observe and use to answer questions that
place them within the context of school coexistence. The presentation of each
case includes both text and graphics to engage and motivate students in reading
and observing the content


2.6 IMPLEMENTATION OF A MULTIPLE REPRESENTATION PROGRAM TO
TEACH SCHOOL COEXISTENCE RULES THROUGH DYNAMIC PEDAGOGY


       Once the implementation phase of the multimedia program was complete,
a program of multiple representations was delivered to the educational institution
to be used as a tool in the tasks of socialization and internalization of school
regulations, through a dynamic strategy that combines graphics, dialogues,
examples, and fundamental concepts for managing school coexistence.


3. RESULTS


       By analyzing the diagnostic survey results by section and grade level, we
identified the questions with the highest error rates. This identified critical areas
that served as a reference for implementing the multimedia program, which is
used as an ICT tool to facilitate the socialization and adoption of the school
coexistence manual. (See Table 2)




                                                                                 220

                 Table 2. Breakdown of results by question section and critical points
SECCION SEPTIMO                OCTAVO     NOVENO                 DECIMO UNDECIMO CRITICOS
   1                                        4;5                              4        4
   2    2;3;10                  2;10         2                    2;3;4  2;3;4;10 2;3;4;10
   3    3;9;10                   3          3;9                    3;9      3;9      3;9
        La opinión de los
        estudiantes no es
        tenida en cuenta
        para la elaboración
  1.4   de pactos de aula y
        manual de
        convivencia


        La puntualidad y la             Una      falta     de            La firma del                  El estudiante no está
        permanencia en las              convivencia         es           contrato de                   comprometido a dar a
        actividades                     aquella     que     se           matrícula no                  conocer la información veraz y
        escolares, son                  comete     de forma              restringe el derecho          oportuna sobre
  2.2   decisiones               2.3    individual y no afecta     2.4   al libre desarrollo    2.10   requerimientos a sus
        voluntarias de los              a los demás.                     de la personalidad            representantes legales.
        estudiantes.                                                     dentro de la
                                                                         institución
                                                                         educativa.
        Las faltas de
                                        El debido proceso es
        convivencia tipo I y
                                        la secuencia de pasos
        II pueden ser
                                        a               seguir
        tratadas por la
                                        ordenadamente
        institución, pero
                                        dentro             del
  3.3   con presencia de         3.9
                                        seguimiento a una
        padres de familia y
                                        conducta, pero no
        autoridades
                                        debe estar estipulado
        locales.
                                        en el manual de
                                        convivencia.

                                                    Source: Authors


        After studying these results, certain concepts were identified regarding the
 shortcomings presented by each section of questions. Based on this, the
 development of scripts began, incorporating case studies that guide students
 toward assertive problem-solving and the management of topics where the
 highest error rates were observed. (Table 3)


                  Table 3. Details of concepts derived by trends and question groups




                                                    Source: Authors


        After organizing and evaluating the diagnostic phase, we proceeded to
 select and implement the teaching tool, opting for the development of a


                                                                                                                        221

multimedia program using NPM-JavaScript technology, due to its ease of use
across students’ various devices. The program is based on case studies of
coexistence, using illustrated dialogue scripts with textual and graphic content,
which students observe and then complete the initial survey to measure their level
of improvement. (See Figure 1)


            Figure 1. Example of an illustrated dialogue. Created by the author




                                     Source: Authors


      After implementing the program and testing the application with students,
it was observed that participants showed greater interest in the virtual materials
than in traditional physical documents. It was also observed that the level of
comprehension and understanding of the content was facilitated more effectively
through ICT-mediated learning than through documents and lectures.
      The instructional materials were delivered to the educational institution to
be used as a technological resource in the dissemination, socialization, and
adoption of school regulations regarding coexistence.


4. DISCUSSION AND CONCLUSIONS


      This study sought to implement ICT-mediated teaching materials to serve
as a technological tool for disseminating, socializing, and fostering the adoption
of school regulations. In the first stage of development, the level of knowledge



                                                                                  222

regarding school coexistence rules among the selected students was identified
through the use of data collection instruments. It was found that students do not
like their parents to participate in school governance, that they are familiar with
the coexistence manual but do not apply it, confuse mandatory rules with
voluntary ones, and are unaware of the procedures and protocols of due process.
       Our results are similar to those reported by (Penalva, 2018) , which notes
the low level of community participation in the dissemination of rules and,
consequently, their limited knowledge of them—a fact that leads to difficulties in
communication and assertive conflict resolution. In a different scenario, this
contrasts with the findings presented by (Troyer et al., 2018) , which refers to
rules developed by consensus within the educational community and the
availability of resources to carry out training activities on coexistence with the full
commitment of teachers.
       Regarding the implementation and sharing of the tool, we found that
students show greater interest and, consequently, better grasp of the material
when technological mediation is used and various forms of presenting
information—such as graphics, color, text, and sound—are combined. Traditional
dissemination methods like books, brochures, and meetings do not generate the
same level of interest, and their impact is limited.
       These findings are consistent with the arguments presented by (Cabello,
2019) , where the author explains how ICTs have facilitated the dissemination
and socialization of peace-related issues. The author also describes how
technological strategies have been integral to social and cultural changes,
accelerating the pace of learning and transformation. However, this contrasts with
certain sections of the work by (Navarro T., 2019) , which highlights how ICTs
facilitate misconduct such as bullying and other related behaviors that violate
school regulations and lead to problematic situations within educational
institutions.
       Students grasp messages better through audiovisual means than through
text, and the use of ICT as a teaching strategy contributes to improved adherence
to school rules
       The implementation of the multimedia program with case studies
demonstrates progress in the adoption of rules of coexistence



                                                                                   223

      Adherence to rules of conduct improves interpersonal relationships and
fosters a pleasant school environment that extends to the broader social context.




                                                                             224

                                   REFERENCES
ACUÑA, N., CONCHA, B., DE LA FUENTE, B., & MEDINA, R. (2018). ¿De qué
hablamos cuando hablamos de comunicación, relación, participación, compromiso e
involucramiento de las familias con la escuela? Ucemaule, 60-64.

ADAME, M. N., GARCÍA, Z. N., & GÓMEZ, I. N. (2017). AMBIENTE ESCOLAR;
CONVIVENCIA Y PAZ. Repositorio-upb, 41-42.

ARAGÓN, G. D. (2017). Plan de Convivencia. Bajo Aragon: Departamento de
educacion, cultura y deportes.

ARANTZAMENDI, M., LÓPEZ, D. O., CAROLE, R., & CARRASCO, J. M. (2016).
Investigación cualitativa en Cuidados Paliativos.Un recorrido por los enfoques más
habituales. Elsevier, 221-222.

Arcia, V., Pilar, M. D., Añaños, F. T., & Medina, G. M. (2020). Educación social escolar
en la construcción de cultura y educación para la paz: propuestas metodológicas de
intervención socioeducativa. Campos en ciencias sociales, 52-55.

BALCAZAR, M. E. (2019). Un estudio comparativo en cuatro maestrías
especializadasdesde la percepción de los estudiantes. Desde el sur, 197-199.

CABELLO, T. P. (2019). LAS TIC´S COMO HERRAMIENTAS IRENOLÓGICAS EN
LA PROMOCIÓN Y DIFUSIÓN DE LA CULTURA DE PAZ. Valencia: TIRANT LO
BLANCH.

CAICEDO, M. F., GARCIA, A. J., & QUINTERO, P. Y. (2018). CONCEPCIÓN QUE
TIENEN LOS DOCENTES Y PADRES DE FAMILIA SOBRE LA NORMA SOCIAL Y
SU EFECTO EN EL COMPORTAMIENTO DE LOS NIÑOS DEL GRADO JARDÍN DEL
HOGAR INFANTIL HORMIGUITA VIAJERA DEL CARMEN DE VIBORAL. Uniminuto,
15-20.

CERDA, G., SALAZAR, Y., GUZMAN, C., & NARVAEZ, G. (2018). Impacto de la
convivencia escolar sobre el rendimiento. Propósitos y Representaciones, 50-54.

DELGADO, S. K., GADEA, W. F., & VERA, Q. S. (2018). Rompiendo Barreras en la
Investigación. Machala-Ecuador: UTMACH.

GALLARDO, C. B., HERNANDEZ, Z. G., MONSALVE, G. M., & BARRIENTOS, B. R.
(2019). CONVIVENCIA, CONFLICTO Y PACTO, HACIA LA CONSTRUCCIÓN
PARTICIPATIVA DE ESCENARIOS DE CONVIVENCIA ESCOLAR. Electrónica en
Educación y Pedagogía, 64-69.

LEÓN, O. V. (2019). La Paz Imperfecta como Definición de las Dinámicas Sociales
que Emergen en Contextos de Alimentación en un Grupo de Mujeres de Floridablanca,
Santander. Ciencias de la Administracion Economica, 33-38.

LÓPEZ, R. P., & FACHELLI. (2017). Metodología de la investigación cuantitativa.
BARCELONA: BELLATERRA.

MENDOZA, B., & BARRERA, A. (2018). Gestión de la convivencia escolar en
educación básica: percepción. Redie, 95.

NAVARRO, T. (2019). Riesgos entre los adolescentes por el mal uso de las TIC.
Zaguan, 11-12.


                                                                                     225

NAVARRO, V., & RICARDO, T. (2018). Formación y desarrollo de competencias TIC e
intercultural. Revista de Paz y conflictos, 182-184.

OCHOA, A., & PÉREZ, L. (2019). El aprendizaje servicio, una estrategia para impulsar
la participación y mejorar la convivencia escolar. Psicoperspectivas, 1-11.

OLIVARES, V. (2018). DESARROLLO DE LA INFERENCIA LÉXICA PARA EL
INCREMENTO Y DOMINIO DE VOCABULARIO EN LA. Universidad Pontificia de
Valparaiso, 3-5.

OTERO, O. A. (2018). Enfoques de investigacion. Barranquilla: Arquitectonico.

OTZEN, T., & CARLOS, M. (2017). Técnicas de Muestreo sobre una Población a
Estudio. Morphol, 228-230.

PENALVA, L. A. (2018). LA CONVIVENCIA ESCOLAR. UN RETO DEL SIGLO XXI.
Electrónica de Investigación y Docencia, 45-47.

PRIETO, C. B. (2017). El uso de los métodos deductivo e inductivo para aumentar la
e ciencia del procesamiento de adquisición de evidencias digitales. Cuadernos de
contabilidad, 1123-125.

REDONDO, R. M., & JARAMILLO, G. O. (2018). Sentidos y significados de la
convivencia escolar en estudiantes y docentes de la institución educativa Niño
Jesús de Praga, del municipio de Popayán - Cauca. Popayan: Editores.

REDONDO, R. M., & JARAMILLO, G. O. (2019). COMPRENSIONES DE LO SOCIAL
EN CLAVE DEL DESARROLLO. Popayan: Editores.

RIVERA, G. E., & MEJIA CORREA, M. Y. (2019). Rasgos que caracterizan las
Prácticas Educativas en el marco de la Educación Inclusiva en un aula Multigrado.
Planilla educativa, 40-45.

SENEVOA, & ALEX. (2005). Las tecnologías de la información y la comunicación
en la enseñanza. Moscú: Unesco.

SINISTERRA, M. D. (2019). INFLUENCIA DE APROPIACIÓN DE VALORES PARA
LA CONVIVENCIA DE NIÑOS DENTRO DEL AULA DE CLASES DE LA ESCUELA
NORMAL SUPERIOR FEDERICO LLERAS. Repositorio Los Libertadores, 19-21.

TOMALÁ, C. C. (2018). La multimedia en el aprendizaje desde los grupos de clase.
Ingenios, 10-15.

TROYER, O. N., VALDIVIA, G. J., GAJARDO, AGUAYO, J., VIEJO, A., CARMEN, . . .
ROMERO, T. G. (2018). Estudio de casos: tensiones y desafíos en la elaboración de la
normativa escolar en Chile. Educ. Pesqui, 5-7.




                                                                                    226

CHAPTER 14
 MANAGEMENT OF EDUCATIONAL
 TECHNOLOGY IN HIGHER
 EDUCATION: THE CASE OF
 INTEGRATING SIMULATORS INTO
 EDUCATION


Ariel Adolfo Rodriguez-Hernández
Doctor in Educational Technology
Universidad Pedagógica y Tecnológica de Colombia
E-mail: ariel.rodriguez@uptc.edu.co

Fanny Avella-Forero
Master of Business Administration
Universidad Pedagógica y Tecnológica de Colombia
E-mail: fanny.avella@uptc.edu.co

Juan Sebastián Rodríguez Avella
Agricultural Engineering Student
Universidad Nacional de Colombia
E-mail: jurodrigueza@unal.edu.co


ABSTRACT: The objective of this paper is to present reflections on the
university’s experience in incorporating simulators into teaching and learning in
the fields of physics, chemistry, and electronics, as well as the theoretical
frameworks that led to the incorporation of these technologies. The project began
with a diagnostic and identification phase focused on open-source and free-to-
use simulators, aiming to identify and document the state of development of
open-source simulators. The goal was to define a methodological model for the
use of simulators within educational processes and a guideline model for their
implementation in the classroom. After analyzing this diagnostic phase and
constructing the methodological model, proprietary software solutions were
analyzed, and finally, investments were made in proprietary software licenses,
which were combined with the use of open-source software. The project presents
a description of the educational methodological model for the use of simulators,
outlining the characteristics the model must possess, which are grounded in
learning theories (active learning, problem-based or real-world case-based
learning, incremental development of competencies, and ICT support) in order to
make effective use of this type of IT solution within education. The project’s
results revealed the existence of open-source simulation software developments,
which offer an easily accessible, low-cost, and high-quality alternative for
improving educational processes in institutions. It also identified high-quality,
valuable proprietary simulation software solutions for education.



                                                                             227

KEYWORDS: simulation in education, educational simulation software,
interactive learning resources.

RESUMO: O objetivo deste trabalho é apresentar as reflexões sobre a
experiência da universidade na incorporação de simuladores no ensino e
aprendizagem nas áreas de física, química e eletrônica. Bem como os
referenciais teóricos que levaram à incorporação dessas tecnologias. Partiu de
uma fase de diagnóstico e identificação em primeira instância de simuladores
para uso livre e aberto, onde se procurou identificar e documentar o estado do
desenvolvimento de simuladores em software livre. Buscou-se definir um modelo
metodológico para o uso de simuladores nos processos educacionais e um
modelo guia para sua implementação em sala de aula. Após a análise dessa
fase de diagnóstico e construção do modelo metodológico, foram analisadas as
soluções de software proprietário e, por fim, foram feitos investimentos em
licenças de software proprietário e combinado o uso de software livre. A
descrição do modelo metodológico educacional para uso de simuladores é
apresentada dentro do projeto, são descritas as características que o modelo
deve ter, que são baseadas em teorias de aprendizagem (aprendizagem ativa,
aprendizagem baseada em problemas ou casos da realidade, desenvolvimento
de habilidades incrementais e suporte de TIC para o uso efetivo deste tipo de
soluções computacionais na educação. Os resultados do projeto revelaram a
existência de desenvolvimentos de simuladores de software livre, que oferecem
uma alternativa de fácil acesso, baixo custo e excelente qualidade para melhorar
os processos educacionais nas instituições , além de soluções proprietárias de
simuladores de software de grande qualidade e valor para a educação.

PALAVRAS CHAVE: simulação na educação, software educacional para
simulação, recursos interativos de aprendizagem.




                                                                            228

1. INTRODUCTION


      This project arose from the university’s need regarding virtual laboratories,
particularly in the fields of physics and chemistry for distance education students.
      Its rationale stems from the need to identify and understand the current
state of development of simulators for educational purposes.
      This research explores and identifies the state of the art in this field; I
sought to identify as many educational simulators as possible, with an initial
requirement that their development or distribution model be open-source
software. I then sought to identify proprietary software. The project began with
two questions:
    • Are there simulators for educational use in physics, chemistry, and
      electronics?
    • If such resources exist, what is their use and dissemination within the
      educational community, and how can they be incorporated into an
      institution’s educational activities?
      To organize the information, a categorization system was defined, which
included: development language type, distribution license type, and area within
physics. (Esquembre, 2004).
      Once the solutions were identified, we proceeded to identify or define a
methodological model for incorporating simulators into education, which included
the design of work guides.



2. METHODOLOGY FOR INCORPORATING SIMULATORS INTO HIGHER
EDUCATION


      To address this project, the following phases were generally defined:
    • Identify simulation systems for physics, chemistry, and electronics
      laboratories,   both    open-source     and     proprietary,   including    their
      characteristics,   functionality,   technical   information,    source     code,
      executables, and costs.
    • Identify a methodological model for education that supports the use of
      simulation systems for laboratories.



                                                                                   229

    • Define and design guidelines for implementing a simulator in an actual
      course.
    • Validate the use of simulators and the defined educational methodology in
      a course.
    • Conduct an assessment to identify strengths, weaknesses, and
      opportunities for improvement that will enable more efficient use of this
      type of material in the classroom.
    • Implement a simulator solution for educational purposes at the university
      as part of the Strategic Plan for ICT Integration, within the project
      “Methodological Modernization and Integration of ICT and Virtual Learning
      in the Faculty of Distance Studies and its Regional Centers.” (UPTC, 2010)


2.1 DEVELOPMENT PHASES


2.1.1 Identification and documentation of software resources


      We searched for and identified educational software solutions of the
simulator type for physics, chemistry, and electronics laboratories developed
using open-source or proprietary software at the national and international levels.
This stage or phase involved identifying the characteristics, functionality,
technical information, source code, and executables—to the extent possible—for
each solution found that had been developed in the last ten years, or, failing that,
the website from which it can be used or is sold. (Fernández, 2004).
      These     resources   were    classified   following   an   analysis   of   the
characteristics they must meet in terms of the subject matter they address, which
was developed based on the content taught in the Physics, Chemistry, and
Electronics courses of undergraduate programs. In particular, these resources
must provide computational treatment of the simulation of phenomena related to
these subjects. (Martínez, 2016).
      At the same time, this phase included a review of studies on the didactic
challenges of experimental learning in Physics, Chemistry, and Electronics, with
the aim of identifying the most important pedagogical aspects that a simulation
system must fulfill for educational use (theoretical content, virtual experiences,



                                                                                  230

skill-building tasks, learning activities, and methodologies for developing
simulator-based practices). (Franco & Álvarez, 2008).


2.1.2 Identification of the educational methodology and design of
implementation guides


       It was necessary to define an educational methodology to validate the
educational use of simulators in a real course. The course population, level, and
educational modality were defined.
       The Physics I course in the Civil Engineering Technology program at the
Faculty of Distance Studies of the Pedagogical and Technological University of
Colombia was selected as the pilot group.
       At the same time that this educational methodology was identified, an
implementation guide for the simulator as educational material in a real course
was developed. This guide is intended to help students practically carry out a
series of physics experiments using the selected simulator, with the aim of
validating the strengths, weaknesses, and opportunities for improvement that will
allow for more efficient use of this type of material in higher education classrooms.
       Similarly, indicators were defined to assess the educational use of
simulators and their impact on education.


2.1.3 Application


       In this phase, these resources were incorporated into teaching practice as
a complementary tool in the planning of laboratory work for courses in the first
years of undergraduate engineering programs (Kofman, 2003)
       The use of simulators was then validated. We also sought to analyze the
influence of these computer applications and complementary teaching materials
on the learning process carried out by students through laboratory experiences,
evaluating the reports from the work sessions conducted with the software
(Kofman, 2000).




                                                                                 231

2.1.4 Assessment of the use of simulators in teaching


      Here, the aim was to assess the validation of simulator use in education
and identify the strengths, weaknesses, and opportunities for improvement that
would allow for more efficient use of this type of material in the classroom
(Rosado & Herreros, 2005).


2.2 METHODOLOGICAL APPROACH


      This project sought to describe the current state of the field by identifying
developments in simulators through descriptive research, with the primary
purpose of establishing the current state of development regarding the
educational use of simulators. Keeping this in mind is essential for understanding
the results presented.
      Since one of the objectives is to create a database that identifies and
presents developments in simulator-type software based on free or proprietary
software, this led to establishing the characteristics of the information analysis
regarding the topic and defining the general framework for the research. The
characteristics defined for data identification, processing, and analysis are:
      Type of software: a characteristic focused on the types of free software or
the conditions a software must meet to be classified as free software. The
criterion used is that it must comply with at least one of the freedoms¹ defined in
the concept of free software.
      Software distribution license: it was necessary to identify this characteristic
in order to present the results more robustly.
      Programming language: the aim was to determine which languages lead
the development of simulators in free software.
      Platform or Operating System: to determine on which operating system the
identified software can be used.
      Field of knowledge: although the project is limited to physics, chemistry,
and electronics, fundamental subfields were identified, and each result was
associated with one of these areas.




                                                                                 232

      Once the characteristics for collecting information were identified, it
became necessary to categorize each one, define variables, and establish
indicators to evaluate the results, as shown in Table 1. Research Variables.


                               Table 1. Research Variables
          CHARACTERISTIC                           VARIABLES

        Software type            Web or Applet

                                 Installable application

                                 Operating System

                                 Directory

                                 Development environment

                                 LMS Content Management System

        Programming language     C++

                                 Java

                                 Python

                                 Perl

                                 Swish / Flash

        Platform                 GNU/Linux

                                 UNIX

                                 Windows

                                 Mac OS

        License type             GNU GPL
                                 Freeware - Proprietary

                                 LGPL

                                 Creative Commons

                                 Shareware

                                 BSD

                                    Source: Authors


2.3 POPULATION UNIVERSE AND SAMPLE OR UNIT OF ANALYSIS


      The study population is limited in terms of time, as the projects identified
must have been developed within the last ten years.
      Furthermore, although the aim was to identify projects developed in
Spanish, it was deemed prudent for the sake of objective analysis to include other


                                                                               233

languages in order to obtain results that would lead to a more comprehensive
study.
         In terms of sample size, the primary aim was to identify developments
carried out in educational institutions worldwide and in organizations related to
physics, chemistry, and electronics, as well as within the free software
communities and universities.
         It was not possible to establish a fixed sample, as the degree of uncertainty
regarding the subject did not allow for the definition of a population; instead, the
characteristics of the target to be identified were defined.


2.4 DEVELOPMENT, SELECTION, AND DESIGN OF INSTRUMENTS


         Given that free software communities and universities are organized on a
global scale, and based on the characteristics and variables to be identified in the
information-gathering process, a spreadsheet-style table was created containing
the elements necessary to identify existing developments and projects.
         The instrument used was a results record sheet, which was employed in
the identification process and enabled the analysis and processing of the data
obtained according to the needs and objectives defined by the project.


2.5 PILOT TEST AND VALIDITY


         The pilot test was conducted over five months and required sending the
form to educational and research networks to quickly identify potential sources of
information.
         In addition, an Internet search was conducted to identify existing projects
and developments.
         To ensure validity, it was mandatory that the projects be referenced and
available on the Internet, in order to verify existing developments and thus
guarantee the availability of resources.




                                                                                  234

2.6 PLAN FOR PRESENTING RESULTS


       To present the results, the information was consolidated, tabulated, and
organized according to the defined characteristics and variables.
       The summary of the results is presented in terms of quantities,
percentages, and graphical representations. Highly relevant projects are briefly
described in the full document.


3. RESULTS OF THE DIAGNOSTIC FOR THE INCORPORATION OF
SIMULATORS


       It is important to note that we sought to identify the development language,
finding that the largest percentage of projects are developed in Java, with a
smaller percentage developed in C or C++, and Python.


3.1 IDENTIFICATION OF RESOURCES BY SOFTWARE TYPE


       This analysis allowed us to determine the number and percentage of
simulators by identified software class, with the aim of understanding market
trends regarding software types.
       As shown in Table 2, applet-based developments are the most common in
simulation. This result is due to the portability of applets, their ease of execution
over the Internet, and their robustness for mathematical operations. The
languages used for these simulations are Java and Flash (the executable is
distributed for free, but not the source code).


                   Table 2. Identification of resources by software type
             Software Type             Quantity     %       No.          of %
                                                            Objects
                                     Projects

              Applet (Java/Flash)     22           44.0    2069           98.
                                                                           7

              Operating Systems       1            2.0     1              0.1

              Running Application     15           30.0    15             0.7

              IDE                     5            10.0    5              0.2




                                                                                 235

              Directory           2           4.0    2           0.1

              LMS                 5           10.0   5           0.2

              Total projects      50                 2097

                                  Source: Authors


      The identified applet-type simulators developed in Java allow users to
download the source code or binary files and the executable files (.jar).
      Regarding executable-type applications, it was found that the vast majority
correspond to applications for simulating graphs of high mathematical complexity.
      Finally, IDE-type development environments for creating simulations are
scarce but are gradually establishing themselves as the future of simulators.
These solutions are described in detail in a section below.
      At the level of web directories or resource repositories, it was possible to
identify two repositories among the more than 50 projects; these repositories are
of the informational database type.
      And at the level of open-source operating systems, the Ing-X operating
system was identified, which integrates the most robust and complex simulation
developments into its distribution. This project originated in the Republic of
Argentina and integrates more than 15 simulation solutions for multiple areas of
scientific knowledge.


3.2 IDENTIFICATION OF RESOURCES BY DEVELOPMENT LANGUAGE


      As part of the research and project survey process, the programming
language in which each project was developed was identified. The purpose of
this analysis is to establish trends in programming languages for simulator
development and to identify the reasons for their use.
      In conclusion, this analysis shows that Java is the most widely used
language for simulator development, followed by Flash, C++, and Python. The
latter language is being tested in the SimPy = Simulation in Python system, a
project that has created a solution for developing simulators. See Table 3.




                                                                              236

              Table 3. Classification of simulators by programming language
             Language            Number of %            No. Objects     %
                                 Projects
             Programming

             Java              29            58.0     1880            89.7

             Python            6             12.0     7                0.3

             Flash             3             6.0      198              9.4

             C++               10            20.0     10               0.5

             NA                2             4.0      2                0.1

             Total             50                     2097

                                    Source: Authors


       Java is the most widely used language because it is cross-platform. This
makes it portable and scalable. Its APIs for mathematical and graphical
processing in 2D and 3D integrate and handle the complex operations and
graphics that physics requires to simulate events. Furthermore, the ability to run
an applet in a web browser makes its distribution and use straightforward.
       A special case is the topic of simulators developed in Flash; it is one of the
development systems with the best graphics processing and is versatile when it
comes to integrating with the Internet.
       The key difference between developments in Java, C++, and Python
compared to Flash is that the first three languages offer the four freedoms
established for free software, while Flash only grants freedoms 1 and 3: execution
and distribution.


3.3 IDENTIFICATION OF RESOURCES BY DISTRIBUTION LICENSE TYPE


       This item allowed us to identify trends in the licensing of the identified
simulator-type resources and the level of implementation of free software
commitments based on each resource’s distribution license, as well as the
permitted freedoms.
       Table 4 reflects the results of this study; upon analysis, it is clear that
Freeware—as software that offers a free trial version for evaluation but does not
grant access to the source code—leads the results.




                                                                                 237

                   Table 4. Classification of simulators by license type
            License Type           Number         %       No.          of     %
                                                          Objects
                                   Projects

            GPL                          16             32.7   120           5.7

            LGPL                         1              2.0    1             0.0

            BSD                          2              4.1    2             0.1

            Freeware             -       28             57.1   1867          89.0
            Proprietary

            Creative Commons             2              4.1    107           5.1

            Total                        50                    2097

                                             Source: Authors


       It is noted with concern that the full freedoms of free software must be
addressed and coordinated in order to leverage the strengths of development
communities in improving these resources.
       In conclusion, freeware (57.1%) is the most common way to publish and
make software available to the public, and its disadvantage is that it does not
comply with the four freedoms established by free software; similarly, the GPL
license ranks second with 32.7%


3.4 IDENTIFICATION OF RESOURCES BY PLATFORM


       It is essential to know the operating system on which it runs, as this
ensures the simulator’s portability.
       The results described in Table 5 conclusively show that 70% of the
developments are multiplatform, thereby ensuring their use on GNU/Linux,
Windows, and even Mac OS.


                  Table 5. Classification of simulators by operating system
             Platform             Number         %          No.        of %
                                                               Objects
                                     Projects

             GNU/Linux               8                16.0     8            0.4

             Windows                 5                10.0     202          9.6

             Cross-platform          35               70.0     1885         89.9




                                                                                    238

            Mac OS             2            4.0      2            0.1

                  Total                50                  2097

                                   Source: Authors


       It is clear that the simulators developed are multiplatform.


3.5 DESIGN OF THE PROTOTYPE GUIDE FOR THE EDUCATIONAL USE OF
PHYSICS SIMULATORS


       Once the different simulators have been identified, it becomes necessary
to design the respective guides for the educational use of these systems within a
physics course at the higher education level.
       This led to the definition of a prototype guide for the educational use of
simulators. On this topic, there is a postdoctoral thesis titled MODELLUS:
Learning Physics with Mathematical Modeling, developed by Teodoro, V. D. in
2003 at the University of Nova in Lisbon, Portugal (Teodoro, 2003). The final
result was the project titled MODELLUS: Interactive Modeling with Mathematics,
which defines software developed in Java for simulation and the methodology for
implementing that software in education.
       In Chapter Six, “Use of Modellus,” the author describes the theoretical
frameworks for the educational use of simulators and defines the general
structure of the guidelines required to use this simulation software solution.
       After reviewing and analyzing this experience—which, within the scope of
the research conducted, is the most comprehensive and well-documented project
regarding the educational use of simulators in education—the general structure
of the guide for the educational use of simulators has been defined, and it is
designed to be compatible with any other simulator.
       The guide model has been used in the development of practical exercises
within the Physics I courses at the Faculty of Distance Learning, with satisfactory
results.
       This prototype must undergo constant review, evaluation, and updating,
and depending on the simulator used, its components must be adjusted as
deemed appropriate.



                                                                                 239

3.5 SWOT ANALYSIS OF LEARNING USING SIMULATORS


           To validate the educational use of the selected simulators, the Physics I
course was used, specifically Group 550 with 26 students and Group 551 with
29. Both groups are part of the Civil Engineering Technology program in the
distance learning format.
           To begin these courses, students were provided with training to familiarize
them with the simulators, covering both the installation and usage processes.
Guided by the instructor, they learned about the simulator and how to interact
with it.
           The experimental group consisted of two groups of students: the first group
(550) used the Modellus simulation environment, and the second group (551)
used the Physlets project simulators and the Uninorte circular motion simulator.
           Each environment is very different, as Modellus is an integrated simulation
design and development system in which the user can change not only the
variables but also the simulation conditions; in fact, from a single example, they
can create an entirely new simulation. Physlets are applets with pre-designed
simulations in which the student only changes variables and then runs the
simulation with those variables.


3.5.1 Advantages and strengths


     • The use of simulators makes all physics experiments accessible without
           requiring complex and highly expensive laboratories. It also allows
           students to have a practice environment right in their own homes.
     • Simulators allow for the reproduction of natural phenomena that are
           difficult to observe directly in reality for various reasons: risks, costs, time
           scale, spatial scale
     • Students test their prior ideas and knowledge about the simulated
           phenomenon by formulating their own hypotheses, which leads to greater
           autonomy in the learning process and the development of constructivist
           and meaningful learning.




                                                                                       240

    • Students can modify the various parameters and initial conditions that
      appear in the physical model provided by the simulator, which helps them
      draw their own conclusions based on different scenarios.
    • Simulation provides students with a wide variety of relevant data,
      facilitating the qualitative and quantitative verification of laws and scientific
      principles across different fields of science.
    • Simulators display real-time graphs of various quantities, giving students
      a much more realistic sense of the simulated phenomena.


3.5.2 Disadvantages and challenges


      In general, no disadvantages as such have been identified; rather, the
issues arising from the use of simulators stem from certain challenges:
    • When students first begin using simulators, they sometimes modify
      variables of the simulated phenomenon that are not relevant to testing their
      hypotheses and that can cause errors in the program’s execution. To
      prevent this, adequate training in the use of simulators and clearly defined
      guidelines are required. (Rodríguez, 2010).
    • The most effective simulation systems from a didactic standpoint are those
      that implement a sufficient variety of physical models, with varying levels
      of complexity, as is the case in the Modellus simulation environment. In
      this environment, each physical model implemented is associated with a
      specific informational interface for the student, such that the sequence of
      proposed tasks requires the student


4. INTEGRATION OF EDUCATIONAL SIMULATION INTO THE UNIVERSITY’S
STRATEGIC PLAN FOR ICT INCORPORATION


      After confirming that simulators are a viable solution for the development
of physics, chemistry, and electronics laboratories, the project for the acquisition
and implementation of a hardware architecture for the institutional integration of
simulators was presented to the Strategic Plan for ICT Integration Committee.




                                                                                   241

This architecture would align with the university’s operations and complement the
existing physical laboratories.
       This research effort ultimately led to the implementation of an IT solution
for integrating simulators into physics, chemistry, and electronics laboratories.
The following activities were carried out for this project:
    • Renovation of computer equipment in six computer labs and their
       corresponding integration with a system of smart boards and interactive
       video bean. Three labs were adapted at the Tunja Campus, one at the
       Sogamoso Campus, one at the Duitama Campus, and one at the Bogotá
       Campus.
    • Acquisition of 145 licenses for Virtual Physical Science version 3 (VPS
       Lab)
    • Acquisition of a server for managing the virtual laboratories.
    • Integration of remote labs using TeamViewer into educational activities, as
       well as the integration of simulators into the university’s Virtual Classroom.
       After identifying both open-source and proprietary software that simulates
laboratory services, it was determined that open-source resources would be used
to design pre-class and reinforcement activities for students outside the
classroom, thanks to the availability of these resources on the Internet and their
ease of distribution via the web.
        Meanwhile, the software that was selected for purchase following analysis
and review—namely, Virtual Physical Science—was installed and configured in
the university’s laboratory centers.


4.1 CONFIGURATION OF THE VIRTUAL LABORATORY SYSTEM


       Taking advantage of VPS’s network features, it can be installed in Web
mode, Local Network mode, or User mode. This depends on the organization’s
capabilities.
       At the university, the initial pilot involved installing the licenses on every
computer in the computer labs and managing them locally with one user account
per student, previously created on the local server to ensure authentication and
control over each student’s activities.



                                                                                 242

       An initial phase of basic training in the use of VPS Lab was conducted,
utilizing the system’s Virtual Book of Pre-designed Labs. By clicking on a lab,
users can access the instructions, objectives, and other details of the exercise.
This option offers a printed book translated into Spanish that contains the 48 lab
guides.
       These guides are not the only labs available, as professors with expertise
in the field can create their own labs and guides and implement simulated
practical exercises.
       For web-based configuration, the web server must be set up with Tomcat
Web Services to serve as the servlet engine. This phase is currently being tested
at the university.
       Once the VPS Lab is configured, Figure 1 presents an overview of the
system.


                          Figure 1. Main view of the VPS Lab




                                   Source: Authors


       The VPS Lab contains nine different labs, each of which can be accessed
by clicking on the bench in the main view. It features a whiteboard on the right- ,
which is used to access messages from the instructor and to view a summary of
assignments.
       The labs available in the VPS Lab are:
    • Mechanics
    • Circuits
    • Optics
    • Quantum
    • Inorganic Chemistry
    • Chemistry


                                                                               243

    • Density
    • Calorimetry
    • Gases
      Each laboratory provides students with a comprehensive set of reagents,
laboratory tools, and equipment, as well as calculators, equation editors, and
meters that enable them to perform the experiments. Additionally, the system
includes features for storing results and notes from each experiment, and in
network or web mode, it stores the activities performed by the student.


5. CONCLUSIONS AND FUTURE WORK


5.1 CONCLUSIONS


      This study aimed to identify and document educational software projects,
a process that revealed the wide range of developments available in both open-
source and proprietary software.
      It should be noted that the results from this stage of the project are
satisfactory in terms of quantity; approximately 2,000 software solutions were
identified, each documented and organized according to its area of application.
      This study concludes that educational software that is 100% free is scarce,
accounting for just 42.4% of the identified projects and 11.4% of the total number
of simulators.
      With the implementation of laboratories through Virtual Physical Science,
an organizational framework has been created for the development of simulated
laboratory practices , a service that has improved students’ ability to understand
the various topics across different subjects. It has also reduced damage to real
laboratory equipment and materials, as both teachers and students can conduct
simulated experiments before working with actual equipment, particularly with
complex, costly, or high-risk laboratory equipment.
      There is a need to lead this type of project in a more organized manner,
applying quality criteria for educational software and system dynamics, so that
the implementation of simulators as a teaching-learning tool can be consolidated
within the educational community. A strength of this work is that it identified not



                                                                               244

only proprietary-licensed simulators but also simulators under free software
licenses, making these types of solutions accessible to everyone.
       From an educational standpoint, several projects were identified that are
methodologically and pedagogically very sound and could serve as models for
consolidating the educational use of simulators within society.
       The University has identified its methodology, which is adapted from the
Modellus project, and the teaching team has been developing laboratory guides,
using the simulators for practical exercises.


5.2 FUTURE WORK


       With more than 2,000 simulators identified, a very important future task
would be the educational validation of these resources based on educational
software quality criteria. Such research would provide educational organizations
and teachers with better tools for utilizing these open-source resources.
       Furthermore, given the existence of integrated open-source software
development environments, an analysis and study must be conducted to define
the methodology for developing open-source simulators using these systems,
along with their respective validation processes from the perspectives of
pedagogy, instructional design, and the learning theories that underpin the quality
of these systems, as proposed by Rodríguez Abril, Rodríguez-Hernández &
Avella-Forero (2021).
       Work is currently underway on the web implementation of VPS Lab, and
the results will be shared in future projects.
       A subsequent project should take these simulators and validate them
using criteria that measure learning and its impact on knowledge development
processes at a more pedagogical and didactic level.




                                                                               245

                                   REFERENCES
ESQUEMBRE F. (2004). Creación de simulaciones interactivas en Java: aplicación a
la enseñanza de la Física. Madrid: Pearson Educación, 2004.

FERNÁNDEZ E. (2004). Implantación de proyectos de formación en línea. Madrid: Alfa
Omega-RaMa.

FRANCO I., ÁLVAREZ F. (2008). Los Simuladores, estrategia formativa en ambientes
virtuales de aprendizaje. En: Revista Virtual Universidad Católica, Vol. 21.
http://www.ucn.edu.co/portal/uzine/volumen21/articulos/3_Investigaci%C3%B3n_simul
adores.pdf

KOFMAN H. (2003). Integración de las funciones constructivas y comunicativas de las
NTICs en la enseñanza de la Física Universitaria y la capacitación docente. Premio del
II Concurso “Educación en la red”. http://www.educared.org.ar/concurso-
2/resenia/pdf/04-kofman.pdf

KOFMAN, H. (2000). Modelos y simulaciones computacionales en la enseñanza de la
Física. Revista Educación en Física, Vol.6, Págs. 13- 22. https://docplayer.es/8809116-
Modelos-y-simulaciones-computacionales-en-la-ensenanza-de-la-fisica.html

MARTINEZ, J. E. (2016). PhET. Percepciones y contribucion del uso de simulaciones
en el aprendizaje de los conceptos de energia para un curso de fisica general de la
ensenanza tecnica. http://arxiv.org/abs/1606.00245

RODRÍGUEZ ABRIL, P., RODRÍGUEZ-HERNÁNDEZ, A., AVELLA-FORERO, F.
(2021). Evaluación de simuladores como estrategia para el aprendizaje de la
electricidad en la asignatura de física en la educación media. Boletín redipe 10(8):219-
37. https://revista.redipe.org/index.php/1/article/view/1401

RODRÍGUEZ-HERNÁNDEZ, A. (2010). Definición, descripción y estudio de los
simuladores en SOFTWARE libre utilizados para el aprendizaje de la física. Revista De
Investigaciones UNAD, 9(1), 153-169. https://doi.org/10.22490/25391887.657

ROSADO L., HERREROS J.R. (2009). Nuevas aportaciones didácticas de los
laboratorios virtuales y remotos en la enseñanza de la física. Internacional Conference
on multimedia and ICT in education. Lisboa.
https://observatoriotecedu.uned.ac.cr/media/286.pdf

TEODORO, V.T. (2003). Modellus: Learning Physics with Mathematical Modelling.
Universidad Nova de Lisboa. http://modellus.fct.unl.pt/mod/resource/view.php?id=334

UPTC, (2010). Plan Estratégico de Incorporación de TIC Universidad Pedagógica y
Tecnológica de Colombia. Tunja,
http://virtual.uptc.edu.co/planestic/plan_est_uptc_realidad.html




                                                                                     246

CHAPTER 15
 MOBILE PLANETARIUMS AS A
 SCIENTIFIC LITERACY TOOL FOR
 PEOPLE WITH VISUAL
 IMPAIRMENTS


Thiago de Oliveira Borges
PhD candidate in Education
Universidade Estadual de Mato Grosso do Sul (UEMS)
E-mail: thiago890@hotmail.com

Celi Corrêa Neres
Doctor of Education
Universidade Estadual de Mato Grosso do Sul (UEMS)
E-mail: celi@uems.br

Edmilson de Souza
Doctor in Mechanical Engineering
Universidade Estadual de Mato Grosso do Sul (UEMS)
E-mail: edmilson@uems.br


ABSTRACT: This article analyzes the possibilities of scientific inclusion of people
with visual impairments in mobile planetariums, taking as a reference the
experience of the Itinerant Planetarium of the State University of Mato Grosso do
Sul (UEMS). Based on a historical-materialist perspective and drawing on
authors such as Marx, Engels, Gramsci, and Freire, the study discusses the
pedagogical, epistemological, and social barriers that limit access to astronomical
knowledge for this audience. The methodology was based on a critical literature
review and documentary analysis of public accessibility policies in science
spaces. Research on inclusion in museums and planetariums was examined, as
well as reports of concrete experiences with accessible scientific mediation. The
results show that the exclusion of blind and visually impaired people stems not
only from a lack of technical resources, but also from an educational structure
that reproduces cultural hegemony, privileging vision as the central sense in
astronomical learning. The study suggests ways to overcome these barriers,
such as the use of tactile models, audio description, and the training of mediators
sensitive to the specific sensory needs of the public. It concludes that inclusion in
mobile planetariums requires more than specific adaptations: it demands an
epistemological and pedagogical transformation that recognizes people with
visual impairments as active subjects in the construction of knowledge.
Democratizing access to astronomy, therefore, is not just a technical issue, but a
political commitment to equity and human emancipation.




                                                                                 247

KEYWORDS: accessibility, scientific literacy, social inclusion, visual impairment,
scientific dissemination.

RESUMO: Este artigo analisa as possibilidades de inclusão científica de pessoas
com deficiência visual em planetários móveis, tomando como referência a
experiência do Planetário Itinerante da Universidade Estadual de Mato Grosso
do Sul (UEMS). Fundamentado na perspectiva histórico-materialista e
dialogando com autores como Marx, Engels, Gramsci e Freire, o estudo discute
as barreiras pedagógicas, epistemológicas e sociais que limitam o acesso ao
conhecimento astronômico por este público. A metodologia baseou-se em
revisão bibliográfica crítica e análise documental de políticas públicas de
acessibilidade em espaços de ciência. Foram examinadas pesquisas sobre
inclusão em museus e planetários, bem como relatos de experiências concretas
com mediação científica acessível. Os resultados evidenciam que a exclusão de
pessoas cegas e com baixa visão não decorre apenas de ausência de recursos
técnicos, mas de uma estrutura educativa que reproduz a hegemonia cultural,
privilegiando a visão como sentido central na aprendizagem astronômica. O
estudo aponta caminhos para superar essas barreiras, como a utilização de
modelos táteis, audiodescrição e formação de mediadores sensíveis às
especificidades sensoriais do público. Conclui-se que a inclusão em planetários
móveis requer mais do que adaptações pontuais: demanda uma transformação
epistemológica e pedagógica que reconheça pessoas com deficiência visual
como sujeitos ativos na construção do conhecimento. A democratização do
acesso à astronomia, portanto, não é apenas questão técnica, mas compromisso
político com a equidade e a emancipação humana.

PALAVRAS-CHAVE: acessibilidade, letramento científico, inclusão social,
deficiência visual, divulgação científica.




                                                                              248

1. INTRODUCTION


       The exclusion of people with disabilities from spaces of science
communication constitutes a structural problem that demands critical analysis
grounded in the relationships between knowledge, power, and human emancipation.
Marx and Engels (2007) had already demonstrated how the unequal appropriation
of the means of cultural production reproduces the asymmetries of capitalism,
turning science into an instrument for maintaining privileges rather than collective
liberation. In the case of students with visual impairments, this perspective reveals
that science venues, such as planetariums, from the standpoint of accessibility for
blind or low-vision individuals, may not be a mere technical failure, but a concrete
manifestation of what Gramsci (1999) termed “cultural hegemony”—a process by
which certain social groups determine which bodies and minds are considered
legitimate to participate in the scientific universe.
       In the Brazilian context, where disability is still frequently associated with
incapacity, the barrier to scientific literacy takes on even more perverse contours.
This stigmatizing association not only limits expectations regarding the cognitive
potential of students with intellectual disabilities but also restricts pedagogical
practices that could promote their full participation in knowledge-building processes.
       Dias and Oliveira (2013), focusing on students with intellectual disabilities,
offer a critical analysis of traditional conceptions that frequently associate this
condition with stagnation in cognitive development, perpetuating the idea of an
“eternal childhood.” From a historical-cultural perspective, the authors argue that
human development is a continuous process influenced by social and cultural
interactions. This approach highlights the importance of the environment and
social relationships in fostering the capabilities of people with intellectual
disabilities, suggesting that, with adequate support, it is possible to achieve
significant levels of autonomy and social participation.
       This view challenges traditional medical models that tend to focus on
individual limitations, proposing instead a more dynamic and contextualized
understanding of disability. This approach is fundamental to promoting a more
equitable society, where all individuals have real opportunities for development
and full participation. (Dias and Oliveira; 2013)



                                                                                  249

       Another relevant aspect to bring to the discussion is the lack of adequate
resources in science venues, such as planetariums, which reflects what is
identified as the “pedagogy of exclusion”: a set of educational practices that, even
without explicit intent, normalize segregation by failing to question their
discriminatory assumptions against people with disabilities. According to Abreu
et al. (2019), upon analyzing accessibility in 15 planetariums and observatories
in Brazil, they conclude that, although there have been advances in physical
accessibility, the communicational and attitudinal dimensions remain largely
unexplored. The lack of institutional policies aimed at the inclusion of people with
disabilities in these spaces highlights educational practices that, even without
explicit intent, perpetuate segregation by failing to challenge discriminatory
assumptions. The authors argue that it is necessary to adopt strategies to
overcome these barriers and invest in funding to promote full accessibility in these
scientific environments. (Abreu et al., 2019).
       According to Costa et al. (2021), it is evident that accessibility in science
museums (the same applies to planetariums) still faces significant challenges.
The research reveals that many of these spaces lack adapted resources that
meet the specific needs of people with disabilities, which limits their full
participation in the activities offered. Furthermore, the importance of
understanding the profile and opinions of spontaneous visitors with disabilities is
highlighted, in order to promote practices that are more inclusive and sensitive to
the diversity present in the audience of these museums. This approach reinforces
the need to rethink inclusion strategies in these environments, ensuring that all
visitors have equitable access to the knowledge and experiences provided by
scientific institutions.
       Neres and Corrêa (2008); Costa, Neres, and Moisés (2023) complement
this analysis by demonstrating how the lack of accessibility in formal and non-
formal educational spaces reinforces social marginalization, creating a vicious
cycle where the inability to access knowledge limits opportunities for civic
participation. In their studies, the aforementioned authors highlight, within the
educational trajectory of people with visual impairments, instances of exclusion
that can only be overcome through access to education in diverse settings and
contexts.



                                                                                250

       Given this situation, and seeking to contribute to the advancement of
inclusion in science settings, it becomes imperative to investigate how to
transform a traveling mobile planetarium into an effective tool for scientific
inclusion for the blind and low-vision public. To this end, this article adopts a
methodological approach that combines a theoretical analysis of the Marxist and
Gramscian foundations of education with the study of concrete experiences of
accessible mediation in science settings, such as science museums and
planetariums. The documentary investigation of Brazilian legislation on
accessibility engages with blind users who have experienced exclusion in science
outreach activities, allowing us to identify not only material and e y barriers, but
primarily the epistemological obstacles that need to be overcome.
       The development of the argument stems from the observation that the
mere technical adaptation of the space will not be sufficient to ensure effective
inclusion. As Freire (1987) demonstrates in his critique of banking education, it is
necessary to reinvent the entire process of scientific mediation, replacing the
unidirectional model of knowledge transmission with a dialogical practice that
recognizes people with visual impairments as active agents in the construction of
astronomical knowledge. This transformation requires rethinking the very notion
of scientific literacy, understanding it not as the passive assimilation of content,
but as a process of empowerment capable of unveiling the structures of
oppression that limit full human development.
       The relevance of this discussion extends beyond the walls of the
university, emerging as a central issue for the construction of a truly democratic
society. When the right to scientific knowledge is denied to people with visual
impairments, one is not only depriving individuals of information about the
cosmos, but also preventing them from developing critical tools to understand
and transform their social reality, which, in the words of Marx and Engels (2007),
means denying them the very status of historical subjects. Thus, fixed or mobile
planetariums, as public facilities for scientific dissemination, have the potential to
become either a space for reproducing inequalities or a laboratory for
revolutionary educational practices, depending on the political and pedagogical
choices that are made.
       By linking the categories of historical materialism with contemporary
debates on inclusive education, this article aims to contribute to the reflection on


                                                                                  251

the need to overcome the dichotomy between theory and practice in the field of
accessibility to science spaces that have notably specialized in science
education. By specifically analyzing the space for scientific outreach provided by
mobile planetariums, it becomes clear that the inclusion of people with visual
impairments is not a secondary or merely technical issue, but a central challenge
for any project that aims to make science a y instrument of liberation, rather than
domination. In the words of Gramsci (1999), “every man is an intellectual,” and
ensuring full access to astronomical knowledge means affirming the inalienable
right of all bodies—including those who perceive the world in other ways—to
actively participate in the construction of human knowledge about the universe.
       The construction of a truly egalitarian society necessarily involves the
democratization of scientific knowledge, understood not as the patrimony of an
intellectual caste, but as a tool for collective liberation. Marx and Engels (2007)
lay the groundwork for this understanding by demonstrating how, under the
capitalist mode of production, science becomes a productive force appropriated
by the ruling classes, transforming into an instrument of domination rather than
emancipation. This analysis reveals that the exclusion of people with visual
impairments from spaces of scientific dissemination is not accidental but
structural—a particular manifestation of the broader process of alienation that
separates workers from the fruits of their intellectual activity. Gramsci (1999)
expands on this reflection by showing how cultural hegemony operates through
control of the means of production and dissemination of knowledge, defining
which social groups have the right to full access to scientific culture.
       The concept of accessibility that emerges from this theoretical analysis
goes far beyond the simple physical adaptation of spaces. As Neres and CorrÊa
(2008) demonstrate, true inclusion requires a radical transformation of the
pedagogical structures that traditionally organize educational spaces. Although
the mobile planetarium already presents itself as an immersive space for science
education that offers sensory experiences, it does not do so in a way that is
accessible to all audiences, particularly the visually impaired, who are practically
excluded from basic processes such as audio description, which are generally
nonexistent. It must be clarified that in these spaces, interaction with the public is
intense, but the narration—whether recorded or led by a planetarium guide—
does not focus on providing abundant detail about the setting, which is partially


                                                                                  252

supplemented in terms of content by the projected visual elements. Specifically,
one can illustrate the experience with celestial bodies , which could not only be
described in terms of their characteristics but also allow visitors to feel them
through tactile models that reproduce their textures and scales, accompanied by
audio narratives enriched with more precise descriptions of the displayed images
linked to the tactile models. Without this profound restructuring to serve the
visually impaired public, even the best technical resources will remain mere
formal concessions, incapable of guaranteeing what she calls “epistemological
accessibility”—the right to understand and not merely to be present.
       The concept of scientific literacy takes on specific contours when applied to
people with visual impairments. Freire (1987) provides the foundations for
overcoming the “banking” view of scientific education, proposing instead a dialogical
pedagogical practice that recognizes these individuals’ prior knowledge and their
particular ways of interacting with the world. It is not simply a matter of adapting
content, but of reinventing the entire process of constructing astronomical
knowledge—in the case of the planetarium—allowing blind or low-vision individuals
to develop their own mental representations of the cosmos through meaningful
experiences. Access to knowledge is a fundamental condition for the full exercise of
citizenship, allowing these individuals to transition from being objects of welfare
policies to active agents in cultural and scientific production.
       The articulation between these different theoretical perspectives reveals
that inclusion in the mobile planetarium cannot be reduced to a technical or
methodological issue. Rather, it is a political-epistemological challenge that
requires confronting the exclusionary structures that have historically organized
the production and dissemination of scientific knowledge. Overcoming these
barriers, as Marx and Engels (2007) argue, will not occur through the mere
natural evolution of institutions, but through the creation of mechanisms for the
production of and access to a truly popular science—a process in which people
with visual impairments must be protagonists, not merely participants or
beneficiaries. In this sense, the accessible planetarium is not an end in itself, but
a necessary step in the construction of a new, e y relationship between science
and society, where astronomical knowledge is effectively appropriated by all
bodies and minds, in their rich sensory and cognitive diversity.



                                                                                 253

2. SCIENCE, INCLUSION, AND HUMAN EMANCIPATION


       The intrinsic relationship between scientific production and social
transformation constitutes the central axis for understanding the challenges of
accessibility in scientific spaces such as mobile planetariums. Marx and Engels
(2007) ground this analysis by demonstrating how the development of productive
forces in capitalist society creates an essential contradiction: while science could
be an instrument of collective liberation, its private appropriation turns it into a
mechanism of domination. This dialectic manifests itself concretely in the
exclusion of people with visual impairments from spaces of scientific
dissemination, which does not represent mere negligence, but a particular
expression of the exclusionary logic inherent in the prevailing system.
       Gramsci (1999) contributes significantly to this reflection by examining how
cultural hegemony is consolidated through control of educational and cultural
apparatuses. The concept of the “organic intellectual,” proposed by the author,
reveals the transformative potential that educators and scientific mediators can
play in transforming the planetarium into a counter-hegemonic space. From this
perspective, the accessible mediation of astronomy ceases to be a merely
technical activity, taking on a political character—an act of resistance to the
intellectual marginalization historically imposed on people with disabilities.
       In the case of planetariums, from the perspective of inclusive education
and considering curricular and pedagogical accessibility, studies highlight the
need for structural transformations across multiple dimensions. First, an
epistemological transformation is necessary, one that challenges the geocentric
paradigms traditionally used in the organization of astronomical knowledge.
Second, a methodological revolution is required, centered on the creation of
pedagogical approaches that value the potentialities—and not merely the
sensory limitations—of individuals. Finally, a political restructuring is required, in
which accessibility is understood as a fundamental right, and not as a benevolent
concession.
       Freire (1987) offers essential contributions to the implementation of a
transformative educational practice, especially through his critique of the banking
model of education. In the context of planetariums, his dialogical pedagogy
proposes a break with the top-down transmission of concepts, advocating instead


                                                                                  254

for collaborative processes of knowledge construction. This approach values
active listening and the participation of individuals in the educational process,
placing the concrete experiences of learners at the center. For visitors with visual
impairments, this implies recognizing their everyday experiences as a legitimate
starting point for scientific understanding, breaking with the traditional logic that
positions them as passive recipients of knowledge. Furthermore, mediation, in
this scenario, must serve as a space for critical examination of the very conditions
of exclusion, promoting reflection on the epistemological and social barriers that
have historically kept them at a distance from the scientific field.
       In a specific case such as the Traveling Planetarium of the State University
of Mato Grosso do Sul (UEMS), the exchange of information based on dialogicity
takes place, and concerns regarding the treatment of content in a critical and
problematizing manner have also been addressed—aspects that required
extensive research involving an audience of over 100,000 visitors. However,
similar to other Brazilian experiences that use planetariums as tools for scientific
literacy, these necessary and desirable advances did not incorporate technically
inclusive methodologies or deeper reflections on political relations, which would
have resulted in solutions addressing accessibility for the visually impaired public
(Borges; Souza, 2022; Junglos et al., 2022).
       According to Chalhub and Gomes (2019), science spaces (in their specific
case, museums) can be inclusive educational spaces, especially for deaf
students, highlighting the importance of communicati y accessibility and scientific
literacy in teacher training. The authors present pedagogical activities developed
in the context of deaf education, related to inclusion and accessibility in
museums, emphasizing strategies such as video captions, animations, and
videos in Brazilian Sign Language (Libras). The study highlights the need for
inclusive policies in museums to cater to the diversity of the public and promote
scientific literacy in an accessible manner. Thus, scientific literacy not only
promotes access to information but also empowers these individuals for a more
conscious and transformative intervention in the social fabric.
       Silva and Elias (2022) discuss the training of agents who mediate in
science spaces, in daily life, or even in schools. For them, both families and
teachers face numerous structural and training challenges in ensuring quality
inclusive education. The research shows that, often, a lack of teacher preparation


                                                                                 255

and a shortage of specific resources exacerbate the process of exclusion,
reinforcing limited views about these students’ capabilities. Thus, breaking with
the social stereotype that associates disability with intellectual incapacity is
essential to making scientific literacy a right for all, regardless of their cognitive
abilities.
        Another study revealed concerning findings regarding the preparedness of
school staff in rural areas. Oliveira and Souza (2011) investigated the
implementation of public inclusion policies at a state school in Belo Horizonte
during 2007 and 2008. Using a qualitative-quantitative approach, the authors
administered questionnaires to 25 teachers and conducted interviews with 10
teachers, the school principal, and the manager of the Special Education
Directorate (DEEP). The results revealed that, although all teachers were in favor
of inclusive education, none had specific training to work with students with
special educational needs, and only two had some knowledge of the relevant
legislation. Furthermore, all reported difficulties in dealing with these students and
observed significant school dropout rates among them.
        Weaknesses in teacher training, the lack of adequate infrastructure, and
insufficient support undermine the effectiveness of inclusion policies. In the
findings of Oliveira and Souza (2011), the teachers interviewed expressed the
need for specific training and better working conditions to meet the demands of
inclusive education. The study concludes that, for inclusion to be effective, it is
essential to invest in the continuing education of teachers, adapt the physical
structures of schools, and ensure the necessary support from educational
authorities.
        The synthesis of these studies points to a radical understanding of
accessibility in the mobile planetarium: not as a peripheral adaptation, but as a
global restructuring of the process of scientific dissemination. This approach
requires overcoming the dichotomy between inclusion and academic excellence,
demonstrating that the development of accessible methodologies does not
represent a “downgrading” of content, but rather its enrichment through dialogue
with new forms of perception and understanding of the cosmos.




                                                                                  256

3. TOWARD A DIALECTICAL AND INCLUSIVE SCIENCE


       An analysis of the relationship between scientific knowledge and human
emancipation reveals a fundamental contradiction: while science possesses
liberating potential, its unequal distribution in class society turns it into an
instrument of domination. Marx and Engels (2007) demonstrate how the
development of productive forces under capitalism creates a rift between
producers and knowledge, alienating the majority from the knowledge they
produce. This analysis offers a privileged lens for understanding the exclusion of
people with visual impairments from scientific spaces not as an accident, but as
a particular manifestation of a system that naturalizes cognitive hierarchies.
       Gramsci    (1999)   expands    this   understanding   by   examining      the
mechanisms of cultural hegemony. His studies on the private apparatuses of
hegemony shed light on how museums and science centers, seemingly neutral,
reproduce dominant worldviews. In the specific case of planetariums and mobi ,
the lack of accessibility reveals what the author termed “organic censorship”—a
process by which certain groups are systematically excluded from cultural
production and enjoyment without the need for explicit prohibitions.
       In analyzing the history of education for people with visual impairments,
using work as a category of analysis, Neres and Corrêa (2008) draw attention to
the persistence of barriers regarding access to knowledge and, consequently, to
scientific participation. Through their studies, it is possible to infer that: a)
Disability is a social construct: the limitations experienced stem less from
biological conditions than from exclusionary social arrangements; b) Inclusion is
a political project: it demands a conscious confrontation with the power relations
that marginalize certain bodies and minds.
       Along these lines, drawing on the studies of Freire (1987), one can derive
methodological tools to operationalize this transformation. His pedagogy of the
oppressed suggests three axes for reinventing scientific mediation: a)
Dialogicity: replacing the academic monologue with collaborative processes of
knowledge construction; b) Problematization: a critical approach to the very
conditions of exclusion as part of scientific content; c) Conscientization: the
articulation between astronomical knowledge and the social experience of
disability.


                                                                                 257

       This theoretical perspective establishes an intrinsic relationship between
scientific literacy and integral human development. In his analysis, the
appropriation of scientific knowledge reveals itself as a pathway to expanding the
horizons of existential possibility for people with disabilities. By accessing this
field of knowledge, these individuals come to perceive themselves not merely as
recipients of science, but as active participants in its construction, which
strengthens their self-image as historical subjects, conscious of their trajectory
and their role in social transformation. Furthermore, mastery of this knowledge
acts as an instrument of critical intervention in reality, by providing elements for
a more complex reading of the world and for the full exercise of citizenship.
       In this way, scientific literacy transcends its informative function, taking on
a profoundly formative and emancipatory dimension. This rationale converges
toward a radical understanding of the accessible planetary: not as a peripheral
adaptation, but as a global reconstruction of scientific practice based on the
recognition of human diversity. The challenge at hand is to transcend the logic of
inclusion as assimilation, proposing instead a model of active coexistence of
differences in the production of knowledge. As the authors analyzed
demonstrate, only this dialectical approach can transform the mobile planetarium
into a true instrument of collective liberation.


4. INCLUSION AS A PRINCIPLE: PROPOSALS FOR ACCESSIBILITY IN
ASTRONOMY EDUCATION


       Building a truly inclusive society requires that the right to knowledge be
guaranteed to all, without exception. In the field of science education, particularly
in astronomy, the barriers faced by people with visual impairments remain
evident. Given this scenario, it is essential to implement concrete proposals that
guarantee equitable access to astronomical content. Adapting teaching
materials, training mediators, and collaborating with specialized teachers are
effective strategies that not only expand access but also promote a cultural
transformation in education.
       First and foremost, the adaptation of materials stands as one of the primary
tools for the democratization of knowledge. Tactile models, such as spheres with
distinct textures to represent planets, enable astronomical content to be grasped


                                                                                  258

through touch—a fundamental sense for blind people. Additionally, the use of audio
description and 3D audio resources to simulate celestial movements enriches the
sensory experience, allowing for a deeper understanding of phenomena. Such
resources not only facilitate learning but also highlight alternative forms of perception
that are often overlooked in traditional educational settings.
       Furthermore, it is essential that professionals involved in the educational
process be prepared to act in an inclusive manner. The training of mediators and
educators provides theoretical and practical support so that knowledge mediation is
sensitive to the needs of different audiences. Courses focused on description
techniques, accessible communication, and welcoming practices thus become key
elements for the effectiveness of inclusive actions, as they broaden the scope of
pedagogical practices and foster an ethical and empathetic attitude among
educators.
       Finally, the importance of institutional partnerships is highlighted.
Collaboration with institutes and organizations of people with disabilities allows
not only for the validation of proposed methodologies but also for the constant
improvement of educational practices. These partnerships ensure that the
solutions developed are aligned with the real demands of the target audience,
avoiding superficial or merely symbolic actions. The dialogue between
institutional knowledge and personal experiences strengthens the legitimacy of
these actions and ensures greater social impact.
       Thus, inclusion in astronomy education goes beyond a technical issue: it
is an ethical and social commitment to equity. The proposals discussed here
demonstrate that, with creativity, dialogue, and commitment, it is possible to
break down the barriers of ableism and offer everyone a truly transformative
educational experience. Investing in inclusion is not just a pedagogical choice—
it is a social duty.


5. PUBLIC POLICIES AND ACCESS TO SCIENCE: PATHWAYS TO SOCIAL
EMANCIPATION


       Universal access to scientific knowledge is a fundamental right that must
be guaranteed by effective public policies. In a country marked by deep
inequalities, viewing scientific inclusion as part of civic education is more than an


                                                                                     259

ideal: it is a social imperative. Among the most urgent proposals are the
integration of accessible science into school curricula, the creation of national
guidelines for non-formal educational spaces, the strengthening of investments
in assistive technologies, and the mandatory accessibility of scientific outreach
equipment.
      The inclusion of accessible science programs in school curricula is a
fundamental step toward ensuring that all students, regardless of their physical,
sensory, or social conditions, have access to scientific knowledge from an early
age. Schools, as spaces for holistic education, must assume the role of
democratizing agents of knowledge, promoting inclusive, interactive, and
culturally contextualized activities. The absence of this perspective in curricula
contributes to the perpetuation of an exclusionary system, in which access to
science remains a privilege of the few.
      Another essential aspect is the creation of national guidelines for inclusion
in non-formal educational spaces, such as museums, planetariums, science fairs,
and science centers. These environments, often neglected by educational
policies, have great potential for engagement and wonder, especially for young
audiences. Establishing accessibility standards and goals in these locations
ensures that the experience with science is not limited to the school walls and
that it reaches diverse audiences, including those historically marginalized.
      Increasing public funding for assistive technologies is also an
indispensable measure. Devices such as screen readers, Braille printers, tactile
materials, and audio description systems enable people with disabilities to
participate independently in scientific activities. However, the scarcity of
resources allocated to the research and production of these materials limits their
availability and makes access more expensive. By prioritizing investment in this
area, the state assumes its rightful role in promoting equity.
      All these proposals converge on a central issue: scientific literacy as an
instrument of social emancipation. In a world increasingly shaped by science and
technology, understanding the scientific foundations of reality becomes essential
for full civil. Science must be recognized as a common good, capable of
transforming lives and communities. Promoting access to science is, therefore, a
concrete way to combat marginalization and expand horizons of autonomy and
agency.


                                                                                260

      The state and public universities play a strategic role in this process. It is
their responsibility to produce knowledge in a socially committed manner, build
bridges between research and the population, and formulate policies that not only
acknowledge historical inequalities but also act directly to overcome them.
      In short, ensuring democratic access to science through structural public
policies is a commitment to a more just, critical, and participatory society.
Scientific inclusion should not be viewed as a favor, but as a collective
responsibility and an indispensable step toward full citizenship.


6. FINAL CONSIDERATIONS


      The analysis presented in this article demonstrates that the inclusion of
people with visual impairments in science outreach settings, such as mobile
planetariums—notably the UEMS Traveling Planetarium—where the author’s
experience in university extension projects during his undergraduate studies,
and, subsequently, the development of research in this same scientific field at the
master’s level, has provided him with a broad empirical perspective on its
pedagogical dynamics. This article brings together analyses grounded in
historical-materialist frameworks to provide a foundation for continuing the
research previously initiated—which was still viewed solely from a technical
perspective, albeit critical of pedagogical issues, yet at the same time entirely
disconnected from accessibility issues for people with visual impairments. Thus,
the reflections presented point to tangible results: the need for implementations
and changes within the science space of the on-screen planetarium that
transcend    specific   technical   adaptations    and    demand      a   profound
epistemological, pedagogical, and political restructuring. It is not merely a matter
of ensuring physical presence, but of guaranteeing the right to active participation
in the construction and appropriation of scientific knowledge, in accordance with
the principles of emancipatory education.
      By articulating the theoretical frameworks of historical-dialectical
materialism with the proposals of an inclusive and dialogical pedagogy, it has
been demonstrated that the scientific literacy of people with visual impairments
must be understood as a process of empowerment and political subjectivation,



                                                                                261

breaking with the welfare-oriented logic that has historically marked educational
practices aimed at this audience.
      In this sense, the planetarium can (and should) be redefined as a space of
resistance and transformation, where science is liberated from its traditional role
as an instrument of exclusion and assumes its potential as a tool for the
democratization of knowledge. To achieve this, universities, public officials,
educators, and the scientific community itself must recognize that accessibility is
not a favor but a right—and that its realization depends on political choices that
place human dignity at the center of the educational project.
      Therefore, making the UEMS mobile planetarium a space of real inclusion
implies recognizing people with visual impairments as legitimate epistemic
subjects, capable of producing and reframing astronomical knowledge based on
their experiences and sensory perceptions. Only in this way can we move toward
a science that is truly popular, critical, and liberating—accessible to all bodies,
perspectives, and ways of existing in the world.




                                                                               262

                                   REFERENCES
ABREU, W; ROCHA, J.N.; MASSARANI, L.; INÁCIO, L.G.B.; MOLENZANI, A.
Acessibilidade em planetários e observatórios astronômicos: uma análise de 15
instituições brasileiras. Journal of Science Communication América Latina. 2(02),
A04,p.1-18,2019.

CHALHUB, Tania; GOMES, Marisa da Costa. Acessibilidade em museus e a
alfabetização científica na formação de professores. In: CHALHUB, Tania; BARROS,
Mônica Cordeiro (org.). Museus, ciência e inclusão: perspectivas de educação
para a diversidade. Belém: Grupo MCCAC, 2019. cap. 18.

COSTA, A. F.; CASTRO, A. R.; STUDART, D. C.; DAHMOUCHE, M. S.; CRUZ, W. S.
Pessoas com deficiência em museus de ciência: perfil e opinião dos visitantes
espontâneos. Interfaces Científicas – Humanas e Sociais, Aracaju, v. 9, n. 1, p. 55–
72, 2021.

COSTA, J. A.; NERES, C. C.; MOISÉS, R. R.. Com a palavra os estudantes com
deficiência visual: a acessibilidade na educação superior. Revista Educação e Políticas
em Debate, v. 13, n. 1, p. 1-17, jan./abr. 2024.

DIAS, S. S.;OLIVEIRA L.;SANTOS, M. C. Deficiência intelectual na perspectiva
histórico-cultural: contribuições ao estudo do desenvolvimento adulto. Revista
Brasileira de Educação Especial, v. 19, n. 2, p. 255-268, 2013.

FREIRE, Paulo. Pedagogia do Oprimido. Rio de Janeiro: Paz e Terra, 1987.

GRAMSCI, Antonio. Cadernos do Cárcere. Rio de Janeiro: Civilização Brasileira,
1999.

JUNGLOS, Fernanda Soares; JUNGLOS, Mario Soares; SILVA, Paulo Souza da;
SOUZA, Edmilson de. Exposição Itinerante de Astronomia: Reflexões sobre sua
Concepção. In: SOUZA, Edmilson de; Borges, Thiago de Oliveira. (Org.). Planetário
Astronômico Móvel e suas Possibilidades Pedagógicas. [S.l.]: [s.n.], [2022]. p. 32-
72.

MARX, Karl; ENGELS, Friedrich. A ideologia alemã. São Paulo: Boitempo, 2007.

NERES, C. C.;MESQUITA, N. O trabalho como categoria de análise na educação do
deficiente visual. Caderno Cedes. Campinas, vol. 28, n. 75, p. 149-170, maio/ago.
2008.

OLIVEIRA, M. A. M.; SOUZA, S. F. Políticas para a Inclusão: Estudo realizado em uma
Escola Estadual de Belo Horizonte. Educar em Revista, Curitiba: Editora UFPR, n.
42, p. 245-261, out./dez. 2011.

SILVA, E. F.; ELIAS, L. C. S. Inclusão de alunos com deficiência intelectual: recursos e
dificuldades da família e de professoras. Educação em Revista, Porto Alegre, v. 45,
2022.

SOUZA, Edmilson de; BORGES, Thiago de Oliveira. Aprendizagem em Astronomia na
Educação Formal: Resultados de Pesquisas sobre a Transposição Didática de Ações
do Planetário. In: SOUZA, Edmilson de; Borges, Thiago de Oliveira. (Org.). Planetário
Astronômico Móvel e suas Possibilidades Pedagógicas. [S.l.]: [s.n.], [2022]. p. 73-
105.



                                                                                    263

CHAPTER 16
 LITERATURE AND LITERACY IN BRAZIL:
 HISTORICAL AND PEDAGOGICAL
 TRAJECTORIES IN THE FORMATION OF
 THE STUDENT READER


Giovanna Carvalho Arantes
Master’s in Education
Universidade Federal de Uberlândia (UFU)
E-mail: giovanna.arantes1@gmail.com

Cristiane Camilo Miranda Dias
Bachelor’s Degree in Education
Pontifícia Universidade Católica de Minas Gerais (PUC - MINAS)
E-mail: cristianecamilo08@gmail.com

Clara Borges Japiassú Rodrigues
Specialist in Literacy and Specialized Educational Services for Sensory Disabilities
Universidade Federal de Uberlândia (UFU)
E-mail: clarajapiassuprof@gmail.com

Elisângela Ferreira Rodrigues
Specialist in Special Education: Literacy and Specialized Educational Services
Universidade Federal de Uberlândia (UFU)
E-mail: elisangela87@yahoo.com.br

Elisângela Rodrigues Prado
Bachelor’s Degree in Education
Universidade Norte do Paraná (UNOPAR)
E-mail: elisangelarodriguez@yahoo.com.br

Maria Santana dos Santos Lucena
Specialist in Psychopedagogy and Special Education
Faculdade Venda Nova do Imigrante (FAVENI)
E-mail: maria.s.lucena@gmail.com

Susana da Silva Karwowski
Bachelor’s Degree in History
Universidade Federal de Uberlândia (UFU)
E-mail: susanadasilvakarwowski@gmail.com

Viviane de Oliveira da Rocha
Specialist in Media in Education
Universidade Federal de Uberlândia (UFU)
E-mail: vvpedagogia83@gmail.com


                                                                                 264

ABSTRACT: The relationship between literature and literacy constitutes a relevant
field of in-vestigation for understanding the processes involved in the formation of
student readers in the Brazilian educational context. Historically, children's literature
and reading practices have been incorporated into literacy processes as pedagogical
tools capable of expanding the cultural dimension of written language learning.
However, different conceptions of teaching and reading have marked this trajectory,
revealing tensions between more instrumental approaches to literacy and
perspectives that value literature as an aesthetic and formative experience. In this
context, this article aims to analyze the historical and pedagogical trajectories of the
relationship between literature and literacy in Brazil, seeking to understand how this
articulation has contributed to the development of practices aimed at the formation of
student readers. Methodologically, this study adopts a qualitative approach,
developed through bibliographic review and documentary analysis of academic
studies that discuss the incorporation of literature into reading and writing teaching
processes. The results indicate that the presence of literature in lit-eracy processes
plays a fundamental role in expanding reading practices in schools, promoting the
development of aesthetic sensitivity, imagination, and in-terpretative competence
among students. It is concluded that the integration be-tween literature and literacy
constitutes a central element in the formation of crit-ical readers, highlighting the need
for pedagogical practices that value literary reading from the early years of schooling.

KEYWORDS: children's literature, literacy, reader formation, literary reading,
history of education.

RESUMO: A relação entre literatura e alfabetização constitui um campo de
investigação re-levante para compreender os processos de formação do aluno leitor
no contexto educacional brasileiro. Historicamente, a literatura infantil e as práticas
de leitura foram incorporadas ao processo de alfabetização como instrumentos
pedagógi-cos capazes de ampliar a dimensão cultural da aprendizagem da
linguagem es-crita. No entanto, diferentes concepções de ensino e de leitura
marcaram essa trajetória, evidenciando tensões entre abordagens mais
instrumentais da alfabe-tização e perspectivas que valorizam a literatura como
experiência estética e formativa. Diante desse cenário, o presente artigo tem como
objetivo analisar as trajetórias históricas e pedagógicas da relação entre literatura e
alfabetização no Brasil, buscando compreender como essa articulação contribuiu
para a consti-tuição de práticas voltadas à formação do aluno leitor.
Metodologicamente, trata-se de uma pesquisa de natureza qualitativa, desenvolvida
por meio de revisão bibliográfica e análise documental de estudos e produções
acadêmicas que dis-cutem a inserção da literatura no ensino da leitura e da escrita.
Os resultados indicam que a presença da literatura nos processos de alfabetização
tem desem-penhado papel fundamental na ampliação das práticas de leitura na
escola, fa-vorecendo o desenvolvimento da sensibilidade estética, da imaginação e
da competência interpretativa dos estudantes. Conclui-se que a integração entre
literatura e alfabetização constitui elemento central para a formação de leitores
críticos, evidenciando a necessidade de práticas pedagógicas que valorizem a
leitura literária desde os primeiros anos da escolarização.

PALAVRAS-CHAVE: literatura infantil, alfabetização, formação do leitor, leitura
literária, história da educação.



                                                                                      265

1. INTRODUCTION


       The relationship between literature and literacy in Brazil is an important
field of research for understanding the historical and pedagogical processes that
have shaped the development of the student as a reader. Reading, as a cultural
and educational practice, did not develop in a linear fashion in the country, but
was shaped by different conceptions of teaching, literacy methods, and societal
projects that influenced the organization of schools and pedagogical practices
over time (Silva, 2015; Mortatti, 2006).
       Historically, the first systematic records of reading and writing instruction
in Brazil date back to the colonial period, with the work of Jesuit missionaries
beginning in the 16th century. The education promoted by the Jesuits had a
strong religious and disciplinary character, guided by the Ratio Studiorum, a set
of norms regulating the operation of the Society of Jesus’ educational institutions.
As Saviani (2013) highlights, this method was structured by detailed rules that
organized everything from administrative functions to pedagogical practices
developed in the classroom:


                       [...] by a set of rules covering all activities of those directly involved in
                       teaching. It began with the rules of the provincial, continued with those
                       of the rector, the prefect of studies, the teachers in general, and those
                       for each subject taught... (Saviani, 2013, p. 55).


       Although this model was associated with a process of catechization and
cultural imposition on indigenous peoples, it also represented one of the first
attempts at the systematic organization of education in the colonial territory. In
this context, according to Saviani (2013), the teaching of reading and writing was
strongly linked to memorization and the mastery of linguistic codes, with little
emphasis on comprehension or the development of independent readers.
       Throughout the 19th century, with the establishment of the Brazilian nation-
state, literacy began to take on greater relevance in educational policies. As Mortatti
(2006) analyzes, the schooling process during this period was still marked by
structural precariousness, a lack of pedagogical organization, and a scarcity of
teaching resources. Many schools operated in makeshift spaces, bringing together




                                                                                               266

students of different learning levels under the responsibility of a single teacher, which
hindered the systematization of reading and writing instruction.
       In this context, teaching practices based on the phonics method and the
use of primers became established, characterized by syllabic approaches and
the rote memorization of words (Soares, 2004). According to Mortatti (2006),
these methodologies prioritized the decoding of written language, without
necessarily promoting the development of reading comprehension or the
formation of critical readers. This perspective contributed to the persistence of
conceptions of literacy centered on the technical mastery of reading, dissociated
from the cultural and interpretive dimensions of the text.
       From the 20th century onward, especially with the advancement of
linguistic and pedagogical studies, new reflections emerged on the literacy
process and the role of reading in the formation of individuals. In this context,
authors such as Magda Soares highlight the need to understand literacy beyond
the simple learning of the writing system, linking it to the concept of literacy,
understood as the individual’s integration into social practices of reading and
writing. For Soares (2004, p.78), “literacy involves teaching reading and writing,
but also enabling the individual to participate in social practices mediated by
written language.”
       Parallel to this movement, literature has come to be recognized as a
fundamental element in the reader’s development. Researchers such as Regina
Zilberman highlight that children’s literature plays a central role in shaping
children’s imagination and aesthetic sensibility, “contributing “for the development
of reading as a cultural experience and not merely as a technical skill” (Zilberman,
2003, p. 45). Similarly, Teresa Colomer argues that “the presence of literature in
schools broadens the possibilities for interpretation and fosters the construction
of meaningful connections between students and texts” (Colomer, 2007, p. 32).
       Within this same theoretical framework, Rildo Cosson proposes the
concept of “literary literacy,” understood as “a pedagogical process that enables
students to develop interpretive and aesthetic competencies through the reading
of literary works” (Cosson, 2014, p. 17). For Cosson (2014), literature in schools
must go beyond instrumental use and assume a formative role, contributing to
the development of readers who are critical and sensitive to the multiple
dimensions of the literary text.


                                                                                     267

       Thus, despite the theoretical advances and pedagogical transformations
that have occurred in recent decades, the Brazilian educational system still faces
significant challenges in the formation of readers. Literacy practices that are
excessively focused on the decoding of written language persist, often
disconnected from literary reading and the social practices of reading. This
scenario highlights the need to revisit the historical trajectory of literacy in Brazil,
analyzing how different conceptions of teaching have influenced the relationship
between literature and the formation of the reader.
       In this context, this article aims to analyze the historical and pedagogical
trajectories of the relationship between literature and literacy in Brazil, seeking to
understand how this connection has contributed to the development of the
student reader within the Brazilian educational context. By discussing the
different historical moments and the transformations in conceptions of reading
and literacy, the aim is to highlight the importance of literature as a central
element in the construction of pedagogical practices aimed at the formation of
critical and culturally situated readers.


2. METHODOLOGY


       According to (Minayo, 2009), research methodology can be understood as
the most important theoretical and practical approach adopted by the researcher
in the process of knowledge production. Thus, this study is characterized as
qualitative research of a bibliographic and documentary nature. The choice of this
research methodology is based on the understanding that the subject under
investigation requires a systematic analysis of works, documents, and academic
productions regarding the history of education in Brazil. Thus, the research
methodology, according to Minayo (2009, p. 14), is characterized as,


                       [...] a process that integrates the method—understood as the theory
                       guiding the investigative approach—the operational instruments that
                       enable data collection and analysis (the techniques), as well as the
                       researcher’s creativity, experience, and sensitivity.


       Considering this, the author asserts that methodology is not merely a set
of technical procedures, but incorporates subjective and epistemological



                                                                                       268

dimensions that shape the way reality is interpreted. Thus, in agreement with
Severino (2016), bibliographic and documentary research allows for the
examination of the subject from different contexts, enabling the critical
reconstruction of historical processes. In this vein, in the present study, this
approach was employed to highlight, within the trajectory of Brazilian education,
perspectives that value literature as an aesthetic and formative experience.


3. LITERACY IN BRAZIL: A BRIEF OVERVIEW


       Understanding the relationship between literature and literacy in the
Brazilian educational context requires, first and foremost, a historical analysis of
the processes of teaching reading and writing in the country. As discussed in the
introduction, literacy in Brazil has its roots in the colonial period, when the first
systematic teaching initiatives were carried out by Jesuit missionaries beginning
in the 16th century. According to Saviani (2013, p. 55),


                      [...] Jesuit education was structured around the Ratio Studiorum, a
                      document that organized the functioning of the educational institutions
                      of the Society of Jesus. This model established strict norms for the
                      pedagogical and disciplinary organization of school activities.


       Although this system was linked to catechization and the imposition of
European culture, it represented one of the first forms of institutionalization of
education in Brazilian territory. However, literacy during this period was
restricted to specific groups, mainly members of the colonial elite and the
clergy (Soares, 2004).
       Throughout the 19th century, as the Brazilian nation-state took shape,
literacy came to play a more prominent role in educational policies. However, as
Mortatti (2006) points out, the teaching of reading and writing was still marked by
significant structural and pedagogical shortcomings. Schools often operated
under makeshift conditions and brought together students of varying learning
levels under the supervision of a single teacher. In this context, methodologies
based on primers and synthetic methods became established, particularly the
phonetic and syllabic methods (Soares, 2004). These approaches prioritized the
memorization of syllables and words, emphasizing the decoding of written



                                                                                         269

language at the expense of textual comprehension. According to Mortatti (2006),
such practices contributed to the consolidation of a pedagogical tradition
centered on the mechanical learning of reading.
       This historical perspective helps us understand that, for long periods,
literacy in Brazil was conceived predominantly as technical mastery of the written
code, without necessarily fostering the development of readers capable of
critically interpreting texts.
       Starting in the second half of the 20th century, studies on literacy underwent
significant theoretical transformations, particularly with the incorporation of
contributions from linguistics, cognitive psychology, and the educational sciences. In
this context, the contribution of Magda Soares stands out, as she introduced the
concept of “literacy” into the Brazilian educational debate.
       For Soares (2004), literacy and literacy are distinct yet interdependent
processes. Literacy refers to the learning of the system alphabetic writing,
whereas literacy refers to an individual’s participation in social practices of
reading and writing. In this sense, the author argues that: “Teaching literacy and
fostering literacy are two distinct but inseparable actions: the ideal would be to
teach literacy by fostering literacy, that is, to teach reading and writing within the
context of the social practices of reading and writing” (Soares, 2004, p. 14).
       This perspective broadens the understanding of the reading learning
process, shifting the focus from the simple decoding of text to the subject’s
insertion into social contexts of the production and circulation of written language.
By considering reading as a social practice, the concept of literacy contributes to
rethinking the role of the school in the formation of readers. Learning to read
comes to involve not only technical mastery of the linguistic code, but also the
development of interpretive and critical skills.
       In this sense, for Soares (2004), literacy is no longer understood as an
isolated stage of the educational process but is integrated into broader cultural
practices, among which literary reading stands out.




                                                                                  270

4.   LITERATURE        AS   A    STRATEGY       FOR     LITERACY       AND     THE
DEVELOPMENT OF READERS


       As Zilberman (2003) points out, literature plays a central role in the
development of readers, especially in the context of elementary education.
Several studies indicate that exposure to literary texts from childhood onward
contributes to the development of students’ imagination, aesthetic sensitivity, and
interpretive skills.
       According to Zilberman (2003), children’s literature also plays a
fundamental role in children’s cultural development, enabling reading
experiences that go beyond the instrumental nature often attributed to reading
instruction in school. For the author, “literature should be understood as a form
of artistic expression that broadens the possibilities for interpreting the world”
(Zilberman, 2003, p.25).
       In the same vein, Colomer (2007), in his studies on “literary reading,”
argues that the presence of literature in the school environment allows
students to develop meaningful connections with texts and broaden their
reading experience. According to Colomer (2007, p.33), literary reading
“enables the construction of multiple meanings and fosters the development
of autonomous readers.”
       Thus, we believe that literature helps transform reading and the literacy
process into a cultural and aesthetic experience, moving beyond pedagogical
practices focused exclusively on the mechanical learning of written language. By
exposing students to different narratives, genres, and symbolic worlds, literature
broadens their cultural repertoire and strengthens their relationship with reading.
       In this vein, the relationship between literature and reader development
has been explored in greater depth by studies that emphasize the importance of
“literary literacy” in the school context. Among the leading authors discussing this
topic, Cosson (2014) stands out; for him, the teaching of literature in schools must
go beyond fragmented or merely informative approaches to works and authors.
The author proposes that literature be approached as a literacy practice, allowing
students to develop interpretive and aesthetic skills through direct engagement
with literary texts.



                                                                                271

       According to Cosson (2014), literary literacy consists of a pedagogical
process that enables readers to understand, interpret, and engage with literary
texts at different levels of meaning. This process involves not only individual
reading but also the teacher’s pedagogical guidance and the collective
construction of meaning within the school environment.
       In this context, the teaching of literature plays a fundamental role in the
development of critical readers, capable of interpreting texts in a reflective and
contextualized manner. By integrating literary reading practices into the literacy
process, the school contributes to broadening students’ reading experiences and
strengthening their relationship with written language.
       Thus, we can understand that historically, the connection between literacy,
literacy education, and literature has been a central element in the development
of the student as a reader and an important tool in the literacy process. By
considering the historical, pedagogical, and cultural dimensions of reading, it
becomes possible to understand the challenges and potential of teaching reading
in the Brazilian educational context.


5. CONCLUSION


       The analysis presented in this article has shown that the relationship
between literature and literacy in Brazil is the result of a complex historical
process, marked by different pedagogical approaches and social transformations
that have shaped the development of the student reader. From the colonial
period, with the Jesuits’ organization of education, to contemporary debates on
literacy and the formation of readers, it is evident that the learning of reading and
writing has often been associated with pedagogical models that prioritized
technical mastery of the linguistic code, to the detriment of critical comprehension
and the aesthetic experience of reading.
       Within this theoretical framework, the contributions of various authors
underscore the importance of integrating literature into reading pedagogy through
the concept of literary literacy. For the author, literary reading should be understood
as a formative practice that allows students to interpret, engage in dialogue, and
construct meaning from texts, contributing to the development of critical and
reflective readers (Zilberman, 2003; Soares, 2004; Mortatti, 2006; Colomer, 2007).


                                                                                   272

       Based on the discussions in this study, it becomes evident that the
development of the student reader depends on the interplay between literacy,
literacy education, and literature. When schools restrict reading instruction to the
decoding of the writing system, they limit the possibilities for developing reading
competence and reduce the reading experience to a merely technical activity. On
the other hand, when literature is integrated into the literacy process, reading
takes on cultural, aesthetic, and critical dimensions, expanding students’ learning
and educational opportunities.
       Thus, it can be concluded that the integration of literature and literacy is a
fundamental element in the development of teaching practices that foster the
development of independent and critical readers. The school, in this context,
plays a central role in providing meaningful reading experiences that enable
students to understand, interpret, and engage with different texts and discourses.
       Finally, it is emphasized that reflection on the historical trajectories of
literacy and literature in Brazil contributes to understanding the contemporary
challenges of basic education, especially regarding the formation of readers in a
society marked by the intense circulation of information and the diversity of
languages. In this sense, it is essential to strengthen educational policies and
pedagogical practices that value literature as a formative tool, recognizing its
potential to broaden cultural horizons, develop aesthetic sensitivity, and foster the
development of critical and socially engaged readers.




                                                                                 273

                                     REFERENCES

BORDIGNON, L. H. C.; PAIM, M. M. W. Alfabetização no Brasil: um pouco de história.
Revista Educação em Debate, Fortaleza, v. 39, n. 74, p. 51-67, jul./dez. 2017.

COLOMER, T. Andar entre livros: a leitura literária na escola. São Paulo: Global, 2007.

COSSON, R. Letramento literário: teoria e prática. 2. ed. São Paulo: Contexto,
2014.

MINAYO, M. C. de S. O desafio do conhecimento: pesquisa qualitativa em saúde. 11.
ed. São Paulo: Hucitec, 2009.

MORTATTI, M. do R. L. História dos métodos de alfabetização no Brasil. Brasília:
MEC/SEB, 2006.

MORTATTI, M. R. Entre a literatura e o ensino: um balanço das tematizações
brasileiras (e assisenses) sobre literatura infantil e juvenil (1998). In: Entre a literatura
e o ensino: a formação do leitor [online]. São Paulo: Editora Unesp, 2018, pp. 61-74.
https://doi.org/10.7476/9788595462854.0006.

SAVIANI, D. História das ideias pedagógicas no Brasil. 4. ed. Campinas: Autores
Associados, 2013.

SILVA, M. V. da. História da Alfabetização no Brasil: sentidos e sujeitos da
escolarização. Campinas-SP: Editora da Unicamp, 2015.

SOARES, M. Letramento e alfabetização: as muitas facetas. Revista Brasileira de
Educação, Rio de Janeiro, n. 25, p. 5–17, 2004.

VIEIRA, A. Formação de leitores de literatura na escola brasileira: caminhadas e
labirintos. Cad. Pesqui. [online]. 2008, vol.38, n.134, pp.441-458. ISSN 0100-1574.

ZILBERMAN, R. A literatura infantil na escola. 11. ed. São Paulo: Global, 2003.




                                                                                         274

CHAPTER 17
 ETHOS OF SCHOOL MANAGEMENT IN
 CIEJAs IN SÃO PAULO: A POLYPHONIC
 ANALYSIS OF POLITICAL-PEDAGOGICAL
 PROJECTS


Renato Melo Ribeiro
Doctor in Education
Faculdade de Educação, Universidade de São Paulo (FEUSP)
E-mail: renatoribeiro@usp.br


ABSTRACT: This study analyzed the Political-Pedagogical Projects [PPPs] of
the Integrated Centers for Youth and Adult Education [CIEJAs] of the Municipal
Education Secretariat of São Paulo – SME/SP, with the objective of
understanding the ethos of school management projected by the polyphonic
configuration of these documents. The empirical-textual exploration used as its
corpus the PPPs of the 15 (fifteen) CIEJAs of the SME/SP, to analyze educational
polyphony through descriptors derived from key notions of discourse studies.
This work sought to demonstrate that there is a relative political-pedagogical unity
among CIEJAs (Integrated Centers for Youth and Adult Education), anchored in
a shared institutional ethos, which projects the image of a school management
that knows and follows educational legislation, values democratic management
and collective work, understands the diversity of the public and the specific
challenges of the EJA (Youth and Adult Education) modality, while ideologically
adhering to the critical discourse of popular and emancipatory education, under
the auspices of the educator Paulo Freire and the spectrum of voices that are
inspired by his legacy. Finally, the work highlighted the alignment of this
institutional ethos with the management practices of CIEJAs, as evidenced by
academic and institutional literature that has taken these school units as an object
or source.

KEYWORDS: educational management, youth and adult education, pedagogical
discourse, CIEJA.

RESUMO: Este estudio analizó los Proyectos Político-Pedagógicos [PPP] de los
Centros Integrados de Educación de Jóvenes y Adultos [CIEJAs] de la Secretaría
Municipal de Educación de São Paulo – SME/SP, con el objetivo de comprender
el ethos de la gestión escolar proyectado por la configuración polifónica de estos
documentos. La exploración empírica-textual utilizó como corpus los PPP de los
15 (quince) CIEJAs de la SME/SP para analizar la polifonía educativa mediante
descriptores derivados de nociones clave de los estudios del discurso. Este
trabajo buscó demostrar que existe una relativa unidad político-pedagógica entre
los CIEJA (Centros Integrados de Educación de Personas Jóvenes y Adultas),
anclada en un ethos institucional compartido, que proyecta la imagen de una


                                                                                275

gestión escolar que conoce y cumple la legislación educativa, valora la gestión
democrática y el trabajo colectivo, comprende la diversidad del público y los
desafíos específicos de la modalidad EJA (Educación de Personas Jóvenes y
Adultas), a la vez que se adhiere ideológicamente al discurso crítico de la
educación popular y emancipadora, bajo los auspicios del educador Paulo Freire
y el espectro de voces que se inspiran en su legado. Finalmente, el trabajo
destacó la alineación de este ethos institucional con las prácticas de gestión de
los CIEJA, como lo evidencia la literatura académica e institucional que ha
tomado estas unidades escolares como objeto o fuente.

PALAVRAS-CHAVE: gestão educacional, educação de jovens e adultos,
discurso pedagógico, CIEJA.




                                                                             276

1. INTRODUCTION


       In the field of Discourse Studies, the concept of “ethos” refers to the image
(positive or negative) of the speaker projected by the utterance, which lends
credibility to the spoken text, reinforcing the logical-figurative argumentation that
underpins its thesis or point of view (Charaudeau; Maingueneau, 2016). Regarding
the ethos of school management, its theoretical relevance is justified by its impact
on management practices, which update or reconfigure the projected image, while
at the same time being demanded and evaluated based on the representations
constructed through the interaction between actions and discourses.
       In a country with approximately 11.3 million illiterate people over the age
of 15, Youth and Adult Education [EJA] emerges as a modality provided for by
the Federal Constitution and the Law on Guidelines and Bases for National
Education, with the social mission of bringing marginalized segments of society
into schools, as a public policy aimed at promoting citizenship and social justice
(Arroyo, 2011; Beisiegel, 1997; Brazil, 1988, 1996; Haddad, 2007; Haddad; Di
Pierro, 2000, 2006; Santos; Almeida, 2020; São Paulo [Capital], 2020).
       Created at the beginning of Mayor Marta Suplicy’s administration (2001–
2004), following the restructuring of the former Municipal Centers for
Supplementary Education [CEMES], the CIEJAs were established by Decree No.
43,052, dated April 4, 2003, to complement the Adult and Youth Education (EJA)
offered by regular schools and the literacy initiatives of the São Paulo Literacy
Movement [MOVA]. The operational guidelines for CIEJAs were regulated with
the publication of Law No. 15,648, dated November 14, 2012, emphasizing
students’ prior knowledge, the development of competencies and skills
necessary for the professional context, and active citizenship as a pillar of a
democratic and just society (Faria, 2014; Santos; Almeida, 2020).
       Located in the city’s outskirts, these schools serve youth, adults, and
seniors from Monday through Friday, during morning, afternoon, and evening
sessions, offering flexible schedules and curriculum paths, daily study sessions
of 2 hours and 15 minutes, school meals, academic guidance, make-up classes,
among other measures aimed at ensuring access, retention, and academic
success for a socially vulnerable student population (Santos; Almeida, 2020; São
Paulo [Capital], 2020).


                                                                                 277

       CIEJA managers and professionals join the network through a public
competitive exam but must undergo an internal selection process to be
assigned to these units. This selection process aims to recruit professionals
who possess knowledge of and an interest in the specific pedagogical work of
the EJA modality. In the case of CIEJA, all professionals undergo full-time
training, which ensures group sessions to discuss problems and actions, in
addition to the development of in-service continuing education (Faria, 2014;
Santos; Almeida, 2020).
       However, despite some favorable conditions, CIEJA professionals must
face on a daily basis the challenges and complexities inherent to the EJA modality
in contemporary times, including: 1) the lack of specific training for educators in
this modality; 2) the increase in the number of young people in EJA and the
resulting intergenerational tensions; 3) the increased presence of students with
intellectual disabilities, which requires inclusion initiatives combined with
specialized support at the school; 4) the social vulnerability of students and the
need to establish a support network with other public institutions and local
stakeholders; 5) the difficulties graduates face in continuing their studies in high
school—due to a shortage of spots in the EJA program or a lack of flexibility
similar to that found in CIEJAs; 6) the lack of coordination between EJA and
vocational training, in order to facilitate entry into the labor market and improve
students’ income (Corte; Roggero, 2016; Haddad, 1993, 2002, 2007; Haddad; Di
Pierro, 2000, 2005; Paiva, 1987, 2003; Toledo, 2017).
       Considering these institutional challenges, the Pedagogical Policy Plan
[PPP] plays a central role as a school management tool, especially regarding
institutional evaluation and planning. Furthermore, the PPP is an element in the
construction of the school’s institutional identity, primarily through the articulation
of educational and pedagogical concepts and guidelines shared by the school
community. Especially in the case of CIEJAs, the efforts of management teams
in the process of periodically updating the PPPs and widely publicizing them,
including via the internet, are evident (Carvalho; Gueudeville, 2021; Laurindo,
2017; Silva; Gallego, 2019; Vasconcellos, 1991; Veiga, 1995, 2001).
       In terms of the genre of discourse (Bakhtin, 2003) specific to the school
sphere, the PPPs can be considered a polyphonic institutional text that articulates
the educational discourses valued and legitimized by internal actors and/or


                                                                                   278

        educational management bodies, while simultaneously contrasting (either explicitly
        or tacitly) with other social discourses upheld by other discursive communities.
                In this sense, this study analyzes the Political-Pedagogical Projects [PPPs]
        of the Integrated Centers for Youth and Adult Education [CIEJAs] of the Municipal
        Department of Education of São Paulo – SME/SP, with the aim of understanding
        the ethos of school management projected by the polyphonic configuration of
        these documents.


        2. MATERIALS AND METHODS


                The empirical-textual analysis uses as its corpus the PPPs of the 15
        (fifteen) CIEJAs of the SME/SP (Table 1), made available on the SME-SP’s
        official website or on the units’ webpages, pertaining to the year 2015—a period
        during which there was an institutional effort to update and publicize the
        pedagogical proposals of the school units within the municipal network of the city
        of São Paulo.


                               Table 1. Specification of CIEJA units by SME-SP DRE
DRE                                                    CIEJA
                                                       1 CIEJA ALUNA JESSICA NUNES HERCULANO (CIEJA
1 Butantã Regional Directorate
                                                       BUTANTÃ)
                                                       2 CIEJA CENTER FOR YOUTH AND ADULT EDUCATION
2 Campo Limpo Regional Education Office
                                                       – CAMPO LIMPO
3 Capela do Socorro Regional Education Office          3 CIEJA LELIA GONZALEZ
4 Freguesia / Brasilândia Regional Education
                                                       4 CIEJA ROSE MARY FRASSON, PROF.
Office
5 Guaianases Regional Education Office                 5 CIEJA ROSA KAZUE INAKAKE DE SOUZA, PROF.
                                                       6 CIEJA CLOVIS CAITANO MIQUELAZZO (CIEJA
6 Ipiranga Regional Education Office                   IPIRANGA)
                                                       7 CIEJA PAULO EMILIO VANZOLINI
                                                       8 CIEJA Center for Youth and Adult Education, I (CIEJA
7 Regional Education Office for the Itaquera
                                                       ITAQUERA)
                                                       9 CIEJA Center for Youth and Adult Education (CIEJA
8 Jaçanã / Tremembé Regional Education Office
                                                       Santana/Tucuruvi)
9 São Miguel Paulista Regional Education Office        There is no CIEJA.
                                                       10 CIEJA CENTER FOR YOUTH AND ADULT EDUCATION
10 Penha Regional Education Office
                                                       (CIEJA ERMELINO MATARAZZO)
11 Pirituba / Jaraguá Regional Education Office        11 CIEJA PERUS I
                                                       12 CIEJA FRANCISCO HERNANI ALVERNE FACUNDO
12 Santo Amaro Regional Education Office
                                                       LEITE, PROF.
                                                       13 CIEJA Center for Youth and Adult Education (CIEJA Vila
                                                       Prudente/Sapopemba)
13 São Mateus Regional Education Office
                                                       14 CIEJA Center for Youth and Adult Education – Iguatemi I
                                                       15 CIEJA MARLUCIA GONCALVES DE ABREU, PROF.
               Source: Original research data, based on information available on the SME-SP website
                                    (https://educacao.sme.prefeitura.sp.gov.br/).



                                                                                                    279

        The analysis of educational polyphony draws on descriptors derived from
key concepts in discourse studies (Bakhtin, 2005, 2014; Charaudeau;
Maingueneau, 2016; Maingueneau, 2003), adapting and expanding methods
from the system of polyphonic text decomposition developed in previous research
(Ribeiro, 2018, 2023).
        Within the scope of this research, the following key concepts are
prominent: enunciator, utterance, and discourse. The term “speaker” will be used
to designate the representations of voices embedded in the texts, whether as a
narrating/quoting voice or a narrated/quoted voice, through an intertextual
relationship between them. The term “utterance” refers to the complete
manifestation of a given speaker (author or source) within the text. In turn,
discourse refers to circulating social discourses that share ideological values,
common rhetorics, core content, or recurring expressions, constituting discursive
communities that establish relationships of alliance, coexistence, or opposition
within a given socio-institutional sphere (Bakhtin, 2003, 2005, 2014;
Maingueneau, 2003).
        To operationalize the analysis of the polyphony of PPPs, a system of
polyphonic decomposition analysis of PPPs is used, based on the levels and
descriptors specified in Table 2.


  Table 2. Specification of the levels of analysis and the textual-discursive descriptors for the
                               polyphonic analysis of CIEJA PPPs
      LEVEL OF ANALYSIS                                       DESCRIPTOR
                                       Identification of the author (CIEJA; DRE)
 SPEAKER-AUTHOR                        Theme
                                       Discourse
                                       Argument
                                       Key Statements
                                       Projected ethos
                                       Identification of the source (reference)
 SPEAKER-SOURCE                        Socio-institutional category
                                       Citation type
                                       Relationship between Citer and Cited
                                       Topic
                                       Discourse
                                       Argument
                                       Quoted statement
                                       Projected ethos
    Note: Prepared based on an exploratory review of the research’s textual material and
             methodologies developed in previous studies (Ribeiro, 2018, 2023).
                                  Source: Original research data.




                                                                                               280

       Through the levels of analysis, a decomposition of the voices present in
the texts is carried out, such as the enunciator-author (narrating voice, citing
voice) and the enunciator-source (narrated voice, cited voice), with a view to
describing textual and discursive evidence (theme, discourse, argument) that
supports and allows for the inference of the management ethos projected by the
statements (effects of meaning). Each descriptor is a textual or discursive
variable (unit of record) that aids in describing the voices present in the textuality
of the PPPs.
       Based on these levels and their descriptors, an online form (using Google
Forms) was developed to convert the “document corpus” into a “spreadsheet
corpus,” which will organize the categories, linguistic evidence, and analytical
comments in a matrix format. The creation of this single textual-discursive
database allows us to: 1) quantify the occurrences of descriptors in the analyzed
textual material; 2) qualitatively assess the utterance(s) of a given descriptor
across the corpus.
       To infer the ethos of school management projected by the textual-
discursive configuration of the CIEJAs’ PPPs in the city of São Paulo, the
polyphonic analysis followed these steps:
    1. analysis of voices—the individual and institutional subjects who appear as
       enunciator-authors (citing parties) and enunciator-sources (cited parties)
       and the delimitation of their utterances;
    2. analysis of central themes – which are the “objects” with disputed
       meanings in the educational arena;
    3. analysis of discourses—which are the ideological-rhetorical formations
       circulating in the socio-institutional sphere of education.
       This study seeks to demonstrate that the relative political and pedagogical
unity of the CIEJAS points to a shared institutional ethos, projecting the image of
a school administration that understands and adheres to educational legislation,
values democratic management and collective work, and recognizes the diversity
of its student body and the specific challenges of adult education, while at the
same time ideologically adhering to the critical discourse of popular and
emancipatory education, under the influence of educator Paulo Freire and the
spectrum of voices inspired by his legacy.



                                                                                  281

3. RESULTS AND DISCUSSION


       The preliminary results of the research, derived from the analysis of the
PPPs of the 15 (fifteen) CIEJAS in the city of São Paulo, prepared in 2015, are
presented below. To infer the descriptive features that make up the ethos of
school management shared by the SME-SP CIEJA network, the thematic,
discursive, and argumentative descriptors that appeared across the PPPs are
systematized. Finally, the descriptors of the intertextual relationships between
enunciator-authors (CIEJA Unit/DRE) and source-enunciators (voices cited,
directly or indirectly) are listed and exemplified, highlighting their impact on the
projection of this institutional ethos.
       Notwithstanding the unique characteristics of each document, the CIEJAs’
PPPs share a compositional structure anchored in ten (10) key themes: T01 –
Pedagogical Policy Project; T02 – Educational Legislation; T03 – Problem-Based
Education; T04 – Pedagogical Approach; T05 – Special Education; T06 - Student
Profile; T07 - Democratic Management; T08 - Social Function of the School; T09
- Vocational Education; and T10 – Learning Assessment.
       These key themes provide the subject matter (subthemes; topics; events)
for a set of 4 (four) ‘educational discourses’ that inhabit the zone of discursive
intersection of the analyzed PPPs: D01 – “legal discourse on the right to
education”; D02 – “critical discourse”; D03 – “discourse of pedagogical
movements”; D04 – “discourse of equity and inclusion.”
       Within the scope of this study, the category ‘educational discourse’ refers
to a social discourse circulating in the educational sphere, which mobilizes
ideological values, thematic nuclei, and specific argumentative content,
distinguishing itself from other social discourses with which it establishes
conjunctive (coalition) or disjunctive (controversial) relationships.
       In general, the “legal discourse on the right to education” addresses topics
related to educational legislation and the pedagogical policy project through
statements whose argumentative content asserts that the CIEJAs and their PPPs
are in compliance with the legally established right to education (1988 Federal
Constitution; Law on Guidelines and Bases for National Education—Law 9394/96),
including the existence of pedagogical work with objectives, curricular organization,
and planning explicitly outlined in the school’s own PPP, as required by law.


                                                                                 282

        The “critical discourse,” on the other hand, addresses themes such as
problem-posing education, democratic management, and the social function of
the school, through argumentative content that values the educational principles
proposed by Paulo Freire, the participation of the internal and external community
in school management, and the importance of the school for the democratization
of systematized knowledge and the transformation of society.
        In turn, the “discourse of pedagogical movements” addresses topics
related to teaching approaches and learning assessment, distinguishing itself
from the discourse of traditional pedagogy and technical school assessment,
while proposing the use in EJA of methods from differentiated, constructivist, and
socio-interactionist pedagogy, as well as the process-oriented and formative
assessment of its students.
        The “discourse of equity and inclusion,” meanwhile, addresses topics
related to Special Education, the profile of EJA learners, and vocational
education, through arguments that highlight the school inclusion of students with
disabilities in CIEJA, the meeting of the educational and specifi al needs of
population segments in peripheral neighborhoods and vulnerable social groups
(Black people, women, the elderly, the unemployed, youth who have dropped out
of regular school, etc.), linking basic education and vocational training from a
perspective of including these learners in the labor market.
        Table 3 lists the argumentative, discursive, and thematic descriptors,
accompanied by statements that exemplify their textual manifestation in the
research corpus. As the meaning of each statement, the descriptive trait that
constitutes the ethos of school management in the CIEJAs of the City of São
Paulo is presented.


   Table 3. Descriptors, textual evidence, and ethos embedded in the textual materiality of the
                           PPPs of the CIEJAs in the City of São Paulo
  DESCRIPTORS                          TEXTUAL EVIDENCE                            ETHOS
A01 – The CIEJA “This project is a document that defines the identity of E01 - School
has a structured this school, outlining the principles, educational goals, management an-
PPP, explicitly stat- and general guidelines of the school’s pedagogical ap- chored in a peda-
ing the objectives, proach. In fact, the Pedagogical Policy Document has gogical            policy
curricular organiza- been developed with clearly identifiable actions de- plan.
tion, and planning.   signed to achieve the pre-established objectives. It is
                      the embodiment of a desire for creativity, quality, and
D01 – ‘legal dis- the integration of things and people—all with experi-
course on the right ence and ready for a great achievement. This docu-
to education’         ment is the realization of a concept that seeks to shape



                                                                                              283

 DESCRIPTORS                             TEXTUAL EVIDENCE                              ETHOS
                       reality based on what we have. It contains the founda-
T01 – Pedagogical      tions and principles that will ensure CIEJA CLOVIS
Policy Project         CAITANO MIQUELAZZO possesses the identity we
                       aim to consolidate in our pedagogical practice. This is
                       the great challenge of this Project for the education of
                       a heterogeneous community, which views the school
                       as a means of social and cultural advancement.”
                       (CIEJA CLOVIS CAITANO MIQUELAZZO [DRE Ipi-
                       ranga], PPP 2015).
A02 - CIEJA and        “The instruction provided by this Integrated Center for    E02 - School
the PPP comply         Youth and Adults will be based on the principles and       management that
with legislation on    purposes of education established by the Law on            understands and
the right to educa-    Guidelines and Foundations of National Education No.       follows the legis-
tion.                  9394/96.                                                   lation on the right
                       Art. 2 Education, a duty of the family and the State,      to education.
D01 – “legal dis-      inspired by the principles of freedom and the ideals of
course on the right    human solidarity, aims at the full development of the
to education”          student, their preparation for the exercise of citizen-
                       ship, and their qualification for work.
T01 – educational      Art. 3 Education shall be provided based on the follow-
legislation            ing principles:
                       I - equal conditions for access to and retention in
                       school;
                       II - freedom to learn, teach, research, and disseminate
                       culture, thought, art, and knowledge;
                       III - pluralism of ideas and pedagogical approaches;
                       IV - respect for freedom and appreciation of tolerance;
                       V - coexistence of public and private educational insti-
                       tutions;
                       VI - free public education in official institutions;
                       VII - recognition of the value of school education pro-
                       fessionals;
                       VIII - democratic management of public education, in
                       accordance with this Law and the legislation governing
                       educational systems;
                       IX - assurance of quality standards;
                       X - valuing extracurricular experiences;
                       XI - linking school education, work, and social prac-
                       tices. “
                       (CIEJA ERMELINO MATARAZZO, DRE Penha, PPP
                       2015).
A03 – The CIEJA        “It is necessary and even urgent that the school be-       E03 - School
and the PPP follow     come a welcoming space that fosters certain demo-          management in-
the principles of      cratic values, such as listening to others—not out of      spired by Paulo
problem-posing ed-     mere courtesy but out of duty—respecting them, prac-       Freire.
ucation proposed       ticing tolerance, and accepting decisions made by the
by Paulo Freire.       majority, while ensuring that those who disagree retain
                       the right to express their dissent. The taste for ques-
D02 – “critical dis-   tioning, for criticism, for debate. (PAULO FREIRE,
course”                1997, p. 60)”
                       (CIEJA STUDENT JÉSSICA NUNES HERCULANO -
T03 - problem-pos-     CIEJA BUTANTÃ, DRE Butantã, PPP 2015).
ing education
A04 - The PPP in-      “The socio-interactionist conception is the one that       E04 - School
cludes provisions      best suits an educational approach aimed at forming a      management that
for differentiated,    well-rounded, critical, active individual who is con-      proposes a differ-
constructivist, and    scious of the society in which they are embedded. In       entiated,      con-
socio-interactionist   this conception, the teacher understands that the stu-     structivist, and so-
pedagogy               dent’s prior knowledge is true and legitimate, serving     cio-interactionist



                                                                                                 284

 DESCRIPTORS                             TEXTUAL EVIDENCE                                 ETHOS
                       as the basis for a mutual approach: both the student          pedagogy       for
D03 – “discourse of    approaches the school, and the school approaches              adult education.
pedagogical move-      the student. Learning occurs through interaction with
ments”                 others, in an environment of tolerance for individual
                       differences that promotes dialogue.
T04 - Pedagogical      To achieve the above objectives, the work was orga-
approach               nized so that: The content is contextualized and mean-
                       ingful; Students’ prior knowledge serves as a starting
                       point for the development and deepening of other
                       skills and competencies; The Computer Science
                       Training Pathway is integrated across knowledge ar-
                       eas to shape students’ professional development tra-
                       jectory; Dialogic interaction is an integral part of the
                       teacher’s role in fostering group interaction; Learning
                       situations promote the development of reading and
                       writing skills for use in the workplace and in social life;
                       Diagnostic assessments and surveys serve as indica-
                       tors and parameters to guide the work carried out.”
                       (CIEJA IGUATEMI I, DRE São Mateus, PPP 2015)
A05 - CIEJA pro-       Our students with special educational needs attend            E05 - School ad-
motes the inclusion    the SAAI classroom, located within our own school,            ministration com-
of students with       and are enrolled in regular classrooms across different       mitted to special
special education      modules. We use different criteria for organizing and         education and an
needs.                 serving the various classes formed to meet the de-            inclusiv .
                       mand:
D04 – “discourse       - the student’s school schedule in regular classrooms,
on equity and inclu-   which is the opposite of the schedule in the SAAI
sion”                  classroom;
                       - gathering relevant information from families and
T05 - Special Edu-     medical reports to provide the necessary care;
cation                 - sharing information about the students with the
                       teachers in the regular classrooms they attend, to dis-
                       cuss the challenges each student faces and the best
                       ways to intervene to ensure progress, while respecting
                       their pace and limitations;
                       - Use of activities and various assessment and obser-
                       vation tools to evaluate cognitive and affective abili-
                       ties, level of autonomy, and other factors.
                       The proposed support plan for these students, regard-
                       ing pedagogical issues such as: objectives, methodo-
                       logical procedures, learning expectations, and aspects
                       considered during the ongoing assessment process,
                       is concisely described in the SAAI teacher’s lesson
                       plan, along with the other attachments.
                       We emphasize that the line of work developed by the
                       teacher includes the SME Reading and Writing Pro-
                       ject.
                       (CIEJA SAPOPEMBA, DRE São Mateus, PPP 2015)
A06 - CIEJA serves     The research also shows that the vast majority of stu-        E06 - School
students from outly-   dents live in neighborhoods near the school (124 –            management that
ing neighborhoods      Parque Bristol; 112 – Jardim São Savério; 28 – Jardim         welcomes a so-
and those who are      Clímax; 16 – Jardim Clímax), with the remainder scat-         cially vulnerable
socially more vul-     tered across the various neighborhoods mentioned.             population.
nerable.               The region is characterized by significant economic,
                       cultural, and recreational deprivation, numerous infor-
D02 – “critical dis-   mal settlements, and high rates of violence. Our re-
course”                search indicates that only 64% of our students are em-
                       ployed. Excluding retirees and those who did not re-
                       spond, 25% of the student body is unemployed. Of



                                                                                                   285

   DESCRIPTORS                             TEXTUAL EVIDENCE                              ETHOS
T06 - Student pro-     those who work, only 35% have formal employment
file                   contracts, which demonstrates a lack of access to la-
                       bor rights. In terms of income, more than two-thirds
                       live on up to two minimum wages, which also indicates
                       difficulties for our students in effectively participating
                       in the consumer market, limiting them to goods that
                       ensure their survival.
                       (CIEJA CLÓVIS CAITANO, DRE Ipiranga, PPP 215)
A07 - CIEJA values     “CIEJA SANTANA/TUCURUVI coordinates its actions              E07 - School ad-
the school commu-      with the community through multidisciplinary activities      ministration com-
nity’s participation   carried out during extended school hours. The Cen-           mitted to demo-
in the school’s        ter’s Governing Board legitimizes democratic manage-         cratic and partici-
management.            ment as a meaningful form of action across various           patory manage-
                       segments. CIEJA proposes the coordination of the             ment.
D02 – “critical dis-   various segments of the educational community, pro-
course”                moting dialogue and the opportunity to re achieve-
                       ments that foster new knowledge. The partnerships
T07 – Democratic       sought with universities and NGOs break the school’s
management             isolation, promote integration among cultural and aca-
                       demic institutions, offer new perspectives, and trans-
                       form the school space into a space for social interac-
                       tion through relationships beyond the school walls.”
                       (CIEJA SANTANA/TUCURUVI, DRE Jaçanã/Tre-
                       membé, PPP 2025)
A08 - CIEJA de-        “The ‘Professora Rosa Kazue Inakake de Souza’ Inte-          E08 - School
mocratizes access      grated Center for Youth and Adult Education has an           management
to knowledge with      educational mission to question and break with the           committed      to
the aim of social      prevailing political, economic, and social structure, be-    transforming soci-
transformation.        lieving in the fundamental principle that underpins          ety.
                       pedagogical work: the commitment to the construction
D02 – “critical dis-   of knowledge by the individual themselves. This con-
course”                struction occurs through the subject’s engagement
                       with the object of knowledge via cooperation and dia-
T08 - social func-     logue. Thus, while educational institutions have until
tion of the school     now been at the mercy of politics and the social situa-
                       tion, it is also through school education that we believe
                       it is possible to build a more just society that respects
                       differences
                       and offers space for the individual to emerge within the
                       social sphere, thereby helping to guarantee the rights
                       of all.” (CIEJA PROFESSOR ROSA KAZUE INAKAKE
                       DE SOUZA, DRE Guaianases)
A09 - CIEJA inte-      Develop educational initiatives that integrate basic ed-     E09 - School
grates basic educa-    ucation and vocational education to provide young            management that
tion with vocational   people and adults with better employability conditions,      promotes work-
training.              so that they can remain engaged in productive, in-           oriented training
                       come-generating activities within their socioeconomic        in adult and youth
D05 – “discourse       contexts, thereby facilitating mobility and increasing       education.
on equity and inclu-   job opportunities. (CIEJA SANTANA/TUCURUVI,
sion.”                 DRE Jaçanã/Tremembé, PPP 2015)

T09 - Vocational
education
A10 - CIEJA priori-    “Assessment should be understood as a support for            E10 - School
tizes the process-     the decision-making process in basic education man-          management that
oriented and forma-    agement, as well as for the teaching-learning relation-      values the quali-
tive assessment of     ship developed within it. This conception of assess-         tative assessment
its students.          ment as a decision-making process:                           paradigm.




                                                                                                   286

 DESCRIPTORS                            TEXTUAL EVIDENCE                              ETHOS
D02 – “discourse of    ... radically changes the student’s assessment pro-
pedagogical move-      cess, no longer focused on mere attendance and test
ments”                 scores, but on independent research and elaboration.
                       At stake is their ability to question and reconstruct, in
T10                    theory and practice, with formal and political quality.
- assessment           The aim is to assess the conditions for the develop-
                       ment of competence within a long-term, sustained
                       evolutionary process, primarily through a system of
                       careful and dedicated monitoring, rather than through
                       grades, semester by semester. Assessment is not
                       merely about measuring, but above all about sustain-
                       ing students’ positive performance (...) assessment is
                       not done to stigmatize, punish, or discriminate, but to
                       guarantee the right to e opportunity. Difficulties must
                       be transformed into challenges, setbacks into oppor-
                       tunities for recovery and revision, and shortcomings
                       into warnings. (PEDRO DEMO, 2000, p. 97). ”
                       (CIEJA TEACHER ROSA KAZUE INAKAKE DE
                       SOUZA, DRE Guaianases, PPP 2015)
                                   Source: prepared by the author.


          Thus, the educational discourses circulating in the PPPs analyzed
manifest themselves in concrete statements that project an institutional image of
the CIEJAs of the SME-SP, or rather, a school management ethos characterized
by the following features: a commitment to institutional work grounded in the
Pedagogical Policy Project and in compliance with legislation on the right to
education; alignment with the problem-posing pedagogy proposed by Paulo
Freire;     use   of    didactic-methodological          approaches        from    differentiated,
constructivist, and socio-interactionist pedagogy, as well as procedures for
continuous, formative, and qualitative assessment in Adult and Youth Education
(EJA); support for and inclusion of socially vulnerable students and those in
Special Education; integration of general education and vocational training from
an inclusive perspective; democratic management of CIEJAs and the
development of an emancipatory education committed to social transformation.
          This ethos of school management is constructed within the polyphonic
“concerto” established between the enunciator-author (the CIEJA) and the source
enunciators, in the form of epigraphs and quotations (direct or indirect) within the
paragraphs, to confer authority and legitimacy on the political-pedagogical
discourse of the CIEJAs. Table 4 specifies and exemplifies the most recurrent
descriptors of intertextuality in the research’s textual material.




                                                                                              287

Table 4. Specification and examples of the intertextuality descriptors that appeared across the
                         PPPs of the CIEJAs in the City of São Paulo
       DESCRIPTORS                             TEXTUAL EVIDENCE (EXAMPLE)
QUOTE FROM AN INTEL- “[...] the political-pedagogical project can be considered the
LECTUAL/ACADEMIC               school’s ‘identity card,’ highlighting the values it upholds, as
                               well as the path it intends to follow in pursuit of its educational
[Paulo Freire, Rubem Alves, goals. It is hoped that the goal of offering everyone equal edu-
Pedro Demo, Celso Vascon- cational opportunities will prevail, which does not necessarily
celos, Dermeval Saviani, Rui mean that the opportunities are the same and identical for eve-
Canário, and others]           ryone. (Rosita Edler Carvalho, 2004, pp. 156–157)” [from the
                               book “Removing Barriers to Learning: Inclusive Education”]
                               (CIEJA TEACHER ROSE MARY FRASSON. DRE Guai-
                               anases, PPP 2015)
CITATION FROM LEGAL “Art. 205 - Education, a right of all and a duty of the State and
TEXT                           the family, shall be promoted and encouraged with the collabo-
                               ration of society, aiming at the full development of the individ-
[LDB 1996, 1988 Constitu- ual, their preparation for the exercise of citizenship, and their
tion, primarily]               qualification for work. (Brazil. Federal Constitution of 1988)”
                               (CIEJA FRANCISCO HERNANI, DRE Santo Amaro, PPP
                               2015)
CITATION OF AN INSTITU- “The world of culture and work provides the context for the de-
TIONAL DOCUMENT                velopment of scientific foundations.
                               (Project of the Centers for Youth and Adult Education—
[Publications by SME-SP; CIEJAs—2002 –SME PMSP)”
UNESCO publications, for
example]
TESTIMONIES            FROM “Life has taught me a lot through reading and good company,
SCHOOL PARTICIPANTS            but nothing compares to studying
                               in a classroom, in a group, feeling the warmth of others, talking,
[Testimonials from CIEJA exchanging ideas about work, and resolving
professionals and students]    any questions (Osmar, CIEJA student)”
                               [...]
                               “I learned a lot this year, not only from my teachers but also
                               from my classmates, and I
                               regret staying in the class I’m in, and I’m very proud of these
                               people who, at
                               , at their age, have earned their diploma through hard work and
                               dedication. (Guilherme, CIEJA student)”
                               (CIEJA STUDENT JÉSSICA NUNES HERCULANO - CIEJA
                               BUTANTÃ. DRE Butantã, PPP 2015).
                                  Source: author’s own work.


       In this sense, one’s own statements and those of others (from intellectuals,
legal texts, institutional documents, and school stakeholders) create an
intertextual fabric that produces, as the meaning-making effect of the CIEJA
network’s political-pedagogical texts, a public and shared image of school
management committed to inclusive, critical, democratic, and emancipatory
youth and adult education.
       Finally, it is worth noting that this institutional ethos aligns with the school
management practices of the CIEJAs that have been highlighted in academic and
institutional literature (Faria, 2014; Santos and Almeida, 2020; São Paulo
[Capital], 2020), that is, with a social commitment to young, adult, and elderly


                                                                                               288

learners in peripheral neighborhoods, materializing in management mechanisms
that aim to ensure retention, academic success, and inclusion for this student
segment, which has historically been marginalized in our country and neglected
by educational policies.


4. CONCLUSION


      The textual evidence analyzed indicates that there is a relative political-
pedagogical unity among the CIEJAS, anchored in a shared institutional ethos,
which projects the image of a school administration that understands and follows
educational legislation, values democratic management and collective work, and
comprehends the diversity of the student body and the specific challenges of the
EJA modality, while at the same time ideologically adhering to the critical
discourse of popular and emancipatory education, under the banner of educator
Paulo Freire and the spectrum of voices inspired by his legacy.
      This ethos of school management is constructed amid the polyphonic
“concerto” established between the enunciator-author (the CIEJA) and the source
enunciators, in an intertextual fabric that articulates its own statements and those
of others to confer authority and legitimacy on the CIEJAs’ political-pedagogical
discourse, or rather, a public image committed to critical, democratic, and
emancipatory education.
      Finally, the study highlighted the alignment of this institutional ethos with
CIEJA management practices highlighted in the academic and institutional
literature that focused on these schools as their subject or source.




                                                                                289

                                  REFERENCES

ARROYO, M. G. Educação de jovens-adultos: um campo de direitos e de
responsabilidade pública. In: Soares, L.; Giovanetti, M. A.; Gomes, N. L. (Orgs.).
Diálogos na educação de jovens e adultos. Belo Horizonte: Autêntica Editora, 2011.

BAKHTIN, M. [Volochínov, V. N.]. Marxismos e filosofia da linguagem: problemas
fundamentais do método sociológico da linguagem. Trad. Michel Lahud et al. 16 ed.
São Paulo: Hucitec, 2014.

BAKHTIN, M. Estética da criação verbal. Trad. Paulo Bezerra. 4.ed. São Paulo:
Martins Fontes, 2003.

BAKHTIN, M. Problemas da poética de Dostoievski. 3ª ed. Trad. Paulo Bezerra.
Rido de Janeiro: Forense Universitária, 2005.

BEISIEGEL, C. R. Considerações sobre a política da União para a educação de jovens
e adultos analfabetos. Revista Brasileira de Educação, São Paulo, p. 26-34, jan/abr.,
1997.

BRASIL. Constituição (1988). Constituição da República Federativa do Brasil.
Brasília, DF: Senado, 1998.

BRASIL. Lei nº 9.394, de 20 de dezembro de 1996. Estabelece as Diretrizes e Bases
da Educação Nacional. 1996. Disponível em:
<https://www.planalto.gov.br/ccivil_03/leis/l9394.htm>. Acesso em: 23/01/2024.

CARVALHO, M. M. F.; GUEUDEVILLE, R. S. Aprendendo a sonhar com CIEJA
Campo Limpo: a inclusão escolar através de uma metodologia na perspectiva freiriana.
Revista OLHARES, v. 9, n. 3, p. 211-222, 2021.

CHARAUDEAU, P.; MAINGUENEAU, D. Dicionário de análise do discurso. Trad.
Fabiana Komezu et. al. São Paulo: Contexto, 2016.

CORTE, L. C.; ROGGERO, R. Um recorte histórico das políticas da educação de
jovens e adultos no município de São Paulo para pensar: os desafios contemporâneos
dessa modalidade de ensino. Plurais Revista Multidisciplinar, v.1, n. 2, p. 24-44,
2016.

DI PIERRO, M. C. Notas sobre a redefinição da identidade e das políticas públicas de
educação de jovens e adultos no Brasil. Educação & Sociedade, v. 26, n. 92, p.
1115-1139, 2005.

FARIA, V. E. P. A trajetória do projeto CIEJA entre as políticas públicas de EJA
na cidade de São Paulo. 2014. Dissertação (Mestrado em Educação) – Faculdade de
Educação, Universidade de São Paulo, São Paulo, 2014.

HADDAD, S. (Coord.). Novos caminhos em educação de jovens e adultos – EJA.
5ed. São Paulo: Global, 2007.

HADDAD, S. Educação de Jovens e Adultos no Brasil (1986-1998). Brasília, DF:
MEC/INEP/COMPED, 2002.

HADDAD, S. Tendências atuais da educação de jovens e adultos no Brasil. Em
Aberto, v. 11, n. 56, p. 2-12, 1993.



                                                                                  290

HADDAD, S.; DI PIERRO, M. C. Escolarização de Jovens e Adultos. Revista
Brasileira de Educação, v. 14, p. 108-194, 2000.

HADDAD, S.; DI PIERRO, M. C. Uma visão da história da escolarização de Jovens
e Adultos no Brasil. São Paulo: Ação Educativa, 2006.

LAURINDO, L. S. R. Projeto político pedagógico da educação de jovens e
adultos: concepções e proposições. 2017. Dissertação (Mestrado) - Departamento de
Educação, Campus I, Universidade do Estado da Bahia, Salvador, 2017.

MAINGUENEAU, D. Análise de Textos de Comunicação. Trad. Cecília P. de Souza-
e-Silva, Décio Rocha. São Paulo: Cortez, 2002.

PAIVA, V. P. Educação popular e educação de adultos. 5ed. São Paulo:
Loyola,1987.

PAIVA, V. P. História da educação popular no Brasil: educação popular e educação
de adultos. São Paulo: Loyola, 2003.

RIBEIRO, R. M. Discursos sobre avaliações de larga escala em revistas
pedagógicas: análise da polifonia midiática. 2023. Tese (Doutorado em Educação) –
Faculdade de Educação, Universidade de São Paulo, São Paulo, 2023.

RIBEIRO, R. M. O debate sobre avaliações em larga escala no Brasil: tensões
contextuais e argumentativas. 2018. Dissertação (Mestrado) – Faculdade de
Educação, Universidade de São Paulo, São Paulo, 2018.

SANTOS, D. D.; ALMEIDA, N. F. A Educação de Jovens e Adultos (EJA) como política
pública no município de São Paulo (SP): uma revisão bibliográfica. E-Mosaico, v. 9, n.
22, p. 3-14, 2020.

SÃO PAULO [Cidade]. Lei nº 15.648, de 14 de novembro de 2012. Estabelece
diretrizes para o funcionamento dos Centros Integrados de Educação de Jovens
e Adultos - CIEJAs na Rede Municipal de Ensino do Município de São Paulo.
2012. Disponível em: <https://legislacao.prefeitura.sp.gov.br/leis/lei-15648-de-14-de-
novembro-de-2012>. Acesso em: 23/01/2024.

SÃO PAULO [Cidade]. Secretaria Municipal de Educação. Coordenadoria Pedagógica.
CIEJAs na cidade de São Paulo: identidades, culturas e histórias. São Paulo: SME/
COPED, 2020.

SÃO PAULO [Cidade]. Secretaria Municipal de Educação. Decreto nº 43.052, de 4 de
abril de 2003. Cria os Centros Integrados de Educação de Jovens e Adultos –
CIEJAs, 2003. Disponível em: <https://legislacao.prefeitura.sp.gov.br/leis/decreto-
43052-de-4-de-abril-de-2003/consolidado>. Acesso em: 22/12/2023.

SÃO PAULO [Cidade]. Secretaria Municipal de Educação. Educação de Jovens e
Adultos: princípios e práticas. São Paulo: Secretaria Municipal de Educação - SME,
2016.

SILVA, V. B.; GALLEGO, R. Projeto Politico Pedagógico. Piracicaba, SP: Pecege,
2019.

TOLEDO, A. L. B. S. Educação de Jovens e Adultos (EJA): um estudo sobre a
inclusão de adolescentes no Centro Integrado de Educação de Jovens e Adultos



                                                                                   291

(CIEJA). 2017. Dissertação (Mestrado) – Universidade Nove de Julho, São Paulo,
2017.

VASCONCELLOS, C. S. Projeto Educativo: elementos metodológicos para a
elaboração do projeto educativo. São Paulo: Libertad, 1991.

VEIGA, I. P. A. (Org.). As dimensões do Projeto Político-Pedagógico. Campinas, 4.
ed. São Paulo, SP: Papirus, 2001.

VEIGA, I. P. A. (Org.). Projeto Político-Pedagógico da Escola: uma construção
possível. 24ª ed. Campinas, SP: Papirus, 1995.




                                                                                 292

CHAPTER 18
 BIOSTATISTICS AND EVIDENCE-
 BASED MEDICINE: PEDAGOGICAL
 CHALLENGES AND THE NEED FOR
 CURRICULUM REFORM IN LIGHT
 OF THE 2025 NATIONAL
 CURRICULUM GUIDELINES

Alan Aldrin Lobão Corrêa Feitosa
Medical student
Centro Universitário (UNI-CET)
E-mail: alan_aldrin@hotmail.com

Nelson Agapito Brandão Rios
Master's Degree in Materials Engineering
Instituto Federal do Piauí (IFPI)
E-mail: nelson17.rios@gmail.com

Antonio Carlos Leal Cortez
Ph.D. in Biosciences
Universidade Federal do Rio de Janeiro (UFRJ)
E-mail: antoniocarloscortez@hotmail.com

Jéssica Danielle da Costa Nascimento Barradas
Medical student
Centro Universitário (UNI-CET)
E-mail: jessicadanielllebarradas@gmail.com

Marcélia Karoline da Silva Raiol
Medical student
Centro Universitário (UNI-CET)
E-mail: marceliakaroline_@hotmail.com

Marilene Siqueira Silva
Medical student
Centro Universitário (UNI-CET)
E-mail: siqueira_marilene@hotmail.com

Nilmara Mousinho Mendes
Medical student
Centro Universitário (UNI-CET)
E-mail: nilmaramousinho9@gmail.com




                                                293

ABSTRACT: Introduction: Evidence-Based Medicine (EBM) is a cornerstone of
modern clinical practice, representing a competency fundamentally grounded in
biostatistics. However, the instruction of this discipline in Brazilian undergraduate
medical education faces historical obstacles, most notably "statophobia" (Lemos,
2022). METHOD: A narrative review with a qualitative approach was conducted
to analyze the gap between traditional biostatistics teaching and the new
competencies required by the National Curricular Guidelines (DCNs) published
in 2025. The search was performed across indexed databases: LILACS,
MEDLINE/PubMed, SciELO, and Google Scholar, including full-text studies in
Portuguese and English (2020 to 2025). RESULTS AND DISCUSSION: The
literature indicates that the pedagogical model isolating biostatistics within the
basic sciences phase is ineffective, leading to low retention and high levels of
anxiety (Souza, 2020; Lemos, 2022). This model creates gaps in the explicit
competencies mandated by the new DCNs, such as the ability to "critically
interpret the literature" (Brasil, 2025b, Art. 8, Item X). This deficiency negatively
impacts both undergraduate research (Santos et al., 2023) and future clinical
practice, leaving professionals vulnerable to flawed scientific interpretations.
CONCLUSION: The reform of biostatistics education is not merely a curricular
update or academic pedantry; it is a fundamental and urgent pillar for the
development of an autonomous, critical, and reflective physician. Such training is
essential for practicing 21st-century medicine, ensuring patient safety and quality
of care through the practical and critical application of the best available scientific
evidence.

KEYWORDS: biostatistics, evidence-based medicine, medical education,
curriculum, National Curricular Guidelines.

RESUMO: Introdução: A Medicina Baseada em Evidências (MBE) é um pilar da
prática clínica moderna, uma competência fundamentada na bioestatística.
Contudo, o ensino desta disciplina na graduação médica brasileira enfrenta
obstáculos históricos, notadamente a "estatofobia" (Lemos, 2022). MÉTODO:
Revisão narrativa com abordagem qualitativa com o objetivo de analisar o hiato
entre o ensino tradicional da bioestatística e as novas competências exigidas
pelas Diretrizes Curriculares Nacionais (DCNs) publicadas no ano de 2025. A
busca foi realizada nas bases de dados indexadas: LILACS, MEDLINE/PubMed,
Biblioteca SciELO e Google Scholar com estudos na íntegra em português e
inglês (2020 a 2025). RESULTADOS E DISCUSSÃO: A literatura demonstra que
o modelo pedagógico que isola a bioestatística no ciclo básico é ineficaz,
gerando baixa retenção e alta ansiedade (Souza, 2020; Lemos, 2022). O modelo
cria lacunas nas competências explícitas exigidas pela nova DCN, como a
capacidade de "interpretar criticamente a literatura" (Brasil, 2025b, Art. 8º, Inciso
X). Essa deficiência impacta negativamente tanto na iniciação científica (Santos
et al., 2023) quanto na futura prática clínica, tornando o profissional vulnerável a
interpretações científicas inadequadas. CONCLUSÃO: A reforma do ensino da
bioestatística não é mera atualização curricular ou preciosismo acadêmico, é
pilar fundamental e urgente para a construção de um médico autônomo, crítico
e reflexivo, capaz de praticar a medicina do século XXI, garantindo a segurança
do paciente e a qualidade do cuidado através da aplicação real e crítica da
melhor evidência científica disponível.



                                                                                   294

PALAVRAS-CHAVE: bioestatística, medicina baseada em              evidências,
educação médica, currículo, Diretrizes Curriculares Nacionais.




                                                                        295

1. INTRODUCTION


       Throughout its long history, the practice of medicine has undergone
profound transformations in its pillars of authority and knowledge. For centuries,
the dominant paradigm was grounded in the authority of masters, oral tradition,
and pathophysiological inference, where individual clinical experience and
deductive reasoning—though essential—often prevailed without rigorous
external validation. The late 20th century, however, saw the consolidation of a
paradigm shift that redefined the foundations of healthcare decision-making:
Evidence-Based Medicine (EBM). Formalized by Sackett et al. (1996), EBM
proposes that modern clinical practice be the explicit, diligent, and judicious
integration of the best available scientific evidence with individual clinical
expertise and the patient’s values and preferences.
       This new paradigm, now widely accepted as the gold standard of practice,
has shifted the center of gravity of medical knowledge. The “best available
evidence” has become a non-negotiable component of good practice. However,
the effective implementation of EBM in daily clinical practice remains a global
challenge, and particularly so in Brazil. As a recent analysis of the national
landscape points out, “we are far from the practice of evidence-based medicine
in Brazil” (Faria, 2021). The challenge no longer lies in a scarcity of information,
as in past eras, but paradoxically in its overabundance. The contemporary
healthcare professional is immersed in an exponential volume of scientific
publications, a veritable “infodemic” where high-quality studies are mixed with
research featuring questionable methodologies, conflicting results, or subtle
biases—often sponsored.
       Given this scenario, the most crucial skill for the 21st-century physician is
no longer the memorization of facts, but rather the ability to critically evaluate (the
“appraisal”). This is the ability to navigate the ocean of information,
methodologically dissect a scientific article, identify its biases, assess the internal
validity of its findings, and, finally, judge the impact and applicability of these
results for the individual patient. This ability to filter out the noise and extract the
signal is what truly enables the professional to stay up to date and provide the
best care.



                                                                                    296

      It is precisely at this stage of “appraisal” that Brazilian medical education
encounters its greatest and most persistent bottleneck.
      Current legislation leaves no room for doubt: “critically interpreting the
literature” and “grounding decisions in evidence” are no longer desirable skills;
they are mandatory competencies. The curriculum model that isolates
biostatistics in the basic cycle and generates “statophobia” (Lemos, 2022; Souza,
2020) has thus become anachronistic and legally insufficient, as it fails to produce
the professionals that the new DCNs require.
      The central objective of this narrative review article is to analyze the
inseparable relationship between Evidence-Based Medicine and the field of
biostatistics, in light of the new regulatory requirements of the 2025 DCNs. It is
argued that overcoming this historical gap requires a structural curricular reform,
abandoning the isolated disciplinary model in favor of the longitudinal integration
of biostatistics and clinical epidemiology, contextualized by active methodologies
(Pereira et al., 2024) and linked to the real-world problems of medical practice,
as    already    explored    by      some    institutions   (DEPARTMENT         OF
GYNECOLOGY/DGO-FMRP-USP, 2022). Only in this way will it be possible to
train physicians who are critical consumers, rather than mere spectators, of the
science that guides their actions.


2. THEORETICAL FRAMEWORK


      In analyzing the critical intersection between medical education, the
practice of Evidence-Based Medicine (EBM), and the discipline of biostatistics, it
is argued that the current pedagogical structure of many medical schools in Brazil
is insufficient to develop the required critical evaluation skills, creating a gap
between the trained physician and the professional demanded by the new
National Curriculum Guidelines (DCNs) of 2025.


2.1 BIOSTATISTICS AS THE LANGUAGE OF EVIDENCE-BASED MEDICINE


      The practice of Evidence-Based Medicine (EBM) represents one of the
most significant paradigm shifts in the history of healthcare. It has shifted the
focus of clinical decision-making, moving it away from tradition, the authority of


                                                                                297

specialists, and pure pathophysiological inference toward a model that requires
the explicit and judicious integration of the best available scientific evidence with
clinical expertise and the patient’s values. This process is often summarized in
the “Five As”: “Ask,” “Acquire,” “Appraise,” “Apply,” and “Assess” (Straus et al.,
2009).
         While modern medical curricula have strived to teach students to formulate
clinical questions (the PICO) and search for articles in databases, the real
bottleneck—the gap in training—lies in the third step: “Appraise.” Critical
appraisal is the ability to dissect a scientific study to judge its internal validity (is
the study free of bias?), its impact (is the effect size clinically relevant?), and its
applicability (do the results apply to my patient?).
         This is where biostatistics comes into play. The practice of EBM requires
that healthcare professionals be, fundamentally, critical consumers of science.
However, as Chaoubah (2021) points out, biostatistics is often perceived as “a
field with a rather controversial image among healthcare professionals.” This
controversy is not merely academic; it is rooted in a generalized anxiety about
mathematics and in students’ perception that the discipline is an abstract
mathematical barrier, divorced from the human reality of medical practice.
         The problem is that this perceived difficulty is not trivial, and its
consequences are serious. Misinterpretation of fundamental statistical concepts
is endemic in the literature on medical education. Concepts such as the p-value,
for example, are routinely misinterpreted—not as the probability of observing the
data (or more extreme data) if the null hypothesis is true, but erroneously as “the
probability that the null hypothesis is true.” Similarly, Confidence Intervals (CI)
are often viewed merely as a test of significance (if the 95% CI crosses 1.0 in
Relative Risk, it is not “significant”), ignoring their primary function: to
demonstrate the precision of the effect estimate.
         This statistical illiteracy leads directly to two dangerous clinical
consequences. The first is the adoption of ineffective or harmful practices. A
physician     lacking   statistical   fluency   can   easily   be   persuaded     by    a
methodologically flawed study (e.g., high risk of selection bias, lack of blinding)
that, by chance, presents a “p < 0.05.” He may adopt a new, expensive drug- ,
believing it to be superior, without realizing that the effect size was statistically



                                                                                       298

significant but clinically irrelevant (e.g., a new drug for hypertension that reduces
systolic blood pressure by only 2 mmHg more than the placebo).
       The second consequence, equally dangerous, is the rejection of effective
practices. A high-quality study with a small sample size (undersized) may fail to
achieve statistical significance (e.g., p = 0.07), even though it shows a strong
trend toward benefit. A professional illiterate in statistics dismisses this study as
“negative,” failing to recognize that the lack of statistical significance is not
evidence of the absence of an effect, but rather the absence of evidence (due to
the study’s low statistical power).
       Therefore, biostatistics is not an auxiliary discipline; it is, literally, the
language in which scientific evidence is written, debated, and validated (MELO
et al., 2023). Without functional mastery of this language, the physician regresses
from an EBM practitioner to a protocol executor. They become passive readers,
dependent on the interpretations of third parties, whether they are the authors of
the article (who may have their own biases), representatives of the
pharmaceutical industry (who will present the data from the most favorable
perspective), or so-called “opinion leaders” (who may themselves be out of date).
       This scenario of intellectual dependence runs counter to the very essence
of EBM, which, as Faria (2021) points out, aims to shift medical practice from
authority to evidence. A physician who does not understand biostatistics cannot
evaluate the evidence; they are forced to rely on the authority of those who
interpret it for them, returning to the paradigmatic model that EBM sought to
overcome. “Statistical literacy” ceases to be an academic distinction and
becomes a core clinical competency for patient safety.


2.2 THE LANDSCAPE OF EDUCATION AND THE NEW NATIONAL
CURRICULUM GUIDELINES (2025)


       Despite the central role of biostatistics in modern medical practice, the
predominant pedagogical model in medical schools in Brazil appears to be
structurally prone to inaccuracies. Historically, the vast majority of medical
schools have scheduled biostatistics courses (often combined with basic
epidemiology) during the first semesters of the program, within the so-called
“basic cycle.” During these early stages, students are focused on acquiring


                                                                                 299

fundamental knowledge such as anatomy, biochemistry, and physiology, and
have little or no exposure to clinical practice or the reading of complex scientific
literature; such an approach presents chronic and systemic problems.
       The first is absolute decontextualization. A first- or second-year student
cannot understand the relevance of a chi-square test or a logistic regression
analysis when they have never encountered a real clinical problem requiring the
reading of a clinical trial. The subject is perceived as an abstract mathematical
obstacle, a curricular requirement to be overcome, rather than a clinical tool to be
mastered. In a study conducted at the Federal University of Rio de Janeiro
(UFRJ), Souza (2020) describes exactly this scenario: the traditional, lecture-
based, and decontextualized teaching of biostatistics in the basic medical
curriculum led to high rates of dissatisfaction and failure, necessitating profound
pedagogical reforms.
       The second problem, a direct consequence of the first, is the development
of “Statophobia.” The term, coined by Lemos (2022) to describe the reality of
Brazilian medical education, defines the aversion, fear, and anxiety that students
develop toward statistics. This “phobia” is not mere disinterest; it is a
psychological and cognitive barrier that blocks learning. The student not only fails
to learn but also begins to actively avoid any contact with the subject.
       The third problem is the forgetting curve. Knowledge, even if acquired
momentarily to pass a test in the basic cycle, is quickly lost. Because it is “inert”
knowledge (unapplied, uncontextualized, and unrevised), it is not transferred to
long-term memory. When this student, now in residency (four or five years later),
finally needs to read a scientific article to discuss a clinical approach, the
statistical foundation has already completely dissipated. The result is frustration
and the reinforcement of “statophobia” (Lemos, 2022).
       This flawed pedagogical model, which for decades produced physicians
with chronic difficulties in scientific interpretation, has become not only
anachronistic but now legally insufficient. The new CNE/CES Resolution No. 3,
dated September 30, 2025 ( , 2025b), which establishes the current DCNs and
revokes the previous 2014 resolution, makes the case for curricular reform a
regulatory imperative.
       The 2025 DCNs are explicit and incisive in outlining the graduate’s
competency profile, requiring skills that are impossible to achieve without a


                                                                                 300

functional mastery of biostatistics and clinical epidemiology. An analysis of Article
8 of the resolution reveals the centrality of this competency:


                      Subsection X (Practice of EBM): The guideline requires that physicians
                      be capable of “carrying out actions responsibly, with safe, effective
                      practices grounded in the best available scientific evidence, and being
                      able to critically interpret the literature, [...] through evidence-based
                      medicine” (Brazil, 2025b). “Critical interpretation” is at the heart of
                      appraisal, an action that depends entirely on statistics.
                      Subsection XXI (Integration of Knowledge): The standard stipulates
                      that graduates must “utilize, in an integrated, critical, and contextualized
                      manner, knowledge from the biomedical, clinical, epidemiological, and
                      social sciences to inform clinical decision-making, [...] always grounded
                      in the best available scientific evidence” (Brazil, 2025b). Clinical
                      epidemiology is the direct application of biostatistics at the bedside.
                      Subsection XXV (Critical Evaluation of Technologies): The DCN goes
                      further and requires that physicians be capable of “guiding themselves
                      through the critical evaluation of technologies, interventions, and
                      clinical practices based on cost-effectiveness criteria, [...] grounding
                      decisions in scientific evidence” (Brazil, 2025b). This competency
                      requires the ability to read not only clinical trials but also
                      pharmacoeconomic studies, which rely on even more complex
                      statistical models.


       It is absolutely clear that the intention of the new DCNs is to train
physicians to be scientists of practice, critical evaluators of science. The
educational model that isolates biostatistics in the basic cycle and, as a
consequence, generates “statophobia” (Lemos, 2022), fails miserably in
producing the professional described in this resolution. There is, therefore, a
profound dissonance between the pedagogy practiced and the current
regulations.


2.3 THE IMPACT ON UNDERGRADUATE RESEARCH AND FUTURE
PRACTICE


       The consequences of this educational gap unfold on two main fronts, both
with long-term impacts: the failure to support scientific initiation during
undergraduate studies and the inability to maintain an up-to-date clinical practice
after graduation.
       First, the 2025 DCNs not only require physicians to be scientifically literate
but also reinforce the university’s role in training new researchers. Article 16
clearly states that training “must integrate, in an inseparable manner, the activities
of teaching, research, and extension, promoting scientific initiation” (Brazil,


                                                                                             301

2025b). The intention is not necessarily for every physician to become a
laboratory researcher, but for every physician to understand the scientific method
from the inside, as a way to enhance their “scientific thinking.”
       However, for students involved in research, a lack of proficiency in
biostatistics is severely limiting. A 2023 Brazilian study, which analyzed medical
students’ involvement in scientific research, revealed a disheartening paradox:
although a majority (66.1%) feel motivated to produce scientific work, an even
more overwhelming majority (80.9%) identified difficulties in doing so (Santos et
al., 2023). The study indicates that among the main obstacles perceived by
students are “inadequate guidance” and “lack of knowledge about the scientific
process.” Students have the desire to conduct research, but educational
institutions fail to provide the methodological tools.
       A 2022 systematic review, focused on research programs for medical
undergraduates in Brazil, corroborates this view in an even more specific way.
The review identified that “lack of familiarity with statistics” is one of the significant
barriers most frequently cited by students for engaging in scientific research
(Souza; Zuniga, 2022). In practice, what happens is that students with “statofobia”
(Lemos, 2022) end up, at best, conducting narrative literature reviews or case
reports, which contribute little to their methodological training. They are unable to
design an analytical study, calculate a sample size, or analyze their own data,
becoming mere data collectors for their advisor or dependent on a professional
statistician, without being able to critically discuss the methods employed. The
DCN’s goal of promoting scientific research (Brazil, 2025b, Art. 16) remains
unfulfilled.
       Second, and even more seriously, the impact extends to the graduate’s
future practice. A physician who graduates without mastery of statistical
interpretation cannot meet the core competencies outlined in Items X, XXI, and
XXV of Article 8 of the DCNs (Brazil, 2025b). Medicine is a rapidly evolving
science; what is considered the gold standard today may be obsolete or proven
ineffective in five years. The only tool that guarantees professional longevity and
patient safety is the capacity for self-learning and continuous updating.
       The professional who carries the “state phobia” from undergraduate
studies (Lemos, 2022) tends not to read scientific articles after graduation. Their
clinical practice becomes rigid, held hostage by the protocols they learned during


                                                                                      302

residency. They become unable to critically incorporate new therapies or, equally
important, to avoid prescribing practices that science has already shown to be
futile or harmful.
       This professional becomes vulnerable. Without the ability to “critically
interpret the literature” (Brazil, 2025b, Art. 8, Item X), they are easy prey for
pharmaceutical industry marketing. A representative may present a study with a
flawed design (e.g., a “non-inferiority” trial with inadequate margins, or a study
using a “surrogate endpoint”) and promote it as evidence of superiority. The
physician, unable to identify the methodological fallacy, adopts a new drug—often
more expensive and without real benefit—burdening the healthcare system and
potentially exposing the patient to unnecessary risks. The pedagogical lapse in
biostatistics transcends the academic realm and becomes a problem of public
health and the sustainability of the system.


2.4 PROPOSALS FOR CURRICULAR ADJUSTMENT


       Given the diagnosis—a teaching model that generates phobia (Lemos,
2022), fails to retain knowledge (Souza, 2020), and does not meet the new
National Curriculum Guidelines (Brazil, 2025b)—the solution cannot be
superficial. The simplest—and also the most misguided—response would be to
simply increase the course load for biostatistics in the basic cycle. This, in fact,
would tend to exacerbate the problem, intensifying “statophobia” and the
perception that the discipline is irrelevant.
       The literature on medical education in Brazil and worldwide suggests that
the change must be structural, focusing on two main axes: longitudinal integration
and contextualization through active methodologies.
       The first axis is Longitudinal Teaching. Instead of a course concentrated
in a single semester at the beginning of the program, biostatistics—ideally
integrated with Clinical Epidemiology and MBE—should permeate the entire
medical curriculum. Knowledge should be built through “scaffolding,” where
complexity increases as the student progresses.
       In this model, elementary school students can learn descriptive statistics
(means, medians, standard deviations). Later, in the clinical cycle, while taking
the Cardiology module, they will learn about randomized clinical trials (RCTs) by


                                                                                303

reading, in practice, a seminal study on a new antihypertensive drug, calculating
and interpreting the Relative Risk (RR) and the Number Needed to Treat (NNT).
When moving on to Radiology, they will learn about diagnostic tests, interpreting
sensitivity, specificity, predictive values, and ROC curves. Innovative curriculum
models in Brazil are already beginning to apply this philosophy. The FMRP-USP
curriculum, for example, has implemented longitudinal tracks that run parallel to
the clinical modules, including a specific track on “Scientific Thinking,” which
accompanies the student throughout their training (DEPARTMENT OF
GYNECOLOGY/DGO-FMRP-USP, 2022); this approach ensures that statistical
knowledge is applied at the moment it becomes relevant, facilitating retention and
understanding.
       The second axis is Active and Contextualized Learning. It is essential to
move beyond the traditional lecture-based model, focused on theoretical classes
and formulas, which has proven ineffective (Souza, 2020). A 2024 review on the
use of active methodologies in medical education in Brazil highlights the success
of approaches such as Problem-Based Learning (PBL) and Team-Based
Learning (TBL) in engaging students (Pereira et al., 2024).
       In the context of biostatistics, the most powerful active learning tool is the
“Journal Club,” provided it is restructured. Traditionally, many journal clubs focus
on presenting the article’s conclusions. The ideal model, aligned with the 2025
National Curriculum Guidelines (CBNs), is the methodology-focused “Journal
Club.” The discussion, facilitated by a faculty member, should start from a real
clinical problem and guide students to dissect the article, focusing on its design,
biases, statistical analysis, and validity. The central question shifts from “What
did the article conclude?” to “Should I believe this conclusion? And does it change
my practice?”
       Implementing this change, however, faces its own challenges, notably the
need for faculty training (Pereira et al., 2024). Many clinical faculty members are
excellent physicians, but they may also carry the “statophobia” from their own
training, feeling insecure about mediating methodological discussions. Therefore,
curriculum reform must be accompanied by a robust faculty development
program.
       The solution to the biostatistics gap in medicine is not “more statistics,” but
“better statistics”—statistics taught in the right place, at the right time, and in the


                                                                                   304

right way. The ultimate goal is to transform the perception of the discipline: from
a feared mathematical barrier (Lemos, 2022) to an indispensable clinical tool, the
true language of modern medicine, empowering physicians to fulfill what the 2025
National Clinical Guidelines (DCNs) and society demand of them: the practice of
safe, effective, and truly evidence-based medicine.


3. METHODOLOGY


       To construct this narrative review, methodological procedures were
adopted to define the type of study, data sources, literature selection criteria, and
processes for analyzing and synthesizing the information.
       The choice of a narrative literature review as the methodological approach
is justified by the nature of the subject matter, which is ideal for describing,
analyzing, and discussing the “state of the art” of a topic, especially when the
objective is to construct a theoretical and contextual argument (Rother, 2007;
Page et al., 2021).
       The purpose of this article is not to quantify the effectiveness of a teaching
intervention, but rather to critically analyze the gap between current pedagogical
practice in the teaching of biostatistics, the difficulties documented in the literature
(e.g., “statophobia”), and the new regulatory requirement imposed by the 2025
National Curriculum Guidelines (Brazil, 2025b). The narrative review allows for
interpretive synthesis and the construction of a cohesive argument based on
heterogeneous sources, including opinion pieces, essays, observational studies
on teaching, and official documents.
       To collect the bibliographic material, a non-systematic but comprehensive
survey was conducted in the main health sciences databases, with particular
emphasis on Brazilian scientific output, in line with the geographical scope of the
problem.
       The databases consulted were:
    a) SciELO (Scientific Electronic Library Online): Selected as the primary
       indexer of scientific literature published in Brazil and Latin America,
       ensuring direct access to the epicenter of the national discussion on
       medical education.



                                                                                    305

    b) LILACS (Latin American and Caribbean Health Sciences Literature): Used
       to complement the search in the regional context, capturing publications
       that might not have been indexed in SciELO.
    c) PubMed/MEDLINE (National Library of Medicine): Consulted to identify
       high-impact international studies on the teaching of biostatistics and EBM,
       allowing for a global contextualization of the issue, although the focus of
       the analysis remained on the national literature.
    d) Google Scholar: Used to search for so-called “gray literature,” such as
       theses, dissertations, and, crucially, to locate official documents and
       publications from educational institutions (e.g., pedagogical projects or
       experience reports, such as the one cited from FMRP-USP).
       The search process was intentional and iterative, starting with key
descriptors and expanding through the analysis of references from the articles
found (“snowballing” or “cascading search”).
       Search terms in Portuguese and their English equivalents were defined,
which were cross-referenced and combined using Boolean operators (AND, OR)
in a manner adapted to each database. The main search terms used were:
    • (Biostatistics) AND (Medical Education OR Medical Teaching);
    • (Evidence-Based Medicine OR "Evidence-Based Medicine") AND
       (Curriculum OR "Curriculum");
    • (Statistical Literacy OR "Statistical Literacy") AND (Medicine OR Health);
    • (Statophobia) AND (Health OR Medicine);
    • (Scientific Initiation) AND (Medicine OR Student);
    • (National Curriculum Guidelines) AND (Medicine 2025).
       A preferred time frame was established for publications from the last five
years (January 2020 to October 2025). This time frame is justified by the need to
capture the most recent landscape of medical education and the pedagogical
discussions that preceded and followed the publication of the new National
Curriculum Guidelines. Exceptions to this timeframe were deliberately made to
include: (a) key official documents (BRASIL, 2025b); and (b) seminal articles or
classic references on EBM and review methodologies (e.g., ROTHER, 2007),
essential for the theoretical foundation.




                                                                              306

       The inclusion and exclusion criteria were applied in two phases: first, by
reading titles and abstracts, and second, by reading the full texts of the
preselected articles.
Inclusion Criteria:
    1. Articles (original articles, reviews, editorials, essays) that discuss the
       teaching and learning of biostatistics, epidemiology, or EBM in
       undergraduate medical programs or health-related courses in the Brazilian
       context.
    2. Studies addressing the difficulties, perceptions, or anxiety (“statophobia”)
       of students and health professionals regarding statistics.
    3. Articles that propose or report experiences with curricular innovation in the
       teaching of these disciplines (e.g., active methodologies, longitudinal
       teaching).
    4. Literature on the promotion of scientific research in medical undergraduate
       programs in Brazil.
    5. Official documents from the Ministry of Education (MEC) and the National
       Education Council (CNE) relevant to the topic.
    6. Publications in Portuguese, English, or Spanish.
    Exclusion Criteria:
    1. Articles that use biostatistics as a tool to analyze clinical data (e.g., clinical
       trials, cohort studies) but do not discuss the process of teaching or learning
       biostatistics.
    2. Studies focused exclusively on the teaching of statistics in courses outside
       the health field (e.g., Engineering, Exact Sciences).
    3. Conference abstracts, due to their concise nature, which would not allow
       for an in-depth analysis.
       After the final selection, the articles were read in their entirety and
subjected to a qualitative content analysis. This process was not aimed at
quantitative data extraction, but rather at identifying themes, central arguments,
gaps, and areas of consensus in the literature.
       The analysis and synthesis process followed three stages:
    1. Reading and Indexing: Each article was indexed to extract its main theses,
       methodologies employed (in the case of experience reports), and
       conclusions.


                                                                                     307

    2. Thematic Categorization: The extracted information was grouped into
       thematic categories that emerged from the literature itself, aligned with the
       objectives of this study. These categories formed the structure of section
       “3. Development and Discussion,” namely: (a) Biostatistics as the
       language of EBM; (b) The landscape of education and the 2025 National
       Curriculum Guidelines; (c) The impact on clinical practice and future
       practice; and (d) Proposals for curricular adaptation.
    3. Critical Narrative Synthesis: Finally, the review was drafted, connecting the
       literature findings in a cohesive manner. This synthesis did not limit itself
       to summarizing the articles, but sought to interpret them critically, placing
       them in dialogue and contrasting them with the central document of the
       analysis: the new 2025 DCNs (Brazil, 2025b). The objective was to
       construct an analytical narrative that highlights the pedagogical gap and
       justifies the urgency of the curricular reform proposed in the title of this
       work.


4. RESULTS AND DISCUSSION


       In the context of scientific initiation (SI), the consequences of this
educational gap are twofold and directly impact the two pillars of the medical
career: research and patient care. As the central objective of this review, the
difficulty is evident. A 2023 Brazilian study that analyzed medical students’
involvement in scientific research revealed a paradox: although 66.1% of
students feel motivated to conduct research, an overwhelming majority of 80.9%
identified difficulties in producing scientific work (Santos et al., 2023). Among the
main obstacles identified are “lack of knowledge about the scientific process” and
“inadequate guidance.” Corroborating this finding, a 2022 systematic review of
undergraduate medical research programs in Brazil identified “lack of familiarity
with statistics” as one of the most significant barriers perceived by students to
engaging in research (Souza; Zuniga, 2022). Students may even want to conduct
research, but the university ultimately fails to provide the most basic
methodological tools for doing so.
       In the context of clinical practice, the consequence is even more serious.
The physician who graduates with “statophobia” (Lemos, 2022) tends not to read


                                                                                 308

scientific articles after graduation. Their practice becomes rigid, held hostage by
the protocols they learned during residency, unable to incorporate new therapies
or abandon practices that science has already proven to be ineffective or harmful.
They   become     incapable     of   self-criticism     and     continuous       professional
development, pillars of good medicine.
       What was once a pedagogical shortcoming lamented by educators
became, as of 2025, an unavoidable regulatory imperative. The new National
Curriculum Guidelines (DCNs) for the Undergraduate Medical Program (Brazil,
2025b), which repealed the previous 2014 resolution, are emphatic and explicitly
in requiring graduates to possess competencies that are, in essence, dependent
on biostatistics and epidemiology. The new standard requires, among other
things, that physicians be capable of:


                      "develop actions [...] grounded in the best available scientific evidence,
                      being able to critically interpret the literature, [...] in accordance with
                      evidence-based medicine" (Brazil, 2025b, Art. 8, Item X).
                      "utilize, in an integrated, critical, and contextualized manner, knowledge
                      from the [...] epidemiological and social sciences to inform clinical
                      decision-making, [...] always grounded in the best available scientific
                      evidence" (Brazil, 2025b, Art. 8, Subparagraph XXI).
                      "be guided by the critical evaluation of technologies, interventions, and
                      clinical practices [...] basing decisions on scientific evidence" (Brazil,
                      2025b, Art. 8, Item XXV).


       The critical evaluation of scientific literature is a task that cannot be
performed without a functional mastery of biostatistics. Concepts such as p-
value, confidence interval, relative risk (RR), odds ratio (OR), number needed to
treat (NNT), survival analysis, and logistic regression are not mere academic
jargon or tools exclusive to researchers; they are the lingua franca in which
scientific evidence is written, validated, and communicated (Chaoubah, 2021).
Without fluency in this language, the physician, no matter how brilliant in clinical
presentation or pathophysiology, becomes a passive consumer of science,
forced to accept the conclusions presented in abstracts or, even more
dangerously, to rely on the interpretations of third parties, whether from outdated
institutional protocols or representatives of the pharmaceutical industry.
       The problem is that, historically, the teaching of biostatistics in medical
schools has been treated not as an essential clinical competency, but as a
peripheral mathematical discipline. Commonly placed in the foundational years,



                                                                                             309

far from the clinical practice where its relevance would be evident, the subject is
often taught in an abstract manner, focused on formulas and calculations, and
disconnected from the real-world problems of the ward or outpatient clinic. This
flawed pedagogical approach has a documented and deeply harmful outcome:
“statophobia.” This term, coined by Lemos (2022), describes the aversion, fear,
and anxiety that health students develop toward statistics, creating a
psychological block that persists throughout their professional lives and becomes
an active obstacle to the practice of EBM.
       Recent national literature corroborates this diagnosis. In a reflection on his
teaching practice at UFRJ, Souza (2020) describes the traditional teaching of
biostatistics as expository and decontextualized, generating high rates of
dissatisfaction and failure, which required a complete overhaul of the course.
Melo et al. (2023) reinforce this view, describing biostatistics as a “challenge for
students and health professionals,” highlighting the subject’s “bad reputation” and
the widespread difficulty in its application.
       The discussion demonstrated that, although biostatistics is the lingua
franca in which scientific evidence is validated and communicated (Chaoubah,
2021), its teaching in medical schools is often relegated to an isolated component
of the basic curriculum. This approach, decontextualized from clinical practice,
fails to demonstrate the discipline’s immediate relevance. The result, widely
documented in the literature, is the creation of a significant psychological and
cognitive barrier: “statophobia” (Lemos, 2022). This phenomenon transforms a
tool that should be one of intellectual empowerment into an obstacle, generating
aversion and anxiety that persist throughout the physician’s professional life.
       The turning point of this analysis is the enactment of the 2025 DCNs. The
new resolution leaves no room for ambiguity: it solidifies, at the regulatory level,
the requirement for competencies that are entirely dependent on statistical and
epidemiological literacy. By stipulating that graduates must be able to “critically
interpret the literature,” utilize “epidemiological knowledge,” and “be guided by
critical evaluation [...] basing decisions on scientific evidence,” the legislation
renders the pedagogical model that generates “statophobia” legally obsolete. It
follows that educational institutions that maintain the traditional model of teaching
biostatistics will, in fact, be at odds with the core competencies required by the
new guideline.


                                                                                  310

5. CONCLUSION


       This narrative review sought to analyze the critical intersection between
the practice of Evidence-Based Medicine (EBM), medical education in Brazil, and
the fundamental—and often neglected—role of biostatistics. An analysis of recent
national literature, in light of the new National Curriculum Guidelines (DCNs) for
the Undergraduate Medical Program (Brazil, 2025b), leads to the conclusion that
the pedagogical model traditionally employed for teaching this discipline is not
only anachronistic, but structurally insufficient to train the healthcare
professionals that contemporary society and new regulations demand.
       The dual impact of this educational gap was also evident. First, it
undermines the DCNs’ own goal of fostering scientific initiation, as demonstrated
by studies pointing to the “lack of familiarity with statistics” (Souza; Zuniga, 2022)
and “lack of knowledge about the scientific process” (Santos et al., 2023) as
central barriers perceived by students, despite their expressed interest. Second,
and more seriously, there is a projected direct impact on future clinical practice:
physicians graduating from this model become vulnerable professionals, unable
to keep up with the continuous updating that modern medicine demands. Without
the ability to critically evaluate new studies, the professional becomes hostage to
outdated protocols or, worse, susceptible to the biased interpretations of
pharmaceutical industry marketing, compromising patient safety and the
sustainability of the healthcare system.
       This study corroborates the conclusions of recent literature (Souza, 2020;
Pereira et al., 2024) that the solution to this gap does not lie in a simple increase
in the course load for the subject in the basic cycle, a measure that could even
exacerbate “statophobia” (Lemos, 2022). The solution requires a structural
curriculum reform, based on the longitudinal integration of biostatistics and
clinical epidemiology throughout the entire course, from the basic cycle through
to the internship. Statistical knowledge must be built incrementally, applied, and
revisited in the context of the real clinical problems of each module
(DEPARTMENT OF GYNECOLOGY/DGO-FMRP-USP, 2022). This approach,
combined with the use of active methodologies that transform the student from a
passive recipient into an active participant in scientific discourse, is the path to
redefining the discipline: from a mathematical barrier to an essential clinical tool.


                                                                                  311

      One limitation of this narrative review is that it did not aim to provide a
comprehensive overview of the literature, but rather to develop a thesis grounded
in the current landscape of Brazilian medical education.
      In light of the above, it is recommended that the Core Teaching Units
(NDEs) of medical schools immediately begin a review of their Course
Pedagogical Projects (PPCs). This review should explicitly focus on aligning with
the competencies outlined in items X, XXI, and XXV of Article 8 of the DCNs
2025, planning the transition from an isolated disciplinary model to a longitudinal
framework of “scientific thinking” or “evidence-based medicine.” It is also
suggested, as an agenda for future research, that comparative studies be
conducted to evaluate the effectiveness of these new longitudinal models versus
traditional ones, measuring not only the acquisition of knowledge but also the
reduction of “exam anxiety” and actual proficiency in critical evaluation by the end
of the course.
      Finally, the reform of biostatistics education is not merely a curricular
update or an academic nicety. It is a fundamental and urgent pillar for the
development of an autonomous, critical, and reflective physician, capable of
practicing 21st-century medicine, ensuring patient safety and the quality of care
through the practical and critical application of the best available scientific
evidence.




                                                                                312

                                   REFERENCES

BRASIL. Ministério da Educação. Conselho Nacional de Educação. Câmara de
Educação Superior. Resolução CNE/CES Nº 3, de 20 de junho de 2014. Institui
Diretrizes Curriculares Nacionais do Curso de Graduação em Medicina e dá outras
providências. Diário Oficial da União: seção 1, Brasília, DF, p. 8-11, 23 jun. 2014.
Disponível em: https://www.gov.br/mec/pt-br/cne/2014/rces003_14.pdf. Acesso em: 8
out. 2025.

BRASIL. Ministério da Educação. Conselho Nacional de Educação. Câmara de
Educação Superior. Resolução CNE/CES Nº 3, de 30 de setembro de 2025. Institui
Diretrizes Curriculares Nacionais do Curso de Graduação em Medicina. Diário Oficial
da União: seção 1, Brasília, DF, p. 35, 01 out. 2025. Disponível em:
https://www.gov.br/mec/pt-br/cne/2025/outubro-2025/rces003_25.pdf. Acesso em: 8
out. 2025.

CHAOUBAH, A. A importância da Bioestatística na formação de um profissional de
Saúde. Revista Brasileira de Oftalmologia, v. 80, n. 2, p. e89, 2021. DOI:
10.5935/0034-7280.20210016.

MELO, L. B. de et al. Bioestatística: desafio para estudantes e profissionais de saúde.
Contribuciones a las Ciencias Sociales, v. 16, n. 4, p. 1562-1569, 2023.

DEPARTAMENTO DE GINECOLOGIA E OBSTETRÍCIA (DGO-FMRP-USP). Novo 4º
ano de Medicina traz mais prática e integração curricular. Ribeirão Preto: FMRP-
USP, 2022. Disponível em: https://dgo.fmrp.usp.br/novo-4o-ano-de-medicina-traz-
mais-pratica-e-integracao-curricular/. Acesso em: 11 out. 2025.

FARIA, L. “Estamos distantes da prática da medicina baseada em evidências no
Brasil”, afirma pesquisadora. Rio de Janeiro: Agência Fiocruz de Notícias, 07 abr.
2021. Disponível em: https://agencia.fiocruz.br/estamos-distantes-da-pratica-da-
medicina-baseada-em-evidencias-no-brasil-afirma-pesquisadora. Acesso em: 11 out.
2025.

LEMOS, J. "Estatofobia": um obstáculo na formação de médicos baseados em
evidências. Revista Brasileira de Educação Médica, v. 46, n. 1, p. e001, 2022. DOI:
10.1590/1981-5271v46.1-20210309.

PAGE, M. J. et al. The PRISMA 2020 statement: an updated guideline for reporting
systematic reviews. BMJ, v. 372, p. n71, 2021. DOI: 10.1136/bmj.n71.

PEREIRA, M. V. da S. et al. Metodologias ativas na educação médica no Brasil.
Revista Eletrônica Acervo Saúde, v. 24, n. 2, p. e15032, 2024. DOI:
10.25248/reas.e15032.2024.

ROTHER, E. T. Revisão narrativa de literatura: uma proposta para artigos de revisão
em saúde. Acta Paulista de Enfermagem, v. 20, n. 2, p. v-viii, 2007. DOI:
10.1590/S0103-21002007000200001.

SACKETT, D. L. et al. Evidence based medicine: what it is and what it isn't. BMJ, v.
312, n. 7023, p. 71–72, 1996. DOI: 10.1136/bmj.312.7023.71.

SANTOS, F. da S. M. et al. Ensino da pesquisa científica na graduação médica: há
interesse e envolvimento dos estudantes? Revista Brasileira de Educação Médica,
v. 47, n. 3, p. e092, 2023. DOI: 10.1590/1981-5271v47.3-2022-0260.


                                                                                       313

SOUZA, B. G. de. O Ensino da Bioestatística na Graduação: uma Experiência.
Revista Brasileira de Educação Médica, v. 44, n. 4, p. e115, 2020. DOI:
10.1590/1981-5271v44.4-20200212.

SOUZA, J. P. N. de; ZUNIGA, R. D. dos R. Programas de pesquisa para graduandos
em Medicina no Brasil: uma revisão sistemática. Revista Brasileira de Educação
Médica, v. 46, n. 3, p. e105, 2022. DOI: 10.1590/1981-5271v46.3-20220008

STRAUS, Sharon E. et al. Medicina baseada em evidências: prática e ensino. 3. ed.
Porto Alegre: Artmed, 2009




                                                                              314

CHAPTER 19
 THE FOCUS GROUP AS A SPACE
 FOR TEACHER TRAINING TO
 DEVELOP CRITICAL TRINKING


Ruth Cristina Soares Gomes Araújo
Doctor in Education
Universidade Estadual do Amazonas (UEA)
E-mail: rcsgomes@uea.edu.br

Evandro Ghedin
Postdoctoral Fellow in Education
Universidade de São Paulo (USP)
E-mail: evandroghedin@ufam.edu.br

Clodoaldo Pires Araújo
Doctor of Education
Universidade Estadual do Amazonas (UEA)
E-mail: cparaujo@uea.edu.br


ABSTRACT: This text discusses the construction of critical thinking in the
teaching and learning process in Basic Education. It arose in the context of
research con-ducted during a doctoral degree in education. Among the various
research questions, we highlight: What do teachers think about the construction
of criti-cal thinking in the teaching-learning process? Critical thinking is a higher
cog-nitive process that is not innate; it needs to be intentionally and systematically
constructed. Thus, we aim to analyze the perception of Basic Education teach-
ers regarding the construction of critical thinking in the teaching and learning
process. The research is qualitative, focusing on historical-dialectical material-
ism and using the focus group technique. The results show that teachers rec-
ognize the need to develop thinking in a more systematic way, as it is still pos-
sible to see a pedagogy of passivity and "domestication" in schools, where praxis
needs to be better understood among the teaching staff.

KEYWORDS: reflection, critical thinking, teaching, teacher training.

RESUMO: Este texto discute sobre a construção do pensamento crítico no
processo ensi-no e aprendizagem na Educação Básica. Surgiu no contexto da
pesquisa rea-lizada durante o doutorado em educação. Dentre os vários
questionamentos da pesquisa, destacamos: O que os professores pensam sobre
a construção do pensamento crítico no processo ensino-aprendizagem? O
pensamento crí-tico é um processo cognitivo superior que não é inato, precisa
ser construído de maneira intencional e sistemática. Desse modo, objetivamos


                                                                                  315

analisar a per-cepção dos professores da Educação Básica sobre a construção
do pensa-mento crítico no processo ensino e aprendizagem. A pesquisa
configura-se como qualitativa, com enfoque no materialismo histórico-dialético e
com a téc-nica do grupo focal formativo. Os resultados evidenciam que os
professores reconhecem a necessidade de desenvolver o pensamento de
maneira mais sistemática, pois ainda é possível visualizar uma pedagogia de
passividade e “domesticação” nas escolas, onde a práxis precisa ser melhor
compreendida entre o corpo docente.

PALAVRAS-CHAVE: reflexão, pensamento crítico, ensino, formação de profes-
sores.




                                                                            316

1. INTRODUCTION


       This text is the result of research conducted in the municipality of Parintins
in the state of Amazonas during the doctoral program in Education at
PPGE/UFAM. The thesis was developed based on numerous questions and a
continuous process of reflection on the construction of critical thinking in
pedagogical mediations. Among the questions, we highlight: What do teachers
think about the development of critical thinking in the teaching-learning process?
This is because critical thinking is a skill that must be developed as early as in
basic education. To this end, teachers must be aware of its true meaning and
provide students with the necessary conditions to move beyond the repetition and
memorization of content, enabling them to achieve critical thinking through a
reflective process. Given this, we aim to analyze what teachers think about the
development of critical thinking in the teaching-learning process in Basic
Education. We opted for the focus group technique, grounded in the dialectical
materialism method, thereby creating a training space for discussions and in-
depth exploration of the development of critical thinking through reflection. This
constituted a training space for teachers, taking on the dimension of a Formative
Focus Group. Six (6) elementary school teachers from different schools
participated in the research. There were four (4) meetings discussing issues
related to reflective-critical training based on a previously organized script.
       The Training Focus Group technique was chosen because it allows Basic
Education teachers to share their experiences and perceptions regarding the
development of critical thinking in the teaching-learning process. We intentionally
chose to address the theme of the reflective-critical teacher using previously
selected texts, sparking discussions among participants so that we could create
a training space where they could understand what reflective-critical training
entails.
       We use the term “reflective-critical” because without reflection there is no
criticism; there is no possibility of analyzing the real circumstances of social
problems. Thinking critically implies having the creativity to do things differently,
to innovate, to create something new from something simple. It means having the
courage and boldness to challenge what is not common, transforming it into



                                                                                  317

something new. Creativity is essential in the learning process, since the brain is
activated more and better by what it does not yet know and is curious to learn.
        It must become a mental habit that can break away from the mere
reproduction of knowledge. To experience a better society, the teaching-learning
process must intentionally and systematically foster the development of more
sophisticated thinking. However, during the meetings of the Formative Focus
Group, we observed that teachers face difficulties in developing critical thinking
in students due to various factors, such as: a lack of understanding of the
inseparability of theory and practice, the school’s lack of commitment to the
critical education of students, and teachers’ weakness in pedagogical
interventions that foster the development of reflection and critical thinking.


2. WHAT IS CRITICAL THINKING?


        Human beings are superior to every other species. This superiority stems
from a capacity that is uniquely their own: thinking. Thinking is inherent to human
beings; they are born to think; they are human because they think. However, what
we will address in this text is not mere thinking, something that everyone
possesses. Rather, it is a form of thinking that overcomes the processes of
alienation1 and that humans themselves have created. We are talking about a
form of thinking that can change the way we perceive and interpret reality. Critical
thinking transcends this innate human capacity for thought. Critical thinking is not
innate; it must be cultivated. To this end, we propose teacher training programs
as an appropriate setting for its development.
        According to Cohen (2017), critical thinking consists of a set of transferable
skills; that is, once something is learned, it can be equally applied to other
contexts, permeating the entire range of academic disciplines and applying to all
spheres of human activity. This justifies the relevance of developing critical
thinking in teacher training, as this higher-order thinking skill extends beyond the
classroom.


1 In other words, alienation occurs not only as a relationship between subject and object, but also

as a relationship between the worker and other people—that is, alienation exists only between
human beings. Labor not only produces objects in which people do not recognize themselves,
but also a peculiar type of relationship among people, in which they stand in opposition to one
another due to their conflicting roles in the production process (Vazquez, 2011).


                                                                                               318

       Thinking critically means possessing greater skills to solve everyday
problems in a dynamic and intelligent way. It is a form of thinking that does not
operate in isolation; rather, due to its complexity, it requires the mobilization of
other mental processes, such as language and emotion, as highlighted by the
author.
       Developing critical thinking is laborious, as it requires teachers to aim to
engage more complex areas of the brain; to do so, they must devise strategies
that challenge students’ comfortable ways of thinking, creating cognitive conflicts
that destabilize existing knowledge so it can be reorganized in a different way. To
this end, more cognitive processes are mobilized, in addition to those we typically
use for routine tasks. Pedagogical interventions should provide students with
situations that engage cognition in a more complex manner. This involves
challenging the brain to mobilize more cognitive processes during activities based
on the studied content. The sooner the brain is mobilized to think critically, the
greater our chances of shaping conscious and responsible citizens in the
construction of a fairer and better society for all.


2.1 FOCUS GROUP: CONCEPT AND CHARACTERIZATION


       For Lervolino and Pelicioni (2001), the essence of the focus group lies
primarily in the interaction between participants and the researcher, whose
objective is to obtain data through discussion on specific topics, hence the name
“focus group.” The focus group is a data collection technique that occurs through
group interaction with the aim of fostering a critical examination of a specific topic
under discussion. We chose this technique to create a training space for in-depth
exploration of the development of critical thinking in the teaching-learning
process, hence the name Formative Focus Group. A striking feature of this
technique is the group- y interview, where interaction is an integral part of the
method (Baches, 2011).
       It is through this interaction that the topic in question is addressed in a way
that promotes group discussion, allowing participants to hear divergent opinions
and form new ones through reflection. Critical thinking was the central theme of
the focus group discussions, as the main contribution of this technique to this
research is its ability to facilitate discussions and comparisons among


                                                                                  319

participants’ opinions. To this end, it consists of the participants, who must share
a common characteristic; and the moderator or facilitator, who may be the
researcher themselves, whose role is to “facilitate all phases of the process, such
as defining a topic guide—which consists of a summary of the issues to be
addressed—as well as a framework to guide the meeting” (Backes, 2011, p. 3).
Gatti (2005) also highlights the role of the moderator and its relevance to the
focus group, specifying its main characteristics: the moderator must be
experienced, skilled, articulate, sensitive, flexible, and capable of leading the
group confidently, competently handling the relationships and interactions that
develop and the situations that arise within the group. In addition to the
moderator, the assistance of a note-taker is recommended. However, the note-
taker does not interfere with the group (Gatti, 2005), but takes cursive notes on
what is happening and what is being said. Their presence is important in order to
record in the field notebook something that might go unnoticed by the moderator.


2.2 SELECTION OF PARTICIPANTS


          According to Gatti (2005), the focus group should be composed based on
certain criteria associated with the research objectives, with a composition
grounded in the participants’ common characteristics, yet allowing for some
variation among them so that different or divergent opinions may emerge. It is
necessary to consider what is known about the target social group, since some
common trait among the participants must exist, as this forms the basis of the
focus group work (Gatti, 2005).
          Following these guidelines, participants were selected based on several
criteria. First, they had to be graduates of the Parintins Center for Higher Studies
from the 2013/2 to 2017/2 academic years, which reflects a formative process;
second, they should have completed a course whose documentary analysis
indicated a reflective-critical education, that is, courses in Education, Language
Arts, History, Geography, Biological Sciences, Chemistry, and Physics; and third,
they should be working in Basic Education. To identify these individuals, we
initially requested a list of graduates for the desired period from the CESP/UEA
office.



                                                                                320

       Upon contacting the first participant, we were able to locate other
graduates who met the research criteria. This was not a simple task, as many of
those trained by the institution work in rural schools in the municipality of
Parintins, while others returned to their municipalities of origin. We visited several
schools and spoke with various teachers; however, most did not meet the study’s
criteria. This required great patience and persistence on the part of the
researcher, who had to rely on the support of former students to find participants
for the study group. Once the participants were selected—some in person at their
workplace, others via phone calls—invitations were sent out formalizing the date
and time of the in-person meeting.


2.3 FIRST MEETING: REFLECTING ON INITIAL TRAINING


       Although 15 (fifteen) invitations were distributed, the attendance of 9 (nine)
participants was confirmed via message the day before; however, only 6 (six)
showed up. We decided to proceed with the six participants, since a focus group
should not be too large, nor should it be excessively small; its ideal size is
between six and twelve people (Gatti, 2005). The environment was carefully
prepared, as Gatti (2005) emphasizes, noting the importance of participants
sitting face-to-face to ensure direct interaction. We provided a large table that
allowed for good visibility among participants, as the author states; comfortable
chairs; a recorder; a microphone to assist with recordings; and a table with snacks
and water. It was held in a room at the Center for Higher Studies of Parintins –
CESP/UEA.
       The researcher herself served as the group’s moderator, and we were able
to count on a rapporteur selected based on their prior knowledge of the research
process and their enrollment in a doctoral program in education, thereby
contributing the discretion, ethics, and reliability inherent to this research
technique. After welcoming the participants, the purpose of forming the formative
focus group and the rationale for selecting the participants were explained.
Everyone seemed quite at ease, as some already knew each other and the
location was part of their educational background. Next, the participants received
the Informed Consent Form so they could formally decide whether they wished
to participate in the focus group. Of the six present, all signed the form.


                                                                                  321

            We gave a brief presentation on the research objective and then provided
   an opportunity for participants to introduce themselves and describe their training
   experience at the Parintins Center for Higher Studies. We adhered to Gatti’s
   (2005) recommendation that the confidentiality of participants’ records and
   names must be ensured. As for the participants’ names, they had the opportunity
   to choose a pseudonym to be used in the study. The table below presents the
   data obtained from a semi-structured questionnaire administered after the
   participants’ introductions.

                          Table 1. Participants in the Formative Focus Group
No.   Name     Education       Years             of Work             What do you understand by reflective-
                               Experience/Positi      Schedule       critical training?
                               on      in    Basic
                               Education
01   Val       Geography       1 year and 5 Contract                 Reflective-critical education is where
                               months/manager                        a person has the opportunity to
                               in Early Childhood                    express their thoughts free from
                               Education.                            oppression.
02   Mere      Education       2 years/teacher in Contract           Reflective-critical training is a process
                               Early Childhood                       of education that always requires
                               Education.                            observation,       reflection,    thought,
                                                                     action, and attitude to build new
                                                                     possibilities and strategies for the
                                                                     cognitive process.
03   Derso     Letters         2 years and 6 Contract                The training of the reflective-critical
     n                         months/teacher in                     teacher is based on creating
                               Adult Education.                      conditions for improvements in an
                                                                     education that correlates multiple
                                                                     ideas of thought.
04   Paty      M.A.        in 3 years/teacher         Civil          It is the capacity that the individuals
               Social                                 Service        involved in the teaching-learning
               History/B.A.                           Exam           process—that is, teachers and
               in History                                            students—have          or    develop to
                                                                     perceive the reality they live in such a
                                                                     way that they position themselves as
                                                                     agents of change in their own lives
                                                                     while transforming the environment in
                                                                     which they are embedded.
05   Su        Physics         6 years/teacher        Contract       When you develop the mindset of a
                                                                     thinker, with skills and methods to
                                                                     contribute to the practice, you will
                                                                     achieve success.
06   Sun       Education       2 years/teacher        Contract       Having a reflective-critical mindset is
                                                                     a way of thinking about how one is
                                                                     acting; that is, in situations that require
                                                                     greater involvement—such as in a
                                                                     school setting—one must consider
                                                                     how one is acting, whether one is
                                                                     acting correctly, and critically evaluate
                                                                     both mistakes and successes.
   Source: Questionnaire administered to focus group participants at the first meeting, CESP/UEA - 2018.




                                                                                                        322

       The purpose of the questionnaire was not merely to outline a profile of
each participant—since this is already evident in their statements—but above all,
to understand what each person means by reflective-critical training. We chose
to conduct this inquiry in writing so that, for the time being, no one would be
influenced by others’ opinions, which is natural in the focus group technique.
Understanding what participants think about critical training during the first
meeting allows us to get a superficial glimpse of their training process and even
to sense what their work in Basic Education has been like. In this sense,
Professor Val states that “reflective-critical training is where a person has the
opportunity to express their thoughts free from oppression.” In other words, it is
when we can speak, question, and ask without being punished for it.
       Professor Mere, on the other hand, asserts that “reflective-critical training
is a process of formation that always requires an observation, a reflection, a
thought...”. A critical stance is capable not only of seeing re ity—the contradictions
and conflicts inherent in it—but also of acting to change it.
       “The training of the reflective-critical teacher is based on creating
conditions for improvements in education...” (Professor Derson). To foster critical
thinking in students, adequate conditions are indeed necessary, such as good
schools and quality teaching materials; however, teacher training is an essential
part of this process.
       According to Professor Paty, reflective-critical training concerns “the
capacity that the individuals involved in the teaching-learning process—that is,
teachers and students—have, or are able to develop, to perceive the reality they
live in.” Perceiving reality and changing it is emphasized in this teacher’s remarks.
This means that critical thinking enables changes in people’s behavior, changes
that occur first in their thinking. One cannot make significant changes to reality
without first seeing it as it truly is.
       Teacher Su, who holds a degree in Physics and has the longest
experience in Basic Education, states that critical education is “when one
develops the behavior of being a thinking being...” Thinking is inherent to human
beings; it is, in a way, innate, the result of a social process, according to Ghedin
(2003).
       When asked about this, Teacher Sol says that “having a reflective-critical
education is a way of thinking about how one is acting—that is, one’s actions in


                                                                                  323

moments that demand greater participation, such as in a school setting—and
reflecting on how I am acting...” It is not just any kind of thinking, but rather a form
of thinking that enables transformation.


2.4 SECOND MEETING: THE FORMATION OF THE REFLECTIVE-CRITICAL
TEACHER


       The objective of this second meeting was to initiate a discussion with the
group on critical training based on the text: Philosophy and the Formation of
Reflective-Critical Thinking (Ghedin, 2003). The text was distributed to
participants at the first meeting as a suggested reading. However, we noticed
during the discussions a lack of familiarity with the concepts discussed in the text,
as only four of the six participants attended, and of these, two admitted they had
not read it. This caused certain difficulties in the discussions, requiring more
frequent mediation by the moderator through questioning to keep the discussion
on track, as the dialogues often veered off in other directions. Thus, the question
under debate was: What does it mean to be reflective and critical?
       It is necessary to establish a pedagogy of transgression and thus teach
how to think in order to reflect (Ghedin, 2003). However, the participants claim
that the school lacks the space and time to develop this type of thinking; let us
look at an excerpt from the dialogue:


                       “...the course load is very heavy, and we end up not covering the topics
                       that actually foster reflective students (Teacher Paty).”
                       “The system is increasingly focused on meeting government goals...
                       (Teacher Val).”
                       “...this teaching approach is wonderful, but the reality at school is quite
                       different. The lab was fully equipped; I tried to make the most of the
                       space and focus on hands-on practice, but then they need grades, and
                       the teacher is caught between a rock and a hard place—either they do
                       things differently or they go along with the school’s pace... I teach
                       physics and end up neglecting the reflective aspect... the system
                       demands grades... (Teacher Su).”


       As explained, school has been a place for domestication. The participants
emphasize that fostering critical thinkers is not the government’s goal. This is
because, as the discussions reveal, the heavy workload and the overemphasis
on grades and metrics dominate every aspect of school life. In this sense, the



                                                                                             324

school, as an agent of the government, does not create opportunities for the
development of individuals who think critically.
       This justifies the need for critical thinking to be developed through
pedagogical interventions when working with curricular content, where the
teacher, by selecting this content, can encourage questioning and doubt,
stimulating curiosity and creativity through well-planned pedagogical strategies.


                       “Silent students, eyes fixed on the teacher...” (Teacher Paty).
                       “He is the expert; there is no debate! There is no teacher-student
                       interaction” (Teacher Su).
                       “It’s the taming of the body.” (Teacher Paty).


       In fact, what is sought is the taming of the mind. We were taught that we
only learn when we are seated, copying, and silent; it is a school tradition that
has stood the test of time. An education that does not work toward
problematization, doubt, and questioning has only one path: to reproduce the
teaching-learning process of traditional pedagogy (Ghedin, 2003). This pedagogy
is evident in the voices of the participants, as well as in the reality they experience.
There is a discourse that traditional education is a thing of the past; however, it
is very much present through the “banking” model of education so often
discussed by Paulo Freire, in which the teacher deposits all the information into
the student, and the student receives, stores, and then returns it exactly as
received. Such information cannot be transformed into knowledge. This is not
permitted.
       The reproduction and mechanization of teaching have been disguised by
a discourse of “education for all,” “quality education,” and “inclusion and
accessibility.” Ultimately, what has been done is to deny the individual the full
development of their cognitive, affective, and social capacities.


                       “In preschool, they learn by playing, doing this, doing that, playing with
                       playdough... so parents have this idea: ‘Oh, my child is going to school.’
                       He has to learn right away how to hold a pencil. It’s not like that! ‘When
                       will my child bring homework home?’ They have this view that school is
                       all about testing… that to learn, you have to be in the classroom… if
                       you leave… if you’re playing… you’re not learning (Teacher Val).”
                       “We’re already so immersed in this pattern that breaking free from it is
                       very complicated (Teacher Paty).”




                                                                                             325

       Breaking free from this educational model and building a more
sophisticated way of thinking capable of perceiving and analyzing the
contradictions present in reality is neither an easy task nor a quick process. It
takes time to change ways of thinking rooted in theories that increasingly oppress
and alienate the individual. It is from this perspective that we cannot miss the
opportunity to develop in early childhood education students neural connections
that direct their thinking toward critical thinking, creativity, and curiosity. It is in
this sense that language plays a fundamental role, when the teacher chooses
activities that dynamically engage students’ cognitive processes—distinctive
activities that better stimulate attention, memory, and perception, leading to
cognitive development that goes beyond the mere accumulation of information.
       The discussion about how schools are organized to meet government
requirements led, at various points in the discussion, to a shift away from the
meeting’s objective, thus veering into other topics. To this end, the moderator,
aiming to bring the group back to the topic at hand, asked the participants: Has
our training enabled the development of critical thinking? How do we deal with
the relationships already established in the school? How do we perceive these
relationships? How does the school seek to alienate? The text used for reading
addresses these questions.


                       Education must make a leap from tradition to transgression. It
                       constitutes itself as transgression; that is, in order for it to assume its
                       proper role, it must foster transgression as a pedagogical space for
                       freedom and the expression of the most varied forms of creativity—not
                       merely the Cartesian rational model, characteristic of modern
                       conceptions of knowledge, but one that does not correspond to the
                       human demands of our time (Ghedin, 2003, pp. 38–39).


       In this regard, Teacher Paty states that, from this perspective, the student
“will be a mere reproducer, doing everything as told.” This is because their
capacity to question and doubt has not been developed within the teaching-
learning process; it is the Cartesian model, where there is no room for questions.
However, Teacher Sol points out that: “I like it when they discuss their opinions,
especially when we talk about politics. Some have formed opinions. Our school
has no projects; it’s just class, class, class, test, class” (Teacher Sol). With this,
we understand that there is no space in school to develop critical reflection since
the “class” is a set of exercises that must be answered in writing by the students.


                                                                                              326

Thus, the participants were asked again: Is it possible to develop critical thinking
in students?


                       “I believe students already have this way of thinking, but many of them
                       don’t try to assert themselves, and when they do, there are a lot of
                       people who stand in their way. When I try to assert myself... I can’t give
                       an opinion, and then 10 people are already against me (Teacher Sol).”


       The school has denied students the full development of their cognitive abil-
ities. This occurs when it prevents them from expressing their opinions in order
to compare them with others’ ideas. For critical thinking to develop, it needs en-
vironments that stimulate creativity, problem-solving, and responsible decision-
making regarding the problems of reality. This is because, although all human
beings are capable of thinking, the school, as a space for education, must enable
the development of higher cognitive processes.


2.5 THIRD MEETING: THE UNITY OF THEORY AND PRACTICE IN THE
REFLECTIVE-CRITICAL TRAINING OF TEACHERS


       The text Philosophy and Praxis (Ghedin, 2003) was distributed at the previous
meeting to aid discussions and provide participants with a theoretical foundation on
the topic at hand. Since some participants had not read the previous text, we set aside
time (fifteen minutes) at the beginning of the meeting for them to read it before starting
the discussions. After this, we returned to the question: what does it mean to be
critical? Emphasizing that such a stance does not imply a practice detached from
theoretical knowledge that explains reality in a dialectical, dynamic, and contradictory
manner. To this end, we highlighted an excerpt from the text:


                       While practical activity presupposes effective action on the world that
                       results in its real transformation, theoretical activity merely transforms
                       our consciousness of facts, our ideas about things, but not the things
                       themselves. However, we believe that this transformation of
                       consciousness regarding things is a necessary prerequisite for a
                       practical process to operate at the theoretical level (Ghedin, 2003,
                       p.41).


       In fact, no education takes place without theory, not even traditional
education. Nevertheless, the educational perspective discussed throughout this
work prioritizes a consistent theoretical framework grounded in a dialectical


                                                                                             327

perspective. This is because, in our view, only a dialectical approach is capable
of analyzing and explaining reality as it is, and thus enabling significant changes
in the teaching-learning process, which will be reflected in society. Thus,
immediately after the question was posed, Professor Paty responded with great
conviction:
       “It was by thinking about this reflective training and seeking to observe the
critique within it. It was a critical-reflective process (Professor Paty).”
       Always speaking with confidence, emphasis, and a questioning tone,
Professor Paty indeed reflects a critical education. This is evident through her
language, her discourse, and the way she relates the facts. A history graduate,
she highlighted on several occasions her satisfaction with the program and how
it provided her with a civic education. Professor Val also demonstrated great
conviction in answering the question. In addition to affirming that she underwent
a formative process from a critical perspective, she highlights Professors Ramos
and Bartoli as mediators of that process.


                       “I remember Professor Ramos very well; he always used to say to us:
                       ‘Today, in class… we’re going to put this theory into practice; we’re
                       going to act as if we were actually teaching out there in the countryside.’
                       How would you convey this theory to your student who is out in the
                       countryside? How would you go about it? He always tried to do that—
                       most of them did—and Professor Bartoli always did that a lot too
                       (Professor Val).”


       Professor Val also played a very effective role in the meetings. She always
took a strong stance, even if at times her speech overemphasized practice, but
as she read the texts, her discourse gradually shifted; the texts began to influence
her way of thinking and broaden her perspective on the subject.


                       “...Professor Tati, Professor Bartoli—he would push us, prod us,
                       question us, stir us up. I mean, he really messed with our heads! ‘You
                       guys are so stagnant!’ He wanted us, one way or another, to be critical,
                       to wake up, to face reality (Professor Val).”


       Professor Val is very firm in stating that her undergraduate education
fostered a reflective-critical mindset. She mentions some professors, even
without being prompted in the questioning, and this assertion is repeated in the
final session. Questioning the way we think about reality allows for the
construction of a new reality in thought and action.


                                                                                             328

       The text discussed in this session allowed participants to consider reality
from a dialectical perspective, imbued with the inseparable relationship between
theory and practice—something that did not occur in previous sessions, where
practice was overemphasized on several occasions. The text addresses the unity
between theory and practice, as well as reflection-action, viewed as elements
that act reciprocally and concurrently in a teacher training process. In this sense,
it is evident that reading the text prompted a rethinking of the role of theory and
how it relates to reflective-critical training, as the testimonials show.


                       “He addresses the issue of working solely on theory without relating it
                       to practice—and vice versa—within the teaching-learning process; the
                       issue becomes mechanical, so it is a mechanization of teaching”
                       (Professor Paty).
                       “The separation of theory and practice is a negation of identity... He
                       says here that dichotomizing theory and practice is simultaneously
                       separating reflection and action” (Professor Val).


       Thinking critically means thinking from a theoretical foundation that
enables a practice capable of developing in the student sufficient cognitive
abilities to modify their environment through more complex thinking. Separating
theory and practice risks losing the possibility of reflection and understanding,
denying human identity (Ghedin, 2003). We have no doubt that this was made
very clear to the participants, as they were able to see the relevance of theoretical
study in educational work, unlike in the first meeting.


                       “I agree when the text says that this relationship between theory and
                       practice builds teaching knowledge. But it only builds it when you’re
                       actually there. Unfortunately, I disagree that, in university, teaching
                       knowledge isn’t built yet. Because you haven’t had the practice yet.
                       Even if you go into the field, in a teaching situation, in a classroom
                       setting, or on an internship, you’ ’t actually the teacher. You’re just there
                       observing; you’re just imagining they’re your students, but they aren’t
                       your students” (Professor Derson).


       Teaching knowledge, according to Ghedin (2003), is the result of a long
historical process of organization and elaboration by society of various forms of
knowledge, for which the teacher is responsible for transmitting. Since it is a long
historical process, the university cannot be solely responsible for the construction
of this knowledge. It is necessary for the teacher, through their experiences, to
construct new knowledge based on research and reflection on their own practice



                                                                                               329

in an intentional and systematic process; however, it is within the undergraduate
program that one learns how to do this, as it is during this period that one learns
to systematize information and transform it into knowledge—a crucial step in the
construction of teaching knowledge.
       The internship, for example, imbued with research (Pimenta; Lima, 2012),
is a strategy, an opportunity to train the intern as a future teacher, where they can
develop the mindset and skills of a researcher based on internship situations,
designing projects that allow them to understand and critically analyze the
situations they observe.


2.6 FOURTH MEETING: HIGHER EDUCATION FACULTY WHO FOSTER
CRITICAL THINKING


       Given that in the previous meeting some participants did not make it clear
whether their undergraduate training was from a critical perspective or not, we
began the final meeting by revisiting this question. However, in addition to this,
for those who stated they had participated in a critical education, we also asked:
Which faculty members do you consider to have most fostered critical thinking
during your undergraduate studies? Our objective with this question was, after
identifying these faculty members, to delve deeper into certain issues using the
open-ended structured interview to learn from them how they work and how they
foster critical thinking in pedagogical interventions during the teacher training
process.
       In addition to this question, we also asked the participants: What did the
experience of reflecting on your training in this group mean to you? The answer
to this question is very significant, given that the focus group had to be relevant
not only to the researcher but also to the participants. Participation would have
to, in addition to achieving the research objectives, also enable the construction
of some knowledge based on the experience with the group, allowing for
moments of reflection on the training received during undergraduate studies, as
well as the work they carry out in Basic Education.


                      “Professor Ramos was very critical. He worked in a very clear way on
                      how to approach critical thinking, how to integrate theory and practice...
                      How to address a specific subject, given that the rural context is totally


                                                                                            330

                      different from the city. Professor Bartoli was also very critical... In the
                      classroom, he would divide us into groups. Each group would defend a
                      position, and one group would challenge the other.” (Teacher Val).


       As expressed in this teacher’s statement, the educators mentioned work
through theory and practice, using groups that engage in mutual questioning,
always emphasizing the realities they would encounter as teachers, guiding
students to reflect on what their teaching would be like amidst the various realities
they would face.


                      “I remember Professor Souza with his political pedagogy. He made me
                      question so many times the politics I hated so much... Professor Leal,
                      that gentle side of hers, but always questioning, seeking to understand
                      the child. Professor Dutra, at first it was through sociology” (Professor
                      Sol).


       During the four meetings, we noticed that their discourse focused more on
the daily school life experienced in rural schools than on the issues raised
themselves. It became evident how difficult it was for the teacher to discuss the
topic, even though she made an effort to participate in the meetings. This analysis
is based on the group discussions, where she participated little in the dialogues.
Her language reveals a lack of critical thinking.


                      “When I mentioned at the last meeting that for me, my undergraduate
                      program wasn’t 100% about practice and theory, because unfortunately
                      I had some professors who stayed only in the classroom, only in theory,
                      and didn’t take us out to do something different... One time we went out
                      into the field to carry out projects. One of them was with Professor
                      Maia, who runs the Leleco project, which is now quite well-known at the
                      University, a reading project... So Professor Maia had a significant
                      impact on my undergraduate experience, not only because of the
                      project, but also because she created the vocabulary lists for us to work
                      on the Portuguese language. And so I am trying to foster critical-
                      reflective thinking with my students.” (Professor Derson).


       Stating that he felt a lack of unity between theory and practice during his
undergraduate studies, Professor Derson highlights Professor Maia for her work
on the reading project called Leleco. Through this project, it was possible to
integrate theory and practice, which was very meaningful to him. A teaching-
learning process that prioritizes powerful and creative pedagogical practice must
be integrated with pedagogical projects conceived and designed beyond the
narrow confines of disciplinary boundaries.



                                                                                             331

       Critical thinking is developed through activities that mobilize various
cognitive processes in a dynamic and concurrent manner. Project-based work,
initiated from a problem, can spark students’ curiosity to the extent that they
participate as active and creative agents in the planning and execution of
activities.
       Diverse activities provide opportunities for students to view specific
content or reality in a different way. This is important because as we engage in
different activities, we establish new neural connections, forge new pathways in
the brain, and thereby enable the mobilization of more cognitive processes—
which is essential for the development of more complex thinking. The new always
generates conflict and discomfort. Situations like these mobilize thought and
reasoning and stimulate intelligent actions.


                       “The projects we worked on were usually group projects, and whenever
                       there was a presentation, seminar, or similar event, each group giving
                       a presentation had to be questioned by the other groups. And there
                       were situations—and Professor Marinho did this a lot—where, in
                       addition to one group being questioned, the other had to take a stance
                       in favor, always sparking a debate... We could use theater,
                       documentaries, or produce short films, as long as we also incorporated
                       into the dialogue with the subjects we were working with.” (Professor
                       Paty).


       As we have seen throughout this study, questioning fosters reflective-
critical thinking (Ghedin, 2003). Working in groups, challenging them, and
promoting discussions is highly relevant when seeking a distinctive form of
education—one that goes beyond the accumulation of information but considers
reality as subject to changes brought about by the individual themselves.


                       “Professor Dantas would sometimes hand out handouts to us. And right
                       on the first day of class, he said: ‘You’re going to face many struggles.’
                       Another teacher was Figueiredo. He would bring the concept map to
                       our classroom. He would have the group there question one another,
                       ask questions. He would have us construct that map based on the text
                       he gave us... It made me a critical thinker, and I’m still striving to be
                       one” (Professor Mere).


       Concept maps are a resource developed by Novak, serving to promote
meaningful learning based on David Ausubel’s theory, where new ideas and
information are internalized and anchored in the subject’s cognitive structure,
modifying it (Razera, et al., 2009). It is a relevant activity in that it allows students


                                                                                             332

to extract concepts from texts and construct the map according to the hierarchy
of those concepts.


                      “Our main interest is to eliminate from that period the subjects that get
                      in the way of the others, which allows us to focus on the others. So, our
                      main concern was to streamline, eliminate the lists, and not get bogged
                      down in assessments” (Teacher Su).


       Pimenta and Lima (2012) concur with this statement, as they clarify that
when teaching specific content, teachers often focus solely on cognitive
knowledge, where the most important aspect is knowledge of that subject area,
centering on content distant from students’ reality and focusing only on the
material being covered.


3. CONCLUSION


       The concept of the reflective-critical teacher was gradually developed
throughout the activities. And this goes beyond the research objectives, since the
knowledge built with the group will be reflected in the practices they carry out in
the classroom. The discussions held during the meetings also revealed
indignation regarding the way the system or “government” works to perpetuate
mechanistic pedagogy, where the interest lies not in forming thinking individuals,
but in achieving high scores without demonstrating any quality. In this sense, the
participants recognize the need for a pedagogy of transgression, where one can
break away from domestication and establish an education that teaches critical
thinking. However, they emphasize that this is not an easy process to carry out,
since what the school wants is “silent students” and the teacher is already
immersed in “this pattern, so escaping it is very complicated.” It is the
domestication of thought, which first affects the teacher, then the student,
undermining the whole of society. This is because education advances when
actors acquire the cognitive capacity to reflect on how they think and how they
act. And not only that. When they decide to modify their practices in order to
improve them, thereby encouraging individuals to seek new ways of being, doing,
and living. This means building a fairer and better society, where everyone can
live with dignity.



                                                                                           333

                                  REFERENCES
BARBOUR, Rosaline. Grupos focais. Tradução: Marcelo Figueiredo Duarte. São
Paulo: Artmed, 2008.

BACKES, Dirce Stein. Grupo Focal como técnica de coleta e análise de dados em
pesquisas qualitativas: O mundo da saúde. São Paulo: 2011, 35 (4), 438-442.

COHEN, Martin. Habilidade de pensamento crítico para leigos. Rio de Janeiro: Alta
Books, 2017.

GATTI, Bernadete Angelina. Grupo focal na pesquisa em ciências sociais e
humana. Brasília: Líber Livro Editora, 2005.

GHEDIN, Evandro. A Filosofia e o filosofar. São Paulo: Uniletras, 2003.

LERVOLINO, Solange Abrocesi; PELICIONI, Maria Cecília Focesi. A utilização do
grupo focal como metodologia qualitativa na promoção da saúde. Escola
Enfermagem USP, v.35, n.2, p.115-121, junho, 2001.

PIMENTA, Selma Garrido; LIMA, Maria Socorro Lucena. Estágio e docência. 7ª ed.
São Paulo: Cortez, 2012.

RAZERA, Júlio César Castilho (et al). O uso de mapas conceituais em projetos de
aprendizagem significativa: uma avaliação quali-quantitativa de mobilização
conceitual sobre animais. Revista Ciência & Cognição, Rio de Janeiro, v.14, n. 2,
p.235-247, julho, 2009.




                                                                                334

CHAPTER 20
 THE ORAL POETRY OF MARACATU
 DE BAQUE SOLTO: STRATEGY
 FOR EXPANDING THE LITERARY
 LITERACY OF STUDENTS IN THE
 4TH PHASE OF EJA

Joseane do Nascimento Rocha
Master of Arts in Literature
Universidade de Pernambuco (UPE)
E-mail: joseanerocha3112@gmail.com

Josivaldo Custódio da Silva
Doctor in Literature and Culture
Universidade de Pernambuco (UPE)
E-mail: josivaldo.silva@upe.br

Maria do Rosário da Silva Albuquerque Barbosa
Doctor in Applied Linguistics and Language Studies
Universidade de Pernambuco (UPE)
E-mail: rosario.silvabarbosa@upe.br


ABSTRAC: This article aims to expand the literary literacy of students in the IV
phase of EJA – Youth and Adult Education, based on reading and interpretation
of the loas of Maracatu de Baque Solto or Rural. Starting from the student's
reading experience, and through the approaches of Reception Aesthetics
(JAUSS, 1994), the Reception Method (AGUIAR and BORDINI, 1988) and
Literary Literacy (COSSON, 2011), we developed a proposal for students from
the municipality of Lagoa do Carro-PE, enrolled at the Dagoberto Lobo municipal
school. This research is characterized by a qualitative approach, of an applied
nature and an action research procedure. The proposal presented here uses,
based on stages of the Reception Method, stages of the basic sequence –
motivation, introduction, reading and interpretation – and contextualizations of the
expanded sequence of Literary Literacy and theses of Reception Aesthetics.
Difficulties in interpretation were analyzed based on the participants' written
productions, originating from texts read and prepared during each workshop
developed within the applied stages. The results provided us with a qualitative
analysis of the occurrences of each index of contextualizations and theses
identified in the written productions. Throughout the research, we identified
negative issues and positive advances until we reached the conclusion with the
final product: the presentations of the TCEF – Elementary School Completion
Works – whose themes were developed relating to maracatu de baque vento.
Therefore, the expansion of the literary literacy of the research participants is


                                                                                335

visible, especially in the creative writing part in the last workshop, even if they
present problems with interpretation, spelling, in short, deviations from the
standard norm.

KEYWORDS: oral poetry, maracatu de baque solto, literary literacy, reception
aesthetics, reception method.

RESUMO: Esse artigo possui como objetivo ampliar o letramento literário de
estudantes da IV fase da EJA – Educação de Jovens e Adultos, a partir de leitura
e interpretação das loas de Maracatu de Baque Solto ou Rural. Partindo da
experiência leitora do estudante, e através das abordagens da Estética da
Recepção (JAUSS, 1994), do Método Recepcional (AGUIAR e BORDINI, 1988)
e do Letramento Literário (COSSON, 2011), desenvolvemos uma proposta para
estudantes do município de Lagoa do Carro-PE, matriculados(as) na escola
municipal Dagoberto Lobo. Esta pesquisa caracteriza-se por uma abordagem
qualitativa, de natureza aplicada e procedimento de pesquisa-ação. A proposta
aqui apresentada utiliza, a partir de etapas do Método Recepcional, etapas da
sequência básica – motivação, introdução, leitura e interpretação – e
contextualizações da sequência expandida do Letramento Literário e teses da
Estética da Recepção. As dificuldades de interpretação foram analisadas com
base nas produções escritas dos(as) participantes, oriundas de textos lidos e
elaboradas no decorrer de cada oficina desenvolvida dentro das etapas
aplicadas. Os resultados nos proporcionaram uma análise qualitativa das
ocorrências de cada índice de contextualizações e teses identificadas nas
produções escritas. Ao longo da pesquisa, identificamos questões negativas e
avanços positivos até chegarmos à conclusão com o produto final: as
apresentações dos TCEF – Trabalhos de Conclusão do Ensino Fundamental –
cujas temáticas se desenvolveram referentes ao maracatu de baque solto.
Portanto, é vísivel a ampliação do letramento literário dos(as) participantes da
pesquisa, principalmente na parte de escrita criativa na última oficina, mesmo
que apresentem problemas de interpretação, de grafia, enfim, de desvios da
norma padrão.

PALAVRAS-CHAVE: poesia oral, maracatu de baque solto, letramento literário,
estética da recepção, método recepcional.




                                                                               336

1. INTRODUCTION


       The Adult and Youth Education (EJA) program is designed for those who
did not have access to or were unable to continue their elementary and secondary
education at the appropriate age and will now be guaranteed such opportunities,
in accordance with LDB 9.394/96 and Normative Instructions/PE 02/2004,
15/2008, and 02/2011, access to school with a language specific to this audience.
       Maracatu de Baque Solto, or Rural Maracatu, also known as Maracatu de
Orquestra, according to Moura (2016, p. 90), “[...] originated in the sugarcane
mills; most of its performers still make their living today from planting and cutting
sugarcane.” It features several characters, among them the caboclo de lança,
who is the most emblematic symbol of this folkloric tradition. The northern forest
region of Pernambuco is the birthplace and setting for the tradition of this folk
dance, and to this day, it has been passing on its mysteries and charms from
generation to generation, preserving its religious elements, sacred aspects, and
oral tradition. The latter, which is of interest to us, will become the subject of study
and a tool for action in the pedagogical work proposed here. It is worth noting that
Rural Maracatu differs from Maracatu Nação or Baque Virado, which were not
used in this research.
       The loas of Maracatu de Baque Solto2 , in a certain sense, are part of the
playful, carnivalesque, artistic, cultural, and social universe of the community in
the municipality of Lagoa do Carro, in the Zona da Mata Norte region of
Pernambuco. For this reason, we proposed that the students—referred to here
as participants—delve into the verses of the loas of Maracatu de Baque Solto or
Rural, so that they might expand their knowledge of the poetic and imaginative
universe of the Maracatu masters. In this way, we promoted literary literacy
through the improvised verses of this popular artistic expression; that is, we used
texts drawn from the sambadas and performances of the revelers.
       Sambadas are gatherings of two maracatu de baque solto groups,
practices known in various cities in the Mata Norte region of Pernambuco, with
the city of Nazaré da Mata as the main representative of this expression of
popular culture. In the “sambada de pé de parede,” for example, two masters


2 From now on, we will use only the term “Maracatu de Baque Solto.”




                                                                                    337

engage in a poetic duel, each with their own performers creating choreography
and playing in support of their master. In this way, we understand that this genre
is already part of the students’ sonic and poetic universe, not just during Carnival,
but all year round.
         In light of this, the general objective of this study was to analyze the
interpretation of literary texts by students in the fourth phase of the Adult and
Youth Education (EJA) program, using the popular literature of maracatu de
baque solto loas as a means of introducing them to the world of reading and
expanding their literary horizons. Our specific objectives were to introduce
students to the loa genre as an aesthetic and literary experience; analyze
contextualizations and possible theses of Reception Aesthetics in students’
written work; conduct oral and interpretive readings of literary texts in the
classroom; and assess students’ comprehension and interpretation of literary
texts.


2. THEORETICAL AND CRITICAL ASSUMPTIONS


         According to Frantz (2011, p. 35), we understand that a poetic and/or
literary text “[…] can be identified through its polysemy and the connotative nature
of its language. In literature, therefore, it is defined by the special use made of
language.” This observation leads us to believe that literary texts treat language
in a special way and imply a particular quality in linguistic treatment. Literature
plays an important role in the humanistic development of individuals (Candido,
2011). Through reading these texts, it is possible to adopt new perspectives,
understand new cultures, and acquire new knowledge.
         The various possibilities for perspectives and alternatives—whether real
or imagined—offered by literary language do not depend solely on the polysemic
nature of language, but above all on the reader’s cultural background and the
historical and social context in which such readings take place. The work
becomes a “social object [...]. It is, therefore, in the process of interaction that the
meaning(s) of the text are constituted, making the reader’s participation
fundamental.” (Frantz, 2011, p. 37).
         The characteristics of the poem genre include versification, the
organization of verses into stanzas, the possibility of rhymes, and the aesthetics


                                                                                    338

of different forms and rhythms. The poem refines the word with musicality, making
use of devices such as polysemy, wordplay, and various possibilities for
interpretation. This genre allows us to reflect on daily life and the imagination and
makes us more sensitive to realities, broadening linguistic perception and
enriching vocabulary, ideas, and diverse thoughts.
       The liberating nature of literary art stems from the fact that, according to
Zilberman (1989, p. 54), “The eminently liberating nature of art, which merges the
transgressive and communicative roles, is made explicit through the aesthetic
experience, which consists of three simultaneous and complementary activities—
poiesis, aisthesis, and catharsis.” Poiesis corresponds to the foreground and
“corresponds to the pleasure of feeling like a co-author of the work” (Zilberman,
1989, p. 55).
       More closely related to the aesthetic experience itself, the second level,
aisthesis, refers “to the effect, brought about by the work of art, of renewing the
perception of the surrounding world” (Zilberman, 1989, p. 55). As for katharsis,
Jauss defines it as “the realization of a process of identification that leads the
viewer to adopt new norms of social behavior, in a return to ideas previously
expressed,” as Zilberman notes (1989, p. 57); that is, “the viewer not only feels
pleasure but is also motivated to act” (Zilberman, 1989, p. 57).
       Jauss (1994), in addition to his discussion of the aesthetic experience, also
seeks to scientifically establish the method of literary hermeneutics, going beyond
regional, theological, or legal hermeneutics that focus on interpreting historical
texts from the past, as noted by Zilberman (1989) and Figurelli (1988),
respectively.
       Following Jauss’s premises, only the process of Reception Aesthetics “[...]
can lead the viewer to abandon the attitude of passive contemplation and, thanks
to a reformulation of poiesis, to actively participate in the experience of creating
the work of art,” comments Figurelli (1988, pp. 269–270). Delight, enjoyment, and
experience are defended by Jauss as moments of the experience of the first
stage of aesthetic perception.
       Jauss, in turn, presented proposals for approaching the study of literature
through his so-called seven theses (JAUSS, 1994), in which he contextualizes
and analyzes different approaches to literary study based on these seven theses:
1st thesis: the historicity of literature does not arise from chronology or year of


                                                                                 339

publication, but from the dynamic dialogue between the reader and the literary
work; 2nd thesis: the reader’s literary experience presupposes “prior
knowledge”—pointing to their expectations and interests; 3rd thesis: concerns
aesthetic distance—the gap or non-coincidence between the reader’s horizon of
expectations and the horizon of expectations evoked by a work; 4th thesis: the
meanings of a literary text are constructed through readers’ interpretations of the
work throughout history; therefore, the reader’s historical context is decisive in
the construction of the literary work’s meanings. Here lies the path of literary
hermeneutics: comprehension, interpretation, and application.; 5th thesis: The
significance of a literary work is determined not only by the initial moment of
reception and reading in history, but by the diachronic aspect, that is, by the
countless subsequent readings that modify and expand the work’s meaning over
time; 6th thesis: Here we have the synchronic perspective, that is, the reading of
the work at a given historical moment, including the moment of its production,
although it also engages with the diachronic aspect; in other words, the diachronic
and synchronic aspects go hand in hand in the construction of the work’s
meanings; 7th thesis: it engages with the diachronic and synchronic aspects, as
well as exploring the reader’s experience through the relationship between
literature and practical life.
       The reader’s role is fundamental to the very definition of the aesthetic
object, and from this perspective, reception theory developed from the studies of
the Polish philosopher Ingarden in the 1930s and the Czech scholar Felix Vodicka
in the 1940s. The sum of these studies gave shape to the so-called Receptionist
Method based on the possible transformations of the creator’s artistic work into
an aesthetic object for the reader (Aguiar; Bordini, 1988, pp. 81–82).
       According to Zilberman (1982, p. 103), the author and the reader interpret
the work based on the following aspects: intellectual, ideological, linguistic, and
literary. In addition to the affective aspects that will function as determinants for
the acceptance or rejection of the other aspects.
       The Receptional Method consists of five stages: determination of the
horizon of expectations, fulfillment of the horizon of expectations, rupture of the
horizon of expectations, questioning of the horizon of expectations, and
expansion of the horizon of expectations, according to Aguiar and Bordini (1988).



                                                                                 340

       Regarding literary literacy, based on reading, we have the concepts of
comprehension and interpretation of literary texts. Cosson (2011) developed a
methodology he termed the “basic sequence,” which consists of four steps:
motivation, introduction, reading, and interpretation. The basic sequence is a
methodological approach for developing the practice of reading literary texts in
school. This approach aims to foster a perspective of literacy- d on reading and
teaching literature. The motivation and introduction strategies should highlight the
literary text being studied, giving it the necessary importance to keep readers
interested and motivated to read. The stages of reading and interpreting the text,
on the other hand, represent the “high point” of the text in the experience of
literary literacy. As a methodology, the basic sequence presents a proposal for
accessibility that makes the text available not only for reading appreciation but,
above all, for meaningful interpretation.
       The basic sequence presented by Cosson (2011, p. 51) highlights the
importance of systematic work for the objective construction of a consistent
methodology for teaching literature.
       However, it was necessary to add something to the studies already
conducted and to the application of the methodology already presented, which
he called the expanded sequence. Through this, the author adds two further
lessons from the literature within the steps initiated in the basic sequence. “The
expanded sequence makes the connections we propose between literary
experience, knowledge, and education—embedded within the scope of this
literacy in school—more evident.” (Cosson, 2011, p. 76).
       The expanded sequence allows for further levels of interpretation, divided
into two stages, each of which is subdivided. In the first interpretation, the reader
is guided through different forms of contextualization, such as: theoretical
contextualization, historical contextualization, stylistic contextualization, poetic
contextualization, critical contextualization, presentational contextualization, and
thematic contextualization. In the second form of interpretation, there is a deeper
exploration of one or more of the previous contextualizations. It is a deeper dive
into the aspect chosen and/or guided by the teacher and/or the reader.
       Regarding the poetics of oral literature and popular culture, Zumthor
(2010, p. 8) unravels the mysteries of oral poetics: “The primordial symbolism
integrated into the phonetic exercise manifests itself eminently in the use of


                                                                                 341

language, and it is there that all poetry takes root.” For the author, the distinction
between voice and language implies a conceptual distance that allows for distinct
discussion and study of the “ .” Every act of speech is uttered by those who hold
the right to speak and establishes a unique act of authority. This act names the
act itself by speaking it. In this research, the acts of orality in the loas of the
maracatu de baque solto become objects of study through the lens of reception
aesthetics, stages of the reception method, and sequences of Literary Literacy.
       Understanding sambadas and loas: The spectacle takes place not only
during Carnival performances—which occur only annually—but also in the
terreiros of the peripheries, rural homesteads, and communities, when the
festivities, called sambadas, take place. These have various purposes: to
rehearse, socialize, celebrate, worship, and keep the tradition alive, which is
typically familial.


                      [...] ‘sambadas’—where two masters take on the challenge of
                      improvisation. These can be ‘short’ (samba de 6 or 4) or ‘long’ (samba
                      de 10), but this difference arises only in the realm of the poetry
                      expressed in the loas/toadas, since the rhythm remains the same [...]
                      And finally, we have the galope, considered by the performers a
                      moment of ‘farewell,’ as it is known that, after its performance, a
                      ‘farewell march’ will follow, usually thanking those involved for their
                      participation. (Brasil, 2013, pp. 115–116, emphasis added).


       The duels of yesteryear are represented today by the songs of the
maracatu masters, for they are the great leaders of their nations. It is the master
who defines the rhythmic characteristics of each group. He is considered the
poet, for it is he who must create and recite the poems composed on the spot
and performed in a spectacle called sambada.


3. METHODOLOGY


       We used qualitative research with an interpretive approach, which, in turn,
“is conducted in areas where there is little accumulated and systematized
knowledge. Due to its exploratory nature, it does not involve hypotheses, which,
however, may arise during or at the end of the research” (Vergara, 2009, p. 42).
       In this research model, the researcher can reflect on their own attitudes
and observations in the field, considering the participants’ interventions and



                                                                                         342

reactions. Indeed, this subjectivity in handling the process— d with different
approaches—is part of the characteristics of qualitative research, bringing a
diversity of possibilities and theoretical approaches as participants in the process.
       Regarding qualitative procedures, according to Creswell (2007, pp. 184–
188), “they are based on text and image data, have unique steps in data
analysis, and use diverse research strategies.” The researcher is permitted to
engage in participants’ experiences in an active and interactive manner.
       One of the approaches in qualitative research is theoretically grounded in
ethnomethodology and constructionism, focusing on daily routines and the
production of social reality, with the aim of “describing the processes involved in
the production of situations and environments [...], as well as existing social
order.” (Flick, 2009, p. 29).


                       From this perspective, data are collected through focus groups,
                       ethnography, or (participant) observation, as well as audiovisual
                       recordings. These data are then analyzed using discourse or
                       conversation analysis (Flick, 2009, p. 29).


       The project was carried out at a public school in the municipality of Lagoa
do Carro, Pernambuco, in a fourth-level Adult and Youth Education (EJA) class
held in the evening. The class consisted of 15 students. All students were eligible
to participate in the study, but only 10 were included in the sample. The selection
criteria were attendance and punctuality in submitting assignments. If all
participants had actively participated in the research activities, the selection
would have been made by drawing roll call numbers from their student IDs.
       To establish the students’ expectations, we administered a questionnaire
to identify their thematic and aesthetic interests and what would be most
appealing to them within the diverse reading universe. Next, we conducted four
workshops, the objective of which was to analyze the interpretive reading of
literary texts by the participating students, using the strategy of employing rural
maracatu chants as a means of introducing them to the world of reading.
       The workshops were preceded by the administration of a diagnostic
questionnaire to analytically establish the students’ initial profile. The instructional
sequence     was    implemented     immediately after       the   questionnaire    was
administered, with an emphasis on Aguiar and Bordini’s Receptive Method and



                                                                                    343

monitoring of the proposed activities to ensure the participation of all involved and
the effectiveness of the activities.
       The questionnaire was administered during a single 40-minute class, and
the workshops consisted of a total of four sessions, each comprising two 40-
minute classes, bringing the complete sequence to nine classes. All sessions
were documented through descriptive analyses of the questionnaire and the texts
produced in each workshop.


4. RESULTS AND DISCUSSION


       Based on the results obtained from the responses to the administered
questionnaire, we observed that the students reported a concerning relationship
with literature and popular culture, which corresponds to the stage of determining
the students’ expectations. While their relationship with literary texts is clearly
restricted to school settings for the most part, the culture of rural maracatu—even
though it is native to the region where the research was conducted—is unknown
and even disparaged by the students for religious reasons, demonstrating
prejudice and a lack of information.
       The “matuta” or regional colloquial language used by the author draws
students in and captures their attention. The choice of text was a good one and
met the expectations for interaction and participation of the entire class, which
read it, discussed it, and wrote short essays about the memories the text
*Paisagem de Interior* evoked.


4.1 ASSESSMENT TO DETERMINE STUDENTS’ EXPECTATIONS


       Based on the results obtained from the responses to the administered
questionnaire, we observed that students reported a concerning relationship with
literature and popular culture. At the same time, their relationship with literary
texts is clearly restricted to school settings, for the most part. The “ ” culture of
maracatu de baque solto, despite being native to the region where the research
was conducted, is still largely unknown and, for religious reasons, even
disparaged by some students, demonstrating prejudice and a lack of information.



                                                                                 344

       The lack of knowledge and the prejudice mentioned above prompted us to
explore the theme of maracatu de baque solto, given that the context in which
the loas are performed during the sambadas of maracatu is part of the cultural
and artistic landscape of the region where the participants live. The theme of
religiosity is implicit in the culture of maracatu de baque solto; thus, the religious
and cultural prejudice on the part of the participants pointed us toward a
discursive need that provided us with a dynamic of listening, knowledge
production, and a shift away from the perspectives initially presented.
       The shift in methodological strategy occurred with the initial results of the
questionnaire. The introduction of workshops using a prose text was not initially
planned; it was implemented to address the expectations observed in the results
of the expectation horizon assessment. Before the consultation, we assumed that
the loas would be readily accepted as a literary literacy proposal; however, the
assessment phase revealed opposing viewpoints, including the identification of
reasons for non-acceptance.


4.2    APPLICATION         OF      THE      RECEPTIONIST          METHOD        AND
CONTEXTUALIZATIONS OF LITERARY LITERACY


       Workshop I: Meeting the horizon of expectations (2 40-minute classes)
       Response/receptivity – The morning poetry of Jessier Quirino. Text 01:
“Interior Landscape.” The response to the horizon of expectations took the form
of a narrative poem to enhance receptivity.
       Motivation/Introduction: illustrative video about the rural landscape.
       Reading: The text was first read silently, then collectively, with attention
to intonation, rhymes, and verses, guided by the teacher. After the collective
reading, the teacher drew attention to the text’s structure, verses, rhyme,
language and its regional characteristics, and parallelism.
       Interpretation: In this session, the teacher drew attention to the
contextualization that brings the work to life, through the language and settings
depicted in the poem, such as the parallels we believe arose spontaneously, and
the thematic contextualization, through the rural context presented in the text,
though without using those terms, in addition to pointing out elements that
indicate some of Jauss’s theses (1994), particularly the 2nd and 7th.


                                                                                  345

       Based on the written works resulting from the reading and interpretation of
the poem, we observed contextualizations that brought the region’s landscapes
to life and provided thematic context—reflections of the memories of most of the
student informants in this study, drawn from the experiences they lived through
and shared during their childhood. Thus, through reading the poem, the students
engaged in the observation of social reality, production processes, situations, and
environments, as predicted by Flik (2009, p. 29).
       The first workshop was conducted as part of the Receptive Method to meet
the expectations of the research participants, who initially rejected the proposal
for the poems, as indicated by the questionnaire administered; however, the data
showed us that they were receptive to matuta literature and narrative poetry,
pointing to the possibility of good acceptance of the poetic genre. Thus, we used
the matuta poetry of the writer Jessier Quirino. In this way, they already presented
us with elements of the second thesis of Jauss’s theory (1994).
       Following the presentation of the methodology, the application aimed at
the production of written texts, in which we observed contextualizations that
evoke the present ( ) and thematic elements ( ) related to rural landscapes; this
stems from the memories, experiences, and life stories of most of the student
informants in this study.
       The writing activities were conducted in pairs to facilitate better acceptance
of the writing process. The students involved are not accustomed to reading or
writing. Resistance to writing was reduced by the proposal to work in groups.
Each informant was identified by a number ranging from 01 to 10, and for each
group, we identified the numerical associations, along with their individual and/or
collective contributions.
       After the teacher led the activities, the students read the text and even
formed pairs to interpret one of its stanzas. The criterion for analysis was to
identify a memory shared by the participants. This was motivated by their
experiences in the countryside and rural activities, with which most students in
this class easily identify. Hence the contextualizations that brought the text into
the present and the thematic focus, precisely through life experiences, bringing
to light Jauss’s theses (1994), particularly the second (the reader’s aesthetic
experience), third (the aesthetic character of the text), sixth (the synchronic
aspect), and seventh thesis (the relationship between the work and practical life).


                                                                                 346

      Everyone had a story to tell based on the text. They felt engaged and
identified with a passage, if not the entire text. Through reflection on their
memories and analysis of the relationship between the present and the past, they
were encouraged, based on the theme, to construct an interpretation that could
merge two contextualizations.
      Let’s look at some examples of the participants’ interpretations from
Workshop 01:


         Figure 1. Participants 01 and 02 – Text produced during the first workshop:




                  Source: Research archive. Transcription follows below:


                        “Back when we used to pick up
                        Bigu in trucks and the stalls
                        where we bought candies, cocadas,
                        cajurinas. Cowboys wearing hats
                         Herding the cattle to the corral.”


      The participants made it clear that the memories evoked by Jessier
Quirino’s text took them back to their childhood, when “we used to catch Bigu in
trucks,” and to the nostalgia for the sweets, drinks, and work they did. In the way
they presented it orally, they also positively highlighted these memories and the
personal experiences depicted in the text, reflecting the thematic context and the
presenter’s role in conveying the nostalgia for those lived experiences.
      The writing in verse led us to the reproduction of the verses from the
original text. The aesthetic perception became visible through the structure of the
verses, linked the two texts, and presented the authors’ intention to bring their
forms closer together.
      The fact that the text’s narrative predominantly uses the past tense
reinforced the nostalgic atmosphere and the search for positive memories of the
practices and experiences lived in the northeastern countryside. Therefore, the
students here demonstrated an understanding of the revival of childhood



                                                                                       347

memories and of the activities, work, and landscape that came to mind upon
reading the text.
      The aesthetic reception of the text and Jauss’s (1994) second thesis were
also evident through prior knowledge: “[...] we used to take / Bigu in trucks [...]
/ Where we bought candies, cocadas, / Cajurinas.” This prior knowledge
enabled a better reception and development of the theme, leading to greater
fluency as well.
      We also examined the relationship between literature and practical life,
which, according to Jauss (1994), forms the basis of his 7th thesis. The students
wrote an essay based on the experiences they had lived through and shared
during their childhood.


               Figure 2. Participant 04 – Text produced in the 1st workshop:




                    Source: Research archive. Transcription follows below:


                         “Accordionists in the courtyard
                         Pamonha, canjica, a dress
                         Made of calico and an old healer
                         Singing aboiadeiro—that
                         is shit and spit
                         A countryside landscape”


      The text attempts to reproduce the format presented by the poet,
paraphrasing the source text and reaffirming the theme of the rural landscape. It
reinforces the memory of the accordionist, of nights in the courtyard, of the
delicacies associated with the corn harvest and the June festivals.            Of rural
figures such as: “calico dress, healer, and singing aboiadeiro.” All these images
are semantically linked to the theme of the rural landscape. However, due to the
format and the repetitions of figures already mentioned in the text, they highlight
the difficulty of developing their ideas, and even more so, in written form.




                                                                                   348

       The thematic contextualization was evident, as they did not stray from the
theme. However, they presented it in a very limited and superficial manner. We
also observed a contextualization that brings the present to the fore through the
maintenance of issues related to the daily lives of rural people, unable to escape
this perspective.
       The relationship between literature and practical life, as in Jauss’s (1994)
second thesis, in presenting—albeit through paraphrase—a series of situations
similar to the source text, contextualizes the daily lives of the characters portrayed
as constituents of the “rural landscape” [emphasis added].
       Workshop II: Rupture of the Horizon of Expectations (2 classes of 40 min.)
       At this point, we introduce the loa genre through the samba curto, one of
the styles of Maracatu de Baque Solto. Text 02: “O maracatu”3 .
       Motivation/Introduction: Audio presentation of the text: CD 01 – Mestre
João    Paulo    (2017)    (track   01),   available    at:   <https://www.youtube.
com/watch?v=VMCS-CLA-Dc>. Also presented, in video format, were some
performances by masters of the region’s maracatus, which served as a catalyst
for discussion on the importance of preserving this oral production , on the
discursive “aesthetics” of the toadas, and on the importance of these cultural
practices and knowledge for maintaining the community’s identity.
       Reading: After listening to the audio recording of the text, a group reading
of the text was conducted by the teacher, with an emphasis on the appropriate
intonation for the text. Vocalized oral reading was emphasized in this workshop.
       Interpretation: The biography of maracatu master João Paulo and his
performances were presented via video to inform the subsequent discussions.
       Within the context of the loas of maracatu de baque solto, the poem “O
maracatu” is an expression of oral literature and the repente tradition. The choice
of this text is explained by its content, which clarifies certain aspects of maracatu
expression and the poet’s satisfaction in sharing his work. It features simple
language, with little complexity but great expressiveness regarding the culture it
represents and the literary language itself.
       Written works were created based on Mestre João Paulo’s oral poem. The
text features simple language, with little linguistic complexity but great

3 Available at: <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=VMCS-CLA-Dc>. Accessed on: Aug. 20,
2019.


                                                                                  349

expressiveness regarding the culture it represents. We examined the texts
produced by the participants and analyzed the extent to which they succeeded in
interpreting the work, using contextualization and some of Jauss’s (1994)
theories.
      The aesthetic experience involves the appropriation of the aesthetic
object. Thus, it was necessary for the students to understand the modes of
production of the loas and sambadas in order to immerse themselves in the
playful and aesthetic universe of the artistic-literary productions of the poems by
the master of maracatu de baque solto.
      After the researcher gave a brief presentation on the cultural context of
maracatu de baque solto, the students read the poem and recorded their
interpretations individually, highlighting a passage or stanza in the text that had
caught their attention for any reason, and wrote their interpretive comments on
the highlighted passage. After recording their notes, the participants organized
themselves into groups of two or three to share their interpretations.
      We observed that, despite significant difficulties with verbal expression,
the capacity for inference and contextualization identified here represents a
break in the aesthetic reception of the text and in adherence to the thematic
discussion—which initially presented great difficulty—and thus a rupture in the
horizon of expectations regarding both the genre and aesthetic and thematic
perception.
      We examined the texts produced by the participants and analyzed the
extent to which they were able to achieve interpretation through contextualization
and some of Jauss’s (1994) theses. Let us consider:


              Figure 3. Participant 01 – Text produced in the 2nd workshop:




                 Source: Research archive. Transcription follows below:




                                                                               350

                      “This maracatu ode
                      Told by a simple
                      Maracatu master, of
                      , in which he recounts that
                      after much suffering, he fulfilled a dream
                      By releasing his CD, thanking
                      God for the grace he received.”


       We note that even though the participant focused solely on describing the
idea presented in the text—thus demonstrating a superficial reading
comprehension—we were able to identify some contextualizations. However, we
can still identify a thematic contextualization, even though the participant did not
propose any thematic discussion or in-depth analysis. All the information is
explicitly stated in the text, and thus we perceive a thematic superficiality, lacking
discussion and failing to challenge expectations.
       We can also perceive a contextualization that brings the past into the
present through the very realization of the dream and the “grace attained,”
according to the student. There is, here, a value judgment. He attributes the
poet’s achievement to grace, a gift, a divine blessing. It is a particular way of
bringing the feeling of the poetic self into the present and personal context of the
reader/student.
       We observe, however, the prior knowledge presented in his interpretation
regarding the writing of the source text: “[...] Maracatu master, of humble origins
[...]” which even influences his way of analyzing the social context of the text’s
production conditions. Here, we also observe Jauss’s (1994) second thesis,
which manifests itself through this prior information, contributing to a
contextualization of the discussions on textual production.
       When considering the prior conditions of the text’s oral production, we can
also more easily associate them with the conditions of practical life: “[...] he says
that / After much suffering, he realized a dream / By releasing his CD [...]”. The
pragmatic condition of speech act and situation expressed here is consistent with
Jauss’s (1994) seventh thesis in observing the use of practical experiences
portrayed through the text.
       From a linguistic perspective, some cohesion interventions are necessary;
however, the orthographic and syntactic elements do not hinder the coherent
development of the text.




                                                                                  351

            Figure 4. Participant 02 – Textual production from the 2nd workshop:




                  Source: Research archive. Transcription follows below:


                       “This ode speaks of the migration
                       of maracatu, which originated in Africa
                       It was brought to Brazil by slaves
                       and became a very strong cultural mark

                       In Pernambuco culture,
                       performances usually take place during
                       Carnival season, but they are accepted at any time”


       The participant confuses the stanza with the loa, defining the interpreted
passage as a “loa”; therefore, it should be understood that he is developing a text
about the 4th stanza of the loa.
       In this stanza, the master traces the origins of maracatu de baque solto.
However, the participant reveals a lack of knowledge regarding this history and
confuses African influences with maracatu itself, which is of Brazilian origin and,
more precisely, from the Mata Norte region of Pernambuco. Thus, based on the
discussion of the participants’ interpretations, we draw on these observations
regarding the origins of rural maracatu to explore the theme and clarify its origins.
       Considering prior knowledge about the topic, the author of this work
acknowledges the cultural expression of maracatu de baque solto: “[...] it has
become a very strong symbol / in Pernambuco culture [...]” and the historical
context of the cultural calendar associated with the festival. Here, we identify the
thematic and presentational contextualizations, when the participant clarifies the
periods of maracatu performances, and also when they analyze and affirm that
maracatu has become a hallmark of Pernambuco culture.
       We can associate expressions of practical life with the universe of rural
maracatu culture, its manifestations, and its importance as an outline of Jauss’s
(1994) 7th thesis in The Aesthetics of Reception.




                                                                                   352

        From the perspective of grammar, spelling, and syntax, the student shows
no difficulty. In this case, we perceive a conceptual difficulty.
        Workshop III: Questioning the Horizon of Expectations (2 classes of 40
min.)
        With this activity, the goal was to go beyond previous expectations and
engage in the reading of a literary text that would provoke questions and
discussions regarding the previous texts. We did not use the two sequences from
the Literary Reading Guide—motivation and introduction—but only the reading
and interpretation.
        Text 03: “Morte do sambador” – a samba in 10-syllable lines – in the
“Décima” format, that is, ten lines of seven poetic syllables each with a regular
rhyme scheme of A-B-B-A-A-C-C-D-D-C, from the CD *No Baque Solto* by Siba
and Barachinha (2003). After discussing the text, the students individually
produced analyses of the texts, based on the teacher’s guidance, who provided
information and examples regarding the verses, rhythm, and rhymes of the text.
The activity addressed two questions: 1 – What is the theme of the text? Explain.
and 2 – What type of language is used in the text? Justify.


        Figure 5. Participant 01 – Textual production from the 3rd workshop:




                  Source: Research archive. Transcription follows below:


                       1 – “Death, cultural heritage”
                       2 – “Cultural”


        We observed that the participants responded quite objectively to the topic
and presented a partial view of the theme—"death"—offering a thematic
contextualization and a superficial perspective without providing further
explanation. Regarding language, the researcher’s guidance focused on
linguistic and stylistic issues, expecting participants to distinguish between formal
and informal and/or colloquial language, justifying or discussing the poetic


                                                                                 353

elements of the verses that highlight the value and mastery of each sambador,
namely Siba and Barachinha. With the unexpected response: “Cultural,” we can
infer an understanding—albeit a simplistic one—of a contextualization that brings
the present to life, of the cultural praxis of rural maracatu, which also points to
Jauss’s (1994) 7th thesis, which applies to questions of practical life, and thus to
the very context of death mentioned above.
      The responses from participants 03 and 05 follow the same pattern of
understanding regarding the sambada “Morte do Sambador.” Let us examine the
response from participant 04:


            Figure 6. Participant 04 – Textual production from the 3rd workshop:




                  Source: Research archive. Transcription follows below:


                       1 – “Morte do Sambador (samba in 10)”
                       2 – “Baque solto”


      From the responses provided, we also observe that the participant
demonstrated a superficial understanding of the text read, attempting to
contextualize the theme. The first response, which copies the title exactly as it
appears—including the reference to the type of composition—shows that the
participant confused the theme with the title. Although, in this case, the theme is
also confused with the title, the fact that the excerpt in parentheses was copied
verbatim reveals that the copying was done without reflection or a plausible
explanation.
      The answer to the second question contains another error: the
classification of the language as “baque solto” reveals a variation in the maracatu
rhythm that the participant evidently identifies without reflecting on the language
itself as used by the poet, yet which nevertheless demonstrates another
attempt—this time with a view to the poetic contextualization of the text through
the lens of the rhythm used by the loas, the context of the text’s musicality.
However, this answer points to prior knowledge: “baque solto.” In Jauss’s (1994)



                                                                                   354

second thesis, it becomes evident that interpretation may present elements of
experience from the reader’s horizon of expectations, which anticipate the text, and the
third thesis, which addresses the aesthetic experience of the text that contributes
to the interpretation of the work. In this case, the perception of rhythmic and
musical expression is also language, even though this was not the approach
requested in the second question. Let us look at participant 06:


            Figure 7. Participant 06 – Textual production from the third workshop:




                   Source: Research archive. Transcription follows below:

                        “Observe: – The verses
                        - The rhymes
                        - The rhythm
                        What is the theme? Humility confronts you, sung in a fantasy poem
                        about death.
                        What is the language? From the favelas to the boundaries of class, it
                        has redefined the linguistic dialogue in samba themes. Sambas are
                        compositions based on a text—the theme—and it’s clear that the
                        language consists of slang words and expressions originating from
                        samba culture or popularized through it.”


       The lack of syntactic and semantic organization causes the text to have
problems with cohesion and coherence. We noted that the participant brought up
the theme of death; however, they were unable to explain or clarify their
understanding, presenting a weak thematic contextualization.
       The second statement was even more confusing and does not allow for a
clear understanding of what was intended to be expressed. We observed that the
participant did not justify the expected understanding regarding linguistic usage
and limited themselves solely to the thematic issue, confusing the “samba”
presented here with “samba enredo.” Here, “samba” refers to the meter and
rhythm used in these songs and their composition. We can infer from this
response an attempt to copy dictionary entries with definitions of “samba enredo,”


                                                                                         355

“samba,” and “enredo,” rendering the response incoherent and inconsistent. Let’s
look at the next participant:


            Figure 8. Participant 07 – Textual production from the 3rd workshop:




                  Source: Research archive. Transcription follows below:

                       “Rhymes
                       My – museum
                       day – photograph
                       grave – search
                       crying – gold
                       search – culture
                       Verses
                       My photograph
                       above the grave
                       Rhythm
                       Maracatu
                       Samba
                       Theme
                       Death
                       Language
                       “cultural”


       The participant took care to record all the observations prompted by the
researcher, although the initial instruction had been to explain the topic, describe
it, and justify the language used.
       From the notes, we observed a clear understanding regarding the
identification of rhymes and verses. As for the rhythm, identified as Maracatu and
samba, it diverges from the perspective of rhythm in the text and approaches the
issue of the use and praises associated with the musical rhythm and the cultural
context of production, within a perception of the text’s poetic contextualization.
       Regarding the theme, the response is objective; as for the language, like
the majority, they classify it as cultural, also following the same line of reasoning
as the others, pointing toward an alignment with the “ ” view of contextualization


                                                                                   356

that brings the present to the fore and addresses issues of practical life—thus,
Jauss’s (1994) 7th thesis.
       This participant demonstrates a technical understanding of rhymes,
verses, and rhythm. Regarding the theme of “death,” as we saw earlier, there
was a partial deviation, given that the text deals with a specific death, narrowing
the theme to the death of the singing poet and addressing how much the
maracatu audience will miss him, including the masters themselves; thus, the
response alludes to a possible thematic contextualization.
       As for the interpretation, however, it was limited to the text’s structure,
without extrapolating or inferring information from it, making the analysis of the
text itself superficial. Let’s look at the next participant:


                Figure 9. Participant 09 – Text produced in the 3rd workshop:




                   Source: Research archive. Transcription follows below:


                        1 – “death of the samba dancer”
                        2 – (did not provide an answer)


       As we have seen so far, the text’s theme is already contained in the title.
Death is the most general theme, which, however, is specified in the way the
lyrical “I” addresses his own death. Thus, since this is the most general theme,
the response “death of the samba dancer” points to a thematic contextualization,
although the participant could have better articulated the theme. Therefore, it is
unclear whether the participant reproduced the title because they understood that
the title already contains the theme and that they would have the same meaning,
or simply did not bother to reflect on the prompt.
       The absence of a response to the second item allows us to consider the
possibility of a refusal to participate and interact in the activity; this is a possibility
characteristic of this group of students who, often— —for various reasons, do not
interact, do not participate, or simply lead us to believe that they are interacting.




                                                                                       357

            Figure 10. Participant 10 – Textual production from the 3rd workshop:




                   Source: Research archive. Transcription follows below:


                        1 – “What is the topic of the text? It talks about the death of the samba
                        dancer
                        2 – What kind of language is used in the text? It discusses the
                        vernacular of Brazilians.


       The first answer merges the title with the theme, yet points toward a
specific interpretation of the text. Although most other participants answered
“death,” the text is quite emphatic about a specific death. The entire text deals
with how the speaker deals with their own death—clearly, a deeper insight into
the thematic context.
       The second response is the only one that points to a linguistic
understanding of colloquial language or “Brazilian vernacular,” demonstrating an
awareness of language and linguistic content—topics covered in class—through
which the participant shows linguistic comprehension of the text and the use of
language as an aesthetic element within it, from the perspective of poetic
contextualization.
       Despite providing more mature responses compared to the other
participants, this participant did not explore the text further, limiting themselves to
answering only the questions. In fact, all participants erred in their explanations
and justifications regarding the questions asked.
       The poem presented here is more complex. First, because it depicts a duel
in which the poets interact and compete to the rhythm of the maracatu de baque
solto. Second, because each poet strives to stand out through allegories and
figures of speech that allow the listeners— —to choose one over the other.
Whether through the way words are used or the strangeness that each phrase
may present, while simultaneously expressing an idea in favor of the master
(poet) or the nation he represents. Third, the verses of both poets elevate the
figure of the poet by describing what their deaths would be like, their absences,
and the legacy they leave for the culture of maracatu de baque solto.



                                                                                             358

       The possibility of interpretations and contextualizations based on this
poem goes beyond the text itself, thus reaching the extratext. Our familiarity with
oral language and the theme of death provided us with a wide range of
possibilities for discussion and questioning; after all, the text was chosen to
provide not only a rupture but, above all, questions about the language, culture,
and religiosity present in the poem. The theme addresses a pragmatic aspect of
religious experiences—death—another point of conflict, given that it is a religious
experience.
       Faith is a sensitive and solemn topic; however, the text approaches it in a
carnivalesque manner. For some students, the natural way the topic of “death”
was handled felt comfortable and familiar, even satirical and comical. For others,
pure heresy! Thus, this reading was steeped in religiosity and moralism. Even so,
it was possible to meet the expectations of the workshop’s proposal to “Question
the horizon of expectations” of the students, evident in the oral discourses and
written works that, even while exploring the poem only briefly, enabled the
researcher to raise further questions in the classroom later on.
       We also observed interpretive instances through Jauss’s (1994) 2nd and
7th theses, present in the participants’ texts, which at times engage with
contextualizations, according to Cosson (2011). In reality, in the written work, we
did not identify a satisfactory level of understanding of the poem, and responses
were limited to objective and simplistic answers to the questions. However, in oral
discourse, there were discussions and plausible inferences about the text,
revealing a preference for speech over writing. Those who truly engaged and
interacted managed to develop insights and questions that challenged their
preconceptions, their perspectives, and, at the very least, their attitudes regarding
respect for differences in thought and sociocultural conduct— , particularly
regarding the cultural universe of the maracatu de baque solto master.
       Workshop IV: Broadening the Horizon of Expectations (2 40-minute
sessions)
       In this workshop, the aim was to give participants the opportunity to explore
one of the classics of Brazilian literature and broaden their horizons in terms of
reading and poetic language, enabling a new interpretation based on Jauss’s
theories (1994) and Cosson’s contextualizations of the expanded sequence
(2011). Text 04: “Motivo,” by Cecília Meireles (1994).


                                                                                 359

       At this stage of the research, we examined the texts written by the
participants following the reading and discussion of Cecília Meireles’s “Motivo,”
as well as their own compositions resulting from an attempt at poetic, versified
writing—without concern for rhyme, focusing solely on stylistic and poetic
observations.
       The poem represents a reflection on the act of writing poetry and the
importance of being a poet, the social role of the poet, and their contribution to
the world. After reading the poem, the participants wrote in response to the
guiding question “What does it mean to be a poet?” Despite its potential for
interpretation, the poem uses simple language to explore what it means to be a
poet, addressing feelings, life’s problems, and even the element of death.
       It is evident that the texts we observed in previous workshops use
colloquial language, but now the objective of this stage was to make the student
realize the role of the poet and experiment with poetic, lyrical, and versified
language. Therefore, engaging with Cecília’s poem through the reader’s poetic
creativity, provoking and broadening the horizon of expectations, fostering an
interest in stylistics, figures of speech, standard language, and the “beautiful,” as
we will see below. Let us examine the responses to the provocative question:
What does it mean to be a poet?


                Figure 11. Participant 01 – Text produced in the 4th workshop:




                   Source: Research archive. Transcription follows below:


                        “ To be a poet is to be free
                        to be able to write suddenly;
                        Knowing how to transform everything that is sad
                        into happy moments forever .”


       The concept of poetry presented here is linked to the oral tradition of loas
and the repente of sambadas. We also note that poetry transforms feelings and




                                                                                 360

conveys joy. It is clear that poetry is associated solely with beauty, focusing only
on the positive aspects—a narrow view of poetic “beauty.”
       We also observe the structure of the verses that make up the quatrain with
external rhymes, alternating ABAB: Free/repente/sad/always. The lexical choice
reflects an aesthetic concern, highlighting a poetic contextualization, while also
constructing a concept of freedom through the metaphor “Ser Livre” (To Be Free),
which, with the linguistic emphasis of capital letters, underscores a significance
marked not only by the spelling, but above all by its subjective and conceptual
message of the poetic being, for only he [the poet] knows how to transform all
that is sad.
       In the last line, a hallmark of fairy tales points to a notion of intertextuality,
broadening the horizon of expectations regarding the beginning of the research.
The revival of the expression “happily ever after” refers us not only to the poetic
context, particularly the aesthetic experience, but also to prior knowledge,
highlighting Jauss’s (1994) second thesis, in addition to the context of practical
life, the 7th thesis, by attributing to the poet the function of transforming sadness
into   happiness,      thereby    engaging       in    dialogue      with    the    presentifying
contextualization.
       There is a concern on the part of the participant to maintain the thematic
context, focusing not only on answering the questions presented but, above all,
on doing so in a free and creative manner. Let us consider the following
participant:


               Figure 12. Participant 02 – Text produced during the 4th workshop:




                    Source: Research archive. Transcription follows below:

                         “To be a poet is to run like the wind, to fly with the birds without leaving
                         the spot; it is a rain that doesn’t wet, it is crying until you sob
                         Without any feeling, it is a tear that rolls down, a passion
                         that cannot be forgotten, or a love that, when it doesn’t kill
                         drives you mad”




                                                                                                 361

       Here, there is a response in the form of lyrical and melodic creation;
however, the participant showed some difficulty with organization and
versification. The attempt to personify what it means to be a poet became
“incoherent” due to the absence of punctuation; however, when read slowly, it
exhibits coherence and fulfills the proposal to delve into subjectivity and attempt
to describe this complex being. Thus, we have the expression of both poetic and
stylistic contextualization. It is possible to reorganize the text into verses and see
that the draft presented above conceals a sequence of verses with alternating
external rhymes: ABBA, followed by two other verses with paired external rhymes
CC:

                       To be a poet is to run like the wind
                       to fly with the birds without leaving your spot.
                       It is a rain that does not wet it is crying until sobbing
                       Without any feeling.

                       It is a tear that rolls down a passion that is not forgotten
                       or a love that, when it doesn’t kill, drives you mad [emphasis added].


       The thematic contextualization is also visible, as the verses attempt to
describe “being a poet,” seeking to respond to the proposal in a lyrical manner,
in accordance with the perception of reality. Thus, we observe in the verses
above a contextualization that brings the text into the present, as well as a
concern with the experience and aesthetic distance from the source text, pointing
to Jauss’s (1994) 3rd and 4th theses.


           Figure 13. Participant 04 – Textual production from the 4th workshop:




                  Source: Research archive. Transcription follows below:

                       “To be a poet?
                       I dream because there are nights, and our time and
                       a breath. I often find myself in time, and in
                       silence of time I hear the cries of my lament
                       every drop of my tears, and as if it were
                       a wound that never heals from within.”



                                                                                           362

       The participant delved into a reflection on their own existence and the
subjectivity of their anxieties and suffering; however, they strayed from the topic
and, consequently, failed to meet the requirements of the assignment.
Nevertheless, one cannot help but notice the fluency and progression they
managed to bring to the text. Even without the aesthetic organization of verse,
the text points us toward a poetic contextualization, in an attempt to create a
narrative form to describe their dreams, laments, sorrows, and pains.
       The student was more concerned with writing a “poetic essay” rather than
focusing on the prompt and answering the guiding question, which points to a
dynamic of perceiving oneself as a poet. The text is evidence that the participant
felt at ease expressing their feelings, pains, and laments through poetic language.
Even without answering the guiding question “ ” for the creative piece, the
participant demonstrated freedom and affinity with the poetic text.
       We can also observe an attempt at internal rhymes that stand out:
“time/time/lament/within.” Instead of answering what it means to be a poet, the
participant decided to “Be a poet” [emphasis added].


               Figure 14. Participant 05 - Textual production from the 4th workshop:




                     Source: Research archive. Transcription follows below:


                           “Being a poet
                           Being a Poet is a basic thing I think about
                           that is part of our life
                           Being a poet: a moment of a dream of wanting to be
                           and fulfills a long-cherished dream, sharing the
                           for a long time
                           To be a poet: you have to be one because people have
                           a desire to be what they dream of”


       The participant submitted a text that was confusing and quite incoherent,
making it difficult to understand their interpretation. It is evident that the errors in
spelling, punctuation, grammar, and syntax cast doubt on the author’s intentions
in the text.



                                                                                       363

       We perceive an attempt to describe what it means to be a poet through
the repetition of the expression: “Being a poet [...]”; however, there are some
clues suggesting a dream one wishes to put into practice: to be a poet. The
participant exhibits serious writing problems, and thus, difficulties in developing
writing proficiency.
       Despite all the difficulties, the participant sketches out an understanding
that the poet fulfills desires and dreams, as evident in the final section of the text.
Thematic    contextualization      is   observed,      as    well   as       presentificational
contextualization and Jauss’s 7th thesis, because being a poet “is part of our life.”


            Figure 15. Participant 06 - Textual production from the 4th workshop:




                  Source: Research archive. Transcription follows below:


                        “to be a poet is to be joy in
                        to live. To be or not to be the sad things
                        not to exist, to have pleasure and not disturbance
                        in the moments or in time
                        because if I feel bad, I pick myself up
                        I didn’t say if I’ll go
                        I know I’m happy because of the song
                        it has eternal reason I will be silent”


       There is an attempt to find an answer to what it means to be a poet;
however, the text exhibits semantic, lexical, and syntactic confusion—that is,
disjointed sequences of words—and thus a lack of textual coherence. The
organization of the verses does not follow a logical structure, and the statements
are disconnected; however, there is a hint of poetic contextualization. We thus
have an example of a sequence of ideas that are unclear. The participant is
unable to develop their ideas coherently and has serious difficulties with writing,
sentence organization, and the logical development of the text. However, from
their own perspective, they manage to conceptualize what it means to be a poet:
“To be a poet is to be joy as long as one lives,” before getting lost in other attempts
and contradicting themselves immediately afterward: “To be or not to be the sad
things.” Perhaps they wish to assert that the poet is a being that is just as unusual


                                                                                           364

and contradictory in equal measure. In fact, since this is a text about being a poet,
the question of logic is often rendered irrelevant.


              Figure 16. Participant 07 – Text produced in the 4th workshop:




                  Source: Research archive. Transcription follows below:


                       “Being a Poet
                       To be a poet is to breathe even when
                       breathing isn’t breathing is speaking of love and loneliness Poems that
                       touch the heart
                       Yes, we keep writing poems to warm hearts”


       Although rudimentary and with grammatical and spelling errors, the
participant demonstrated logical development of their thinking. They reflected on
what it means to be a poet and expressed it coherently. Furthermore, the
versification issues did not prevent them from clearly expressing their perception
of the poet; their sensitivity reveals a lyrical tone in the exposition of the poetic
process, while simultaneously establishing a poetic and thematic context.
       We also observed the reader’s everyday experience aligning with the
literary text, as stated in Jauss’s (1994) 7th thesis, and a concern with the work’s
aesthetic experience and the meanings of the text for its better perception,
pointing to the 4th and 5th theses of Reception Aesthetics.


           Figure 17. Participant 09 – Textual production from the 4th workshop:




                  Source: Research archive. Transcription follows below:


                       “Being a poet isn’t just about writing.
                       Poetry isn’t. It’s what was
                       Feeling. Being a poet is
                       to lay bare the soul.


                                                                                          365

                        The poet
                        A poet’s verses
                        enchant with every sensation...
                        The poet draws from himself the beating
                        of his soul.”


       The participant seeks a way to express what it means to be a poet. They
offer some statements, such as that being a poet is “[...] to lay bare the soul [...]
The poet draws from within the beating of his soul.” These poetically cohesive
and coherent excerpts stand out for their poetic lyricism; thus, they excel in their
description of the poetic act , for the act of writing poetry is to give a part of oneself
to another. However, a careful observation led us to believe that the passages
are superimposed and do not follow the same linguistic style, as the end of the
text features vocabulary that is unusual for the participant.
       Consequently, we conducted an online search and confirmed that the text
was indeed copied from the website “pensador.com/frase,” as the participant’s
other writings do not exhibit a well-structured poetic style. In a private
conversation, we spoke with the participant, informed them of what had
happened, expressed our disappointment, and asked that this not occur again in
their academic and personal life, as plagiarism is a crime under Article 184 of the
Penal Code. The first part “[...] to bare the soul” was copied from the text by Neusa
Marilda4 and the second part “[...] to pulse from your soul” was taken from the text
“O Poeta” by Mara Hernandes5 , as shown on the website cited above. We
decided to include the text here as a precaution for works of this nature, especially
since the authors are not identified. Participants 03 and 08 did not wish to
participate, so we respected their wishes and rights.


               Figure 18. Participant 10 - Text produced in the 4th workshop:




                   Source: Research archive. Transcription follows below:



4 https://www.pensador.com/frase/MTk0MzAzOQ/
5 https://www.pensador.com/frase/NzIzMDc2/




                                                                                      366

                       “I am sensitive to any suffering. I go from sadness
                       to contentment. I feel sad, I feel
                       happy. I am like a river or an empty well
                       and whether I suffer or smile, it is because I am a poet.
                       Being a poet means taking a slap in the face and not always
                       please everyone...
                       It’s also being silly and writing a bald poem,
                       thinking it’s full-headed.”


       The participant found a lyrical way to express their thoughts on being a
poet. The text features a freer verse form and includes chained rhymes, departing
from the classical aesthetic pattern: suffering/contentment, river/emptiness, and
poet/goofball/bald. They attempted to paraphrase the source text and added
some elements that indicate an effort to meet the prompt’s requirements. They
constructed an imperfect rhyming scheme (assonance/rhyme): “world.../hairy”
and successfully addressed what it means to be a poet, presenting a poetic
contextualization.
       There was a concern with maintaining the theme, as we observed that the
author manages to detach from the source text and express themselves
autonomously, presenting thematic and presentific contextualizations, also
through application in practical life, as in: “Being a poet is putting yourself out
there and not always pleasing everyone...” highlighting Jauss’s (1994) 7th thesis.
       Here we have reached, for now, the conclusion of this phase of our
research. The level of poetic elaboration in Cecília Meireles’s poem aimed to
achieve the objective of breaking with the horizon of expectations, understanding,
and   interpretation    regarding     thematic     contextualization,      presentational
contextualization, poetic and stylistic contextualizations, as well as the
observation of Jauss’s (1994) theses, according to Reception Aesthetics, also
considered in this work, and which, in a certain way, we saw were met by the
participants’ poetic gaze.
       Thematic contextualization, possibly the most basic, came to the fore and
also enabled the presence of presentifying reflections, observed in most of the
texts produced by the students. As for poetic language, we intended for the
participants to construct a text prioritizing literary style, which, in a certain way,
they also did. The reading of the poem “Motivo” highlighted the stylistic distance
from previous poems and the use of standard norms, prompting the participants
to engage in moments of writing and even rewriting their own lyrical texts.



                                                                                     367

      The use of standard language in the poem is evident, with a smooth and
delicate style that facilitates metapoetry—that is, it highlights the poetic moment,
the present moment of life. The subjectivity of the theme was not enough to hinder
a comprehensive understanding, and the participants were able to meet the
expectations of broadening their horizons by breaking away from colloquial and
regional language while reading the literary text. The proposal to broaden the
horizon of expectations arose from the lexical choices and text construction that
present, even if in a basic way, poetic elements through the reading of the poem
“Motivo” by Cecília Meireles. Due to the aesthetic and stylistic approach of the
text, which belongs to the canon of Brazilian literature from the second modernist
phase, the poem challenged the participants, but it did not prevent them from
constructing their own works with poetic elements in a colloquial language
characteristic of their reading experience.


5. FINAL CONSIDERATIONS


      Regarding the workshops conducted, the participants revealed their
personal experiences primarily through contextualizations that brought the
present into focus and thematic explorations. From this perspective, we can
understand that their life experiences and interpretations of the world align with
the narratives of the texts they read. Even with the superficiality of some texts
produced by the participants, revealing great difficulty in developing their
writing—especially in spelling, syntax, and thematic organization—the texts
produced here show us that EJA students can produce texts in which they
express their emotions, values, and desires for a more just and democratic life.
      It is evident from the interpretations presented by the participants that they
faced significant difficulty in organizing their ideas in a cohesive and coherent
manner; however, the vast majority of the texts produced do, to some extent,
address the thematic and presentational contexts and, at times, the poetic
context, as Cosson (2011) explains in the expanded sequence. Thus, from the
perspective of literary development, it was possible to spark a curious interest in
literature and, above all, in the aspects of popular culture found in the loas of
maracatu de baque solto, which resulted in the final production of presentations



                                                                                368

for the TCEF— -Conclusion of Elementary School Projects—whose themes were
developed around the subject of maracatu de baque solto.
       The more erudite language of Cecília Meireles’ text introduced a new
setting and a more canonical language, embodying literary language,
estrangement, lyricism, and poetry for the research participants. The difficulties
in written production point to challenges that need to be overcome. The objective
of the proposal, however, was achieved, as the introduction of literary literacy
occurs through access to the text, by breaking down the barriers of the literary
world, and through the encouragement and promotion of reading and writing that
took place throughout the workshops.
       The greatest challenge, however, does not end here. The continuation of
literary activities, reading practices, and access to popular culture must continue
to encourage adult education students to remain motivated to read literary texts.
Reading develops through practice, dialogue, the exchange of experiences, and
the encouragement that is also the role of the school.
       The findings of this research may help other researchers and teachers to
use the tools proposed here, as well as other sources of popular culture, to
facilitate literary literacy practices.
       The appreciation of local cultures, knowledge, and cultural practices is of
great importance for the restoration of citizenship, empowerment, and a sense of
belonging to the local culture. The search for one’s origins and their significance
helps build a people’s identity. Literature has the social role of documenting these
practices and reflecting customs and cultures in its stories. That is why we often
identify with characters or even with settings presented in texts.
       An educational approach that values popular culture and draws on the
Receptive Method in conjunction with the Literary Literacy methodology offers a
new perspective on a potential methodological path that is relevant to educational
practice, as the development of reading skills requires a structured sequence and
instructional support that facilitate gradual progress.
       Schools must foster an engaging environment, value reading through
human experience, and provide support, guidance, and acceptance of the
interpretations and contextualizations that emerge from this context, particularly
for adult learners. But, of course, this also depends on the student’s willingness.
There must be receptivity and empathy toward the approach and the texts.The


                                                                                369

reader of a literary text must interact with the text, engage with it, discuss it,
devour it, and reflect on it so that both reader and text can build literary literacy—
that is, proficient reading.
       Therefore, one cannot assume that the reader of a literary text is ready or
fully prepared solely through the pedagogical approaches implemented at school;
however, by valuing the student’s potential and believing in the process of literary
literacy, it is possible to expand the reading of literary texts.




                                                                                  370

                                 REFERENCES
AGUIAR, Vera Teixeira de; BORDINI, Maria da Glória. Literatura: A formação do
leitor: Alternativas Metodológicas. Porto Alegre: Mercado Aberto, 1988.

BRASIL. Maracatu Baque Solto. Patrimônio Cultural Imaterial do Brasil. Brasília.
Ministério da Cultura. 2013.

CANDIDO, Antonio. O direito à literatura. In. CANDIDO, Antonio. Vários Escritos. 5.
ed. SãoPaulo, Rio de Janeiro: Ouro sobre azul, 2011. p. 169-191.

COSSON, Rildo. Letramento Literário: Teoria e Prática. São Paulo: Contexto, 2011.

CRESWELL, J. W. Projeto de Pesquisa: Métodos qualitativo, quantitativo e misto.
2. ed. Porto Alegre: Artmed, 2007.

FIGURELLI, Roberto. Hans Robert Jauss e a Estética da Recepção. RevistaLetras,
UFPR, Curitiba, v. 37, p. 265-285, 1988.

FLICK, Uwe. Introdução à pesquisa qualitativa. Tradução de Joice Elias Costa. 3.
ed. Porto Alegre: Artmed, 2009.

FRANTZ, Maria Helena Zancan. A Literatura nas séries iniciais. Petrópolis, RJ:
Vozes, 2011.

JAUSS, Hans Robert. A história da literatura como provocação à teoria literária.
Tradução de Sérgio Tellaroli. São Paulo: Ática, 1994.

MEIRELES, Cecília. Os melhores poemas de Cecília Meireles. 6. ed. São Paulo:
Global, 1994.

MOURA, Adriano Carlos de. O Espetáculo Semiótico do Maracatu Rural da Zona
da Mata Norte Pernambucana. 2016. Tese (Doutorado em Letras) – Programa de
Pós-Graduação em Letras, UFPB, João Pessoa, 2016.

SIBA & BARACHINHA. No Baque Solto somente. 2003. 1CD.

VERGARA, Sylvia Constant. Métodos de coleta de dados no campo. São Paulo:
Atlas, 2009.

ZILBERMAN, Regina. Estética da Recepção e História da Literatura. São Paulo:
Ática, 1989.

ZILBERMAN, Regina (Org.). A produção cultural para a criança. Porto Alegre:
Mercado Aberto, 1982.

ZUMTHOR, Paul. Introdução à poesia oral. Tradução de Jerusa Pires Ferreira, Maria
Lúcia Diniz Pochat e Maria Inês de Almeida. Belo Horizonte: Editora UFMG, 2010.




                                                                                   371

CHAPTER 21
 ACTIVE METHODOLOGIES IN
 UNDERGRADUATE HEALTH
 EDUCATION WITH A FOCUS ON
 THE TEACHING OF EPIDEMIOLOGY


Íris Nascimento Freitas
Bachelor of Science in Nursing
Universidade Estadual de Feira de Santana (UEFS)
E-mail: irisnfreitas@gmail.com

Felipe Souza Dreger Nery
Doctor in Epidemiology
Universidade Estadual de Feira de Santana (UEFS)
E-mail: fsdnery@uefs.br

Mona Gizelle Dreger Nery
Doctor in Public Health
Universidade Estadual de Feira de Santana (UEFS)
E-mail: monagdreger@gmail.com

Anna Carolina Souza Silva
Bachelor of Science in Nursing
Universidade Estadual de Feira de Santana (UEFS)
E-mail: souza2001anna@gmail.com


ABSTRACT: The transformation of higher education in health demands
strategies that promote student autonomy and critical thinking, and although
active methodologies are recognized as strategic tools, their application in
complex disciplines such as Epidemiology remains incipient. This study aimed to
map and critically analyze the scientific production between 2020 and 2025 on
active methodologies in undergraduate health education, with a specific focus on
the teaching of Epidemiology. This is an integrative review according to
Whittemore and Knafl, conducted on the CAPES Platform (SciELO, PubMed,
LILACS, ERIC). Of the initial search of 676 records, 97 met the eligibility criteria.
The results revealed a predominance of qualitative research (68.5%) and
experience reports, concentrated in Medicine (37.1%) and Nursing (33%). The
most frequent strategies were Gamification (39.2%), ICTs (30.9%), and
Simulation (18.6%), with recurring methodological combinations. The main
associated results included engagement (Gamification, 84%), critical reasoning
(Clinical Case, 94%), and interactivity (ICTs, 80%). Epidemiology showed the
lowest representation (4.1%), highlighting underutilization of active strategies,
especially gamification. It is concluded that active methodologies demonstrate


                                                                                 372

consistent benefits for health education, but a paradox persists between their
potential and marginal application in the teaching of Epidemiology. This gap
demands urgent investments in research and specific pedagogical development
for this discipline.

KEYWORDS: active methodologies, health education, epidemiology, under-
graduate studies.

RESUMO: A transformação do ensino superior em saúde demanda estratégias
que promovam autonomia e criticidade discente, e embora as metodologias
ativas sejam reconhecidas como ferramentas estratégicas, sua aplicação em
disciplinas complexas como a Epidemiologia permanece incipiente. Este estudo
teve como objetivo mapear e analisar criticamente a produção científica entre
2020 e 2025 sobre metodologias ativas na graduação em saúde, com recorte
específico para o ensino de Epidemiologia. Trata-se de uma revisão integrativa
conforme Whittemore e Knafl, conduzida na Plataforma CAPES (SciELO,
PubMed, LILACS, ERIC). Da busca inicial de 676 registros, 97 atenderam aos
critérios de elegibilidade. Os resultados revelaram predominância de pesquisas
qualitativas (68,5%) e relatos de experiência, concentrados em Medicina (37,1%)
e Enfermagem (33%). As estratégias mais frequentes foram Gamificação
(39,2%), TICs (30,9%) e Simulação (18,6%), com combinações metodológicas
recorrentes. Os principais resultados associados incluíram engajamento
(Gamificação, 84%), raciocínio crítico (Caso Clínico, 94%) e interatividade (TICs,
80%). A Epidemiologia apresentou a menor representatividade (4,1%),
evidenciando subutilização de estratégias ativas, especialmente gamificação.
Conclui-se que as metodologias ativas demonstram benefícios consistentes para
o ensino em saúde, porém persiste um paradoxo entre seu potencial e a
aplicação marginal no ensino de Epidemiologia. Tal lacuna demanda
investimentos urgentes em pesquisa e desenvolvimento pedagógico específico
para esta disciplina

PALAVRAS-CHAVE: metodologias ativas, ensino em saúde, epidemiologia,
graduação.




                                                                              373

1. INTRODUCTION


       Epidemiology involves the study of factors that impact the health-disease
process in individuals and populations, encompassing concepts such as
morbidity, mortality, incidence, and life expectancy (Souza et al., 2010). It is a
field that integrates contributions from statistics, medicine, and public health,
without dissociating itself from the critical understanding provided by the
humanities      (Barata,   1997).   Epidemiology    is   considered    essential    in
undergraduate health programs, as it enables the identification of disease
mechanisms, the development of health profiles, and the guidance of priority
interventions (Souza et al., 2010). When well- , it can be applied to identifying
needs, risks, and priorities in health services, thereby facilitating the optimization
of resources.
       In recent years, epidemiology has gained prominence due to the COVID-
19 pandemic, a context in which much of the scientific evidence underpinning
health recommendations stemmed from epidemiological studies (Netto; Corrêa,
2020). However, the multifaceted nature of the discipline poses challenges to its
teaching, especially given the growing complexity of the content and the need to
formulate cohesive methodologies (Cauduro; Kuchenbecher, 2011). Added to
this is the fact that epidemiology involves mathematical knowledge, an area often
associated with difficulties for undergraduate students (Vilaça et al., 2020). In this
context, using the difficulties in teaching through the traditional method as a
premise, we sought to investigate the advantages associated with the application
of active methodologies, with a focus on the Epidemiology component, through
an integrative literature review.


2. THEORETICAL FRAMEWORK


       Higher education institutions play a fundamental role in training
professionals capable of meeting the demands of the labor market, requiring
continuous adjustments to teaching-learning processes (Lacerda; Machado,
2024). In the face of social transformations, traditional teaching approaches have
proven insufficient, making a rethinking of higher education necessary (Leão,
1999). A central aspect is the promotion of student autonomy, linked to the


                                                                                   374

renewal of the student profile in the face of new technologies (Torres; Hilu;
Siqueira, 2015). This connection between learning and autonomous development
highlights that the educational process fulfills a social and political duty by
promoting the exercise of citizenship (Dewey, 2007).
       In this context, active methodologies emerge as spaces that allow students
to develop self-governance, autonomy, and reflective processes (Oliveira, 2019).
The literature legitimizes them as relevant mechanisms for stimulating critical
thinking, problem-solving skills, and the alignment between theory and everyday
reality (Oliveira, 2019).


2.1 THE USE OF ACTIVE METHODOLOGIES IN HEALTH COURSES


       The application of active methodologies in formal education in Brazil
intensified starting in the 2000s with the implementation of the National
Curriculum Guidelines for undergraduate health programs, resulting in initiatives
such as the Aprender SUS Program and the National Policy on Continuing
Education (Prado; Velho, 2012).
       A variety of successful experiences could then be observed. In the
Master’s in Nursing program at UFSC (2012), the Maguerez Arc proved effective
in stimulating curiosity and promoting action-reflection-action (Prado; Velho,
2012). In the Medicine program at Universidade Vila Velha (2015), the
combination of the Maguerez Arc with PBL sparked students’ interest in social
awareness (Dalla; Moura; Bergamaschi, 2015). At UFRJ, 78% of students
perceived themselves as active learners, and 92% felt better prepared to work in
the public health system (Gomes et al., 2010). In the Dentistry classes at UEPB,
the Critical-Reflective Portfolio and ICTs fostered a critical-reflective profile (Reul
et al., 2016). The use of gamification in the Bioethics component, through Kahoot,
increased motivation in dense content (Maranhão; Reis, 2019). These
experiences demonstrate the success of active methodologies in promoting
autonomy, active participation, and critical thinking.




                                                                                   375

2.2 THE TEACHING OF EPIDEMIOLOGY IN UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION


         The teaching of epidemiology in Brazil began in the 1920s, closely linked
to Public Health, incorporating social sciences and statistical techniques (Barata,
1997). The training was guided by social epidemiology, based on the humanities,
addressing social determinants of the health-disease process (Barata, 1997).
         Currently, the complexity of this component has increased, presenting
challenges to faculty in formulating cohesive methodologies (Cauduro;
Kuchenbecher, 2011). Authors suggest that small-group approaches, using
collaborative platforms, can be valuable for deepening knowledge (Cauduro;
Kuchenbecher, 2011). Playful activities foster the development of critical thinking
skills and teamwork (Silva; Oliveira; Silva, 2018).
         In the face of social transformations, higher education must adapt to
enable students to achieve the expected competencies (Lacerda; Machado,
2024). Active methodologies emerge as strategies that foster the development of
autonomy, critical-social reflection, and student agency (Leão, 1999; Oliveira,
2019).


3. METHODOLOGY


         This is an integrative literature review conducted on the CAPES Journal
Platform (SciELO, PubMed, LILACS, and ERIC databases), following the five
steps outlined by Whittemore and Knafl (2005). The guiding question was
structured based on the PICo framework (Cochrane, 2023): Population –
undergraduate health students; Interest – application of active methodologies;
Context – curricular components in Brazil between 2020 and 2025. The following
Boolean combinations were used: (“Active methodologies”) AND (“Health
undergraduate programs”) and (“Active methodologies”) AND (“Teaching of
epidemiology”), with filters for empirical articles, case studies, and experience
reports in Portuguese, English, and Spanish, with open access.
         Initially, 676 articles were identified; 53 duplicates were removed. During
the screening of titles and abstracts, conducted by two independent reviewers,
354 studies were excluded for being outside the scope. Of the 269 articles
selected for full-text review, the following exclusion criteria were applied: not


                                                                                376

focusing on undergraduate health students (47), being a systematic review or
meta-analysis (43), and restricted access (21). Ultimately, 97 studies comprised
the sample.
       The data were then organized into spreadsheets, from which descriptive
variables (author, year, country, methodological design) and thematic variables
(type of active methodology, curricular component, learning outcomes) were
extracted. The analysis combined quantitative (frequencies and correlations) and
qualitative (categorical synthesis of benefits, challenges, and emerging patterns)
approaches. The results were organized into a PRISMA® flowchart, comparative
tables, and a critical synthesis.


                 Figure 1. PRISMA flowchart used in the integrative review




                  Source: Adapted and translated from PRISMA (2020).




                                                                              377

4. RESULTS AND DISCUSSION


       The temporal distribution of publications reveals progressive growth
between 2020 and 2025, peaking in 2023–2024. Of the 97 articles analyzed,
97.9% are from Brazil. The qualitative approach predominates (68.5%), followed
by action research (13.7%). Regarding undergraduate fields, Medicine (37.1%)
and Nursing (33%) are the most represented, while Speech-Language Pathology
(4.1%) and Occupational Therapy (3.1%) have the lowest frequencies. In terms
of fields of knowledge, Public Health and Management (14.4%) leads, with a
focus on subfields such as health policies and the SUS, followed by
Morphofunctional Sciences (13.4%) and Nursing Practices (12.4%).


  Table 1. Distribution of studies by location, nature/type, and undergraduate field, published
                                    between 2020 and 2025.
                        VARIABLES                                  n                        %
           Study location
                          National                                95                       97.9
                        International                             02                        2.1

           VARIABLES                                       n                               %
           Distribution of Studies by Methodological Type
                  Qualitative Research                    50                              68.5
                     Action Research                      10                              13.7
                    Exploratory study                     0.5                              6.8
                Design Science Research                   02                               2.7
                    Longitudinal study                    02                               2.7
                   Experimental study                     02                               2.7
                          Other                           02                               2.7

           Distribution by Undergraduate Program
                        Medicine                           36                             37.1
                         Nursing                           32                              33
                        Dentistry                          14                             14.4
                       Pharmacy                            10                             10.3
                  Unspecified degrees                      08                              8.2
                       Physiology                          08                              8.2
                        Nutrition                          08                              8.2
              Speech-Language Pathology                    04                              4.1
                  Occupational Therapy                     03                              3.1
           Source: CAPES Journals (2020–2025). Author’s own compilation (2025).




                                                                                               378

  Table 2. Distribution of studies by fields and subfields of knowledge addressed using active
                       methodologies, published between 2020 and 2025.
     Category                              Typical subfields                            %
 Public Health and      Public Health, Planning, Management, Policies, Health
                                                                                     14.4%
   Management                                Promotion, SUS
 Morphofunctional Anatomy, Physiology, Histology, Genetics, Biochemistry,
                                                                                     13.4%
     Sciences                                  Cell Biology
                        Nursing, SAE, Semiology, Palliative Care, Urgent and
 Nursing Practices                                                                   12.4%
                                            Emergency Care
  Education and       Health Education, Humanities, Training, Capacity Building,
                                                                                     11.3%
    Humanities                                  Bioethics
 Clinical Medicine
                                 Diseases, Pathology, Clinical Medicine               9.3%
  and Pathology
Pharmacology and
                                 Pharmacology, Toxicology, Therapies                  8.2%
   Therapeutics
     Dentistry         Restorative Dentistry, Pediatric Dentistry, Prosthodontics     7.2%
Biological Sciences             Parasitology, Immunology, Microbiology                6.2%
   Public Health                              Epidemiology                            4.1%
      Nutrition             Diet Therapy, Gastronomy, Dietetic Techniques             4.1%
       Other                Psychology, Arts, Multidisciplinary Interventions         8.2%
              Source: CAPES Journals (2020–2025). Author’s own analysis (2025).


       Among active methodologies, gamification (39.2%) and ICTs (30.9%) are
the most widely used, with frequent combinations: gamification with ICTs (12
instances), ICTs with the flipped classroom (10), clinical case studies with
simulation (9), and problem-solving with the Maguerez Arc (8). Regarding the
associated outcomes, the following stand out: engagement for gamification (84%
of the studies), critical thinking for clinical cases (94%), interactivity for ICTs
(80%), and contextualized reflection for problem-based learning (93%).
Methodologies such as Maguerez’s Arc, conversation circles, and dialogic
classes show a 100% association with their main outcomes.


     Table 3. Distribution of studies according to active methodologies used and frequent
                combinations among them, published between 2020 and 2025.
 Active methodology                       %                      Frequent combinations
       Gamification                    39.2%               ICT (12x), Simulation (8x), PBL (6x)
           ICT                         30.9%          Flipped Classroom (10x), Gamification (12x)
        Simulation                     18.6%           Clinical Case (9x), Material Production (5x)
      Clinical Case                    16.5%         Simulation (9x), Problem-Based Learning (6x)
Problem-Based Learning                 15.5%                   Maguerez Arc (8x), PBL (5x)
  Material Production                  15.5%                    ICTs (9x), Gamification (4x)
           PBL                         15.5%             ICT (7x), Problem-Based Learning (5x)
           ABP                         14.4%             Problem-based learning (6x), TBL (3x)
   Flipped Classroom                   13.4%                  ICTs (10x), Concept Map (4x)
      Concept Map                      11.3%                       ICTs (5x), PBL (3x)
           TBL                          9.3%                    Gamification (3x), PBL (2x)
    Group dynamics                      7.2%               Peer Instruction (2x), Seminars (3x)
       Role-playing                     6.1%            Clinical Case (4x), Artistic Production (2x)



                                                                                              379

 Active methodology                  %                    Frequent combinations
     Maguerez Arc                  6.2%           Problem-Based Learning (8x), PBL (2x)
 Roundtable Discussion             5.1%            ICTs (2x), Problem-based learning (2x)
 Dialogue-based lesson             5.1%                Portfolio (2x), Concept Map (1x)
      Use of films                 5.1%                   Simulation (3x), ICTs (1x)
         Portfolio                 5.1%              Material Production (3x), ICTs (1x)
   Artistic production             4.1%             Performances (2x), Gamification (1x)
           Source: CAPES Journals (2020–2025). Author’s own compilation (2025).


     Table 4. Distribution of studies according to results most associated with each active
                        methodology, published between 2020 and 2025
          Methodology                       Most frequently reported result               %
           Gamification                                 Engagement                       84%
                ICTs                             Interactivity/Accessibility             80%
            Simulation                              Clinical Reasoning                   89%
          Clinical Case                               Critical Thinking                  94%
                PBL                                      Teamwork                        87%
         Problem-Solving                        Contextualized Reflection                93%
       Material Production                        Creativity/Collaboration               80%
       Flipped Classroom                               Self-Discipline                   85%
          Concept Map                            Knowledge Organization                  82%
                 TBL                       Cooperation/Collective Performance            78%
        Group Dynamics                   Socialization/Exchange of Experiences           86%
          Maguerez Arc                               Reflection-Action                  100%
           Role-playing                   Awareness-Raising/Contextualization            83%
        Discussion Circle                              Critical Debate                  100%
       Dialog-Based Class                           Reflective Dialogue                 100%
                Films                         Awareness-Raising/Discussion              100%
              Portfolio                  Self-reflection/Continuous Assessment           80%
        Artistic Production                        Creativity/Expression                100%
          Source: CAPES Journals (2020–2025). Author’s own compilation (2025).


       The results show a predominance of qualitative research, with a lower
frequency of experimental or longitudinal studies, indicating that most of the
evidence derives from practical applications in real classroom contexts (Ferreira;
Santos, 2021). The scarcity of controlled studies limits the ability to establish
direct causal relationships between methodologies and learning outcomes
(Gomes, 2001). A significant concentration of studies is observed in Medicine and
Nursing, while Speech-Language Pathology and Occupational Therapy are less
represented. Regarding complementary approaches, a frequent combination was
observed between Gamification and ICTs and between Clinical Case and
Simulation, indicating recurring practices of integration between active strategies
(Sandmann et al., 2023).
       Regarding        curricular     components,         Public      Health/SUS         and
Morphofunctional Sciences are the most studied categories, while Epidemiology


                                                                                           380

appears with significantly lower frequency (4.1%). There is a notable absence of
studies specifically testing gamification for epidemiology, although articles on
gamification    report   improved    content    retention—a     relevant   skill   for
epidemiological calculations (Vilaça et al., 2020). The data reveal a contradiction
between the frequency of gamification and its underutilization in epidemiology
education, given its potential for engagement and content retention (Tolomei,
2017).


4.1 MOST COMMON STRATEGIES


4.1.1 Gamification


         The 38 articles analyzed demonstrate that gamification facilitates
knowledge assimilation and makes the educational dynamic more participatory
(Monteiro et al., 2020). This approach connects students’ technological world to
pedagogical objectives, allowing for the exploration of different learning profiles
(Rocha et al., 2021; Silva et al., 2022). It provides fun and relaxation, stimulating
creativity and interaction (Botelho et al., 2023). Diversifying assessment methods
increases motivation and engagement (Oliveira et al., 2023). Playful teaching has
proven effective in understanding and reviewing content (Costa et al., 2020;
Faustino et al., 2020), encouraging teamwork (Lima et al., 2024; Mendes et al.,
2024). In Biochemistry, educational games have improved knowledge acquisition
and made content more accessible (Alcantara et al., 2022; Marinho et al., 2023),
in addition to developing interpersonal skills (Laguna; Marques, 2022).
         The effectiveness of games depends on a design tailored to disciplinary
objectives (Singh et al., 2024) and the quality of gameplay (Silva et al., 2022).
"Serious games" are relevant in healthcare because they allow for the safe
simulation of procedures (Aquino et al., 2022). However, implementation faces
challenges: it is essential to establish clear goals (Marcuzzo et al., 2023); many
faculty members lack adequate training (Monteiro et al., 2020); a lack of
technological resources can be limiting (Godoy et al., 2020); and ensuring
equitable engagement requires pedagogical sensitivity (Lima et al., 2024;
Marinho et al., 2023).



                                                                                   381

4.1.2 Information and Communication Technologies (ICTs)


         The integration of ICTs promotes interactivity, personalized teaching, and
skills development (Silva et al., 2022; Fontana et al., 2020). Proximity to
technological devices enhances technical and scientific skills (Lopes; Lenz,
2023), which is crucial in contexts where practice requires familiarity with digital
tools (Feitosa et al., 2022). New generations find technology to be a natural
language (Mendes et al., 2024). ICTs foster skills in teachers and students
(Ribeiro; Abbade, 2024). Examples include linking content to pop culture
(Mendonça et al., 2023). The National Curriculum Guidelines highlight the
importance of technological integration (Damázio et al., 2022). Modalities such
as synchronous and asynchronous remote learning have tended to remain
(Fleury; Possolli, 2022; Maia et al., 2020).
         Teachers’ technological training is crucial (Marcuzzo et al., 2023).
Audiovisual resources aid in knowledge construction (Almeida et al., 2024;
Cunha et al., 2020). Key challenges include: adapting assessment processes
(Botelho et al., 2023), students’ difficulty in stepping outside their comfort zone
(Cavalcante et al., 2023), and limitations in teacher qualifications (Celeste;
Dourado, 2021). Addressing these challenges depends on the institution’s role in
promoting courses on active methodologies (Silva; Irineu, 2021).


4.1.3 Simulation


         Simulation promotes the integration of theory and practice in a safe
manner (Fernandes et al., 2021), preparing students for ethical dilemmas (Ferraz
et al., 2021). Maestri et al. (2020) warn of a dissonance between innovative
discourse and practice that remains centered on lecture-based classes. When
well-structured, it allows for the practice of clinical reasoning (Ximenes et al.,
2020).
         Simulating cases involving bioethical dilemmas develops skills for
multiprofessional decision-making (Ferraz et al., 2021). Regarding emotional
aspects, it can generate anxiety (Ferraz et al., 2021). The role of the tutor- r is
crucial for creating a safe environment (Godoy et al., 2020), with structured
feedback being an essential step (Santana et al., 2023). It has proven effective


                                                                                382

in developing technical and non-technical skills (Silva et al., 2023). It allows for
practice in Primary Care without exposing patients to risks (Gaspar et al., 2023).
Limitations include: challenges in the teaching transition (Maestri et al., 2020),
difficulty in maintaining interest (Gaspar et al., 2023), low realism of scenarios
(Godoy et al., 2020), and increased planning time (Gaspar et al., 2023).


4.2 EPIDEMIOLOGY AND ACTIVE METHODOLOGIES


      Epidemiology     education    has    incorporated    active   methodologies,
especially during emergency remote learning (Ries et al., 2023). Gamification
emerges as a promising strategy (Silva et al., 2023). Successful experiences
have combined networked technologies and active methodologies, enabling
student-centered learning (Ries et al., 2025), which requires faculty professional
development (Lopes; Lenz, 2023).
      The pandemic has accelerated the adoption of these methodologies,
which draw on real-world problems (Aquino et al., 2022). Group dynamics and
problem-based scenarios help students engage with the realities of the SUS
(Maia et al., 2020). Educational games prove valuable, stimulating interactive
learning (Rodrigues et al., 2020). Gamification allows for the simulation of real-
world situations, facilitating the understanding of complex concepts, provided it is
aligned with pedagogical objectives (Maia et al., 2020; Ries et al., 2023).
Challenges include teachers’ technological fluency (Ries et al., 2023) and striking
a balance between competition and collaboration (Rodrigues et al., 2020). The
integration of active methodologies with epidemiology promotes the acquisition
of theoretical knowledge and the development of practical skills (Cauduro;
Kuchenbecher, 2011).


4.3 PEDAGOGICAL IMPACTS


      Active methodologies promote a paradigm shift, breaking away from the
traditional teacher-centered model and establishing the student as the
protagonist (Cunha et al., 2020). They foster a problem-based construction of
knowledge, developing higher-order cognitive skills (Neto et al., 2022). Group
dynamics develop argumentation and the organization of thought (Laguna;


                                                                                383

Marques, 2022). They prove effective in promoting critical thinking and socio-
emotional skills (Passos et al., 2024), stimulating creativity and collaboration
(Araujo et al., 2024). Democratic collectives are formed (Souza; Duque, 2023).
         In healthcare, they foster a humanistic, critical, and reflective mindset
(Delfino; Caprara, 2020), moving beyond rote memorization. Dialogic practices
are more effective in knowledge retention (Santos; Santos, 2021). Student
agency promotes self-directed learning (Marques, 2023; Leitão et al., 2023).
However, implementation requires curricular changes (Silva et al., 2024) and
faculty adaptation to overcome resistance (Cardoso et al., 2021; Fontana et al.,
2020).


5. CONCLUSION


         This study systematized evidence on the use of active methodologies in
health undergraduate programs, with a focus on the teaching of Epidemiology.
The results show a concentration of studies in Nursing and Medicine, with
gamification, ICTs, and simulation being the most commonly used strategies,
offering multiple benefits for the teaching-learning process. However, few studies
were found describing the use of active methodologies in the teaching of
Epidemiology, especially gamification. The studies point to positive impacts on
student education, and despite the challenges, a growing trend in publications is
observed. The inherent weaknesses of integrative reviews, such as publication
bias and subjectivity in analysis, are acknowledged, and peer review was adopted
to mitigate these limitations.




                                                                              384

                                  REFERENCES
ALMEIDA, W. S. de, MELO, J. de S. V., MELO, I. de S. V., BORGES, P. R.,
PAULINO,D.B. "Produções Cinematográficas como recurso para educação médica:
Aplicando econtextualizando conceitos em “A Garota Dinamarquesa””, Revista de
Atenção à Saúde, v. 22, p. e20249591–e20249591, 18 dez. 2024. DOI:
10.13037/ras.vol22.e20249591.

AQUINO, B. P., LIMA, A. A., NOBRE, M. S. C., ALMEIDA, W. G. M., BARROS, E.M.
de,MEDEIROS, M. S. "Desenvolvimento de aplicativo móvel com gamificação como
metodologia de ensino em infectologia para graduandos de medicina", Research,
Society and Development, v. 11, n. 17, p. e81111738923–e81111738923, 21 dez.
2022. DOI:10.33448/rsd-v11i17.38923.

ARAUJO, V. A. de F., UCHÔA-FIGUEIREDO, L. da R., CHRIGUER, R. S. "As
metodologias de aprendizagem ativas e participativas no estágio supervisionado de
um curso de fonoaudiologia: uma análise do processo de ensino-aprendizagem",
Caderno Pedagógico, v. 21, n. 5, p. e3930–e3930, 27 maio 2024. DOI:
10.54033/cadpedv21n5-201.

BARATA, R. B. Tendências no ensino da epidemiologia no Brasil. Revista
Panamericana de Salud Pública, v. 2, n. 5, p. 334–341, 1997.

BOTELHO, L., ANDRADE, K. "Saint Seya Hematológico: Elevando o cosmo no ensino
da hematologia", Hematology, Transfusion and Cell Therapy, HEMO 2023. v. 45, p.
S958–S959, 1 out. 2023. DOI: 10.1016/j.htct.2023.09.1722.

CAUDURO, L. L. N. "É possível ensinar epidemiologia? Promovendo o raciocínio
epidemiológico em sala de aula", Accepted: 2013-01-22T12:11:27Z, 2011.

CAVALCANTE, B. B. C., BARRETO, E. A., AVENA, K. de M., BRITO, A.P.A., SOUSA,
G.V. "Currículos inovadores na formação médica: a percepção dos estudantes sobre
metodologias ativas de ensino-aprendizagem", Saúde em Redes, v. 9, n. 2, p. 4141–
4141, jul. 2023. DOI: 10.18310/2446-4813.2023v9n2.4141.

CELESTE, L. E. N., DOURADO, J. "Preceptoria de enfermagem: uso de metodologias
ativas durante estágio supervisionado", Revista Recien - Revista Científica de
Enfermagem, v.11, n. 34, p. 259–265, 27 jun. 2021. DOI:
10.24276/rrecien2021.11.34.259-265.

COCHRANE. Manual Cochrane de Revisões Sistemáticas de Intervenções.
Versão 6.4. Cochrane, 2023.

COSTA-LOPES, V. da, CUNHA, M. V. da. "John Dewey: a busca por uma pedagogia
retórica", Educação e Pesquisa, v. 46, p. 1–19, 3 jul. 2020. DOI: 10.1590/S1678-
4634202046218071. .

CUNHA, M. S., CAMPOS, H. M. N., MATTOS, M. P. "A formação construtivista de
educandos de farmácia na gestão do SUS: Abordagens e contribuições para
ambientes virtuais de aprendizagem", Revista Baiana de Saúde Pública, v. 43, n. 1,
p. 288–300, 2019. DOI:10.22278/2318-2660.2019.v43.n1.a3030. .

DALLA, M. D. B.; MOURA, G. A. G. DE; BERGAMASCHI, M. S. Metodologias ativas:
um relato de experiência de estudantes de graduação em medicina da Universidade
Vila Velha na disciplina de Interação Comunitária. Revista Brasileira de Medicina de
Família e Comunidade, v. 10, n. 34, p. 1–6, 31 mar. 2015.


                                                                                    385

DAMÁZIO, L. C. M., RESENDE, V. S., VILAR, M. J. P. "Análise situacional quanto à
utilização de metodologias ativas de ensino em um curso de medicina de uma
instituição pública", Brazilian Journal of Development, v. 8, n. 2, p. 11536–1545, 15
fev. 2022. DOI: 10.34117/bjdv8n2-204. .

DELFINO, A. dos S., CAPRARA, A. "Percepção dos estudantes acerca da utilização
de metodologias ativas na disciplina de Ciências Sociais e Saúde", Revista da
Faculdade de Ciências Médicas de Sorocaba, v. 22, n. 2, p. 88–90, 2020. DOI:
10.23925/1984-4840.2020v22i2a11.

FAUSTINO, V. L., SANTOS, G. B. dos, AGUIAR, P. M. "É brincando que se aprende!
Uso de jogos educativos como estratégia na construção do conhecimento em
Assistência Farmacêutica", Interface - Comunicação, Saúde, Educação, v. 26, p.
e210312, 18 fev. 2022. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1590/interface.210312.

FEITOSA, R. R., BATISTA, J. de S., SOUZA, W. B. A. de, FARIAS, G. D., BESERRA,
L.R.M., CAVALCANTI, A.M., ARAÚJO, E.G.O., BONAN, P.R.F., PIAGGE, C.S.L.,
MÉLO, C.B. "Metodologias ativas no ensino de Teleodontologia: um relato de
experiência", Research, Society and Development, v. 11, n. 12, p. e19111234049–
e19111234049, 5 set. 2022. DOI: 10.33448/rsd-v11i12.34049.

FERNANDES, E. C. C., PANTA, C. A. de O., BARROS, M. M. A. "Aproximações
acadêmicas sobre a temática violência contra a mulher na perspectiva do futuro
profissional enfermeiro", Revista Eletrônica Acervo Saúde, v. 13, n. 7, p. e8106, 3
jul. 2021. DOI:10.25248/reas.e8106.2021.

FERRAZ, M. O. A., BIONDO, C. S., ROSA, R. S., YARID, S.D. "Metodologias ativas no
ensino da bioética nos cursos de graduação em saúde", Revista de Salud Pública, v.
23, n. 4, p. 1–6, 1 jul. 2021. DOI: 10.15446/rsap.v23n4.77408.

FERREIRA, R. K. A., SANTOS, E. da S. "Breves considerações sobre a
documentação pedagógica", Research, Society and Development, v. 10, n. 9, p.
e15010917782– e15010917782, 23 jul. 2021. DOI: 10.33448/rsd-v10i9.17782.

FLEURY, P. F., POSSOLLI, G. E. "Prática docente e o uso das tecnologias de
informação e comunicação no ensino remoto na educação superior em humanidades e
saúde", Brazilian Journal of Development, v. 8, n. 1, p. 7442–7451, 27 jan. 2022.
DOI: 10.34117/bjdv8n1-501. .

FONTANA, R. T., SILVA, A. P. da, ROCHA, B. da S. N., GARLET, B., CIEPIELEWSKI,
C.M, PEREIRA, C.M.B., ADRIANO, C., KASSBURG, H.R., SILVA, J.R. da, CONTRI,
J.M., TONIOLO, J.P., PAULUS, K.L.L., ZIMPEL, L.C., WAMMES, L.W., RAMOS,
L.G.A., SILVA, L.G. "Educação em saúde digital: uma experiência on line", Research,
Society and Development, v. 9, n. 9, p. e532997460–e532997460, 29 ago. 2020.
DOI:10.33448/rsd-v9i9.7460.

GASPAR, A. A. C. dos S., IWAMOTO, M. A., KAWATA, L. S., MASELLA, T.A.C.
"Simulação no processo de ensino-aprendizagem em atenção primária no curso de
enfermagem", Revista Interdisciplinar de Saúde e Educação, v. 4, n. 1, p. 159–173,
28 jul. 2023. DOI: 10.56344/2675-4827.v4n1a2023.10.

GODOY, L. B. de, MORAIS, S. M., LIMA, R. S., GOMES, R.G, SANCHES, R.S.,
OLIVEIRA, I.F. de, FAVA, S.M.C.L. "Percepção dos graduandos de enfermagem sobre
práticas simuladas em emergência", Enfermagem Brasil, v. 19, n. 2, p. 123–129, 9
jun. 2020. DOI: 10.33233/eb.v19i2.3083.



                                                                                   386

GOMES, A. A. Considerações sobre a pesquisa científica: Em busca de caminhos
para a pesquisa científica. Intertemas, v. 5, p. 61-81, nov. 2001.

LACERDA, F. C. B.; SANTOS, L. M. DOS. Integralidade na formação do ensino
superior: metodologias ativas de aprendizagem. Revista da Avaliação da Educação
Superior (Campinas), v. 23, p. 611–627, dez. 2018.

LAGUNA, G. G. de C., MARQUES, C. R. "Ensino de genética humana: novas
abordagens para sensibilização de estudantes no contexto das síndromes genéticas",
Genética na Escola, v. 17, n. 1, p. 53–60, 16 mar. 2022. DOI: 10.55838/1980-
3540.ge.2022.422.

LEÃO, D. M. M. "Paradigmas Contemporâneos de Educação: Escola Tradicional e
Escola Construtivista", Cadernos de Pesquisa, p. 187–206, jul. 1999. DOI:
10.1590/S0100-15741999000200008.

LEITÃO, L. P. C., FERRAZ, M. C. C. S., RANKE, B. S., COSTA, A.D., QUEVEDO, P.
de S., SIANI, S.R., JEDLICKA, L.D.L. "Monitoria virtual: metodologias ativas no
período emergencial no curso de saúde coletiva, construindo uma cartilha",
Cuadernos de Educação y Desarrollo, v. 15, n. 6, p. 4855–4867, 19 jul. 2023. DOI:
10.55905/cuadv15n6-001. .

LIMA, A. de, AZEVEDO, M. A. R. de. "Metodologia Ativa e avaliação processual–
Construções na área da saúde", Revista Foco, v. 16, n. 4, p. e1501–e1501, 5 abr.
2023. DOI:10.54751/revistafoco.v16n4-004.

LIMA, W. P., RODRIGUES, C. I. R., ROCHA, J. A. de A. L., AMORIM, C.R.N.
"Maratona das Biomoléculas: um jogo dinâmico para explorar a Bioquímica", Revista
de Ensino de Bioquímica, v. 22, n. 2, p. 92–107, 31 dez. 2024. DOI:
10.16923/reb.v22i2.1072.

LOPES, Í. de O., LENZ, C. A. "Aplicação de metodologias ativas e tecnologia como
intervenção pedagógica no processo de ensino-aprendizagem em uma universidade
do Vale do Rio dos Sinos/RS", Research, Society and Development, v. 12, n. 3, p.
e20512339901– e20512339901, 10 mar. 2023. DOI: 10.33448/rsd-v12i3.39901.

MAESTRI, E., MARTINI, J. G., LAZZARI, D. D., BITENCOURT, J.V.O., LIMA, J.F.,
LIMA, J.B.S., KWIATKOWISKI, H.S. "Estratégias de ensino na graduação em
enfermagem: abordagem das doenças crônicas não transmissíveis", Ciência,
Cuidado e Saúde, v. 19, 2 ago. 2020. DOI: 10.4025/ciencuidsaude.v19i0.50388.
Disponível em:
https://periodicos.uem.br/ojs/index.php/CiencCuidSaude/article/view/50388. Acesso
em: 16 maio 2025.

MAIA, I. C. V. de L., PEIXOTO, M. das G. B., MEDEIROS, D. da S., ARRUDA,
G.M.M.S., NETO, F.C.A., SANTOS, E.R. "Aprendizagem ativa e híbrida na formação
médica sobre Políticas Públicas de Saúde", Revista Brasileira de Educação e
Saúde, v. 10, n. 4, p. 15–21,14 nov. 2020. DOI: 10.18378/rebes.v10i4.8084.

MAIA, I. C. V. de L., PEIXOTO, M. das G. B., SCHWERMANN, L. P. "Construções
coletivas na formação médica sobre planejamento em saúde", Temas em Educação e
Saúde, p. 720–734, 27 ago. 2020. DOI: 10.26673/tes.v16i2.13823.

MARANHÃO, K. DE M.; REIS, A. C. DE S. Recursos de gamificação e materiais
manipulativos como proposta de metodologia ativa para motivação e aprendizagem no



                                                                                    387

curso de graduação em odontologia. Revista Brasileira de Educação e Saúde, v. 9,
n. 3, p. 1–7, 24 ago. 2019.

MARCUZZO, R., GONÇALVES, G. C. de S., DRAGANOV, P. B. "O ensino de gestão
de conflitos e a gamificação na graduação de enfermagem no contexto da COVID-19",
Saberes Plurais Educação na Saúde, v. 7, n. 2, p. e131210–e131210, 14 ago. 2023.
DOI:10.54909/sp.v7i2.131210.

MARINHO, J. I., AZEVÊDO, S. M. de A., SILVA, C. R. da, PIMENTEL, E.R.S.,
ANDRADE, L.L. "Metodologias ativas na monitoria de semiologia e semiotécnica em
enfermagem: Contribuições para as vivências práticas", Revista Enfermagem Atual
In Derme, v. 97, n. 4, p. e023188–e023188, 3 out. 2023. DOI: 10.31011/reaid-2023-
v.97-n.4- art.1698.

MENDES, P. C., DO NASCIMENTO, I. J. B. M. F., PEREIRA, E. M. C. "Integraçao
entre tecnologias e metodologias ativas na educação 4.0", Lumen et Virtus, v. 15, n.
42, p. 7124–7139, 14 nov. 2024. DOI: 10.56238/levv15n42-042.

MENDONÇA, W. da R., PELICANO, L. C., LOPES, M. F. C., GOMES, T.C.,
TEFÉSILVA, C. "Metazoários na Netflix: abordagem de metodologias ativas de ensino
no curso de medicina", Revista Interdisciplinar de Saúde e Educação, v. 4, n. 3, p.
195–198, 9 nov. 2023. DOI: 10.56344/2675-4827.v4n3a2023.44.

NETO, G. E. de A., OLIVEIRA, C. M. F. de, SANTOS, P. A. G. dos, BASTOS, K.A.S.,
VERAS, C.M.T. "A utilização de biomodelos em 3D no aprendizado da anatomia
humana: uma experiência técnica e metodológica", Research, Society and
Development, v. 11, n. 14, p. e388111435207–e388111435207, 30 out. 2022. DOI:
10.33448/rsd-v11i14.35207.

OLIVEIRA, F. de, KUZNIER, T.P., SOUZA, C.C, CHIANCA, T.C.M. Aspectos Teóricos
E Metodológicos Para Adaptação Cutural E Validação De Instrumentos Na
Enfermagem. Texto & Contexto - Enfermagem, v. 27, n. 2, 2018.

OLIVEIRA, L. C., CAETANO, L. B., GONÇALVES, A. E. C., SILVA, L.L.C., RAIMONDI,
G.A., PAULINO, D.B. "Feira das Cartas: integrando promoção, regionalização e gestão
em saúde em atividade lúdica e interativa", Revista Brasileira de Educação Médica,
v. 47, p.e124, 13 nov. 2023. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1590/1981-5271v47.4-2023-0006.

OLIVEIRA, S. B. S. de, SANTOS, S. V. S. dos, FLORES, M. J. B. P. "Metodologias
ativas na educação médica: Percepção de estudantes", Revista Portuguesa de
Educação, v. 36, n. 2, p. e23038–e23038, 2 nov. 2023. DOI: 10.21814/rpe.25193.

PASSOS, V. C. dos S., VILCHEZ, L. F. S., ÁVILA, L. K. de, SOUZA, G.R.B.
"Metodologia ativa de ensino na formação do enfermeiro: Relato de experiência ",
Revista Contemporânea, v. 4, n. 4, p. e3837–e3837, 22 abr. 2024. DOI:
10.56083/RCV4N4-135.

PRADO, M. L., VELHO, M.B., ESPÍNOLA, D.S., SOBRINHO, S.H., BACKES, V.M.S.
Arco de Charles Maguerez: refletindo estratégias de metodologia ativa na formação de
profissionais de saúde. Escola Anna Nery, v. 16, p. 172–177, mar. 2012.

REUL, M. A. LIMA, E.D., IRINEU, K.N., LUCAS, R.S.C., COSTA, E.M.M.B.,
MADRUGA, R.C.R., Metodologias ativas de ensino aprendizagem na graduação em
Odontologia e a contribuição da monitoria - relato de experiência. Revista da ABENO,
v. 16, n. 2, p. 62–68, 12 jul. 2016.



                                                                                   388

RIBEIRO, R. A., ABBADE, J. F. "Estilos de aprendizagem e interfaces online: aporte
ao ensino presencial em graduações da saúde", Cadernos Saúde Coletiva, v. 32, p.
e32020430, 23 set. 2024. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1590/1414-462X202432020430.

RIES, E. F., ROCHA, V. M. P., SILVA, C. G. L. da. "Avaliação do ensino remoto
emergencial de Epidemiologia em uma universidade pública do sul do Brasil durante
pandemia de Covid-19", Interfaces da educação, v. 13, n. 39, 14 jun. 2023. DOI:
10.26514/inter.v13i39.5489.

ROCHA, B. P., SILVA, D. H. T. da, PINHEIRO, D. D., CARNEIRO, P.L., DUARTE,
L.S.F., ARRUDA, C.A.M., VERDE, S.M.M.L. "Estratégias educativas em tempos de
pandemia: Um relato de experiência acerca da utilização de e-book, quiz e materiais
de apoio no processo de ensino e aprendizagem no ensino superior, Brazilian
Journal of Development, v. 7, n. 9, p. 90951–90963, 20 set. 2021. DOI:
10.34117/bjdv7n9-313.

RODRIGUES, K. L. M. L. da S., LUCENA, E. A. de, PEREIRA, V. M., NASCIMENTO,
J.J., ARAÚJO, N.F., PEREIRA, P.C.V., COSTA, N.R.S., FONSÊCA, L.M.A., NETO,
V.L.S. "Metodologia ativa: experiência exitosa de estudantes de enfermagem", Revista
Recien - Revista Científica de Enfermagem, v. 10, n. 30, p. 245–250, 30 jun. 2020.
DOI: 10.24276/rrecien2020.10.30.245-250.

SANDMANN, A., HALLAL, R., HELLMANN, L., ALVARISTO, E.F., TENÓRIO, M.M.,
SILVA, F.A., MENONCIN, C., "Educational practices through information and
communication technologies: integration between active methodologies", Caderno
Pedagógico, v. 20, n. 1, p. 501–524, 18 out. 2023. DOI: 10.54033/cadpedv20n1-026.

SANTANA, T. C. P. de, SILVA, L. M. da, SOUSA, L. N. de, "Percepção de estudantes
de enfermagem no desenvolvimento das habilidades e competências na simulação
realística", Revista Eletrônica Acervo Saúde, v. 23, n. 6, p. e12634, 2 jun. 2023. DOI:
10.25248/reas.e12634.2023

SILVA, D. S. M. da, SÉ, E. V. G., LIMA, V. V., BORIM, F.S.A., OLIVEIRA, M.S.,
PADILHA, R.Q. “Metodologias ativas e tecnologias digitais na educação médica: novos
desafios em tempos de pandemia", Revista Brasileira de Educação Médica, v. 46, p.
e058,11 mar. 2022. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1590/1981-5271v46.2-20210018.

SINGH, D. M., BICALHO, F. L. S., BRITO, C. A. F., DINIZ, S.N. "Cinesiogame:
inovações no ensino de cinesiologia através de jogos educacionais",
CONTRIBUCIONES A LAS CIENCIAS SOCIALES, v. 17, n. 2, p. e4465–e4465, 20
fev. 2024. DOI:10.55905/revconv.17n.2-234.

SOUZA, J. B. de, TOMASI, Y. T., MADUREIRA, V. S. F. " É possível transformar o
ensino na enfermagem? Uso de metodologias ativas na formação do enfermeiro",
Revista Renome, v. 10, n. 1, p. 44–51, 8 ago. 2021. DOI:
10.46551/rnm23173092202100105.

TOLOMEI, B. V. A Gamificação como Estratégia de Engajamento e Motivação na
Educação. EaD em Foco, v. 7, n. 2, 6 set. 2017.

TORRES, P. L.; CARNEIRO, V. B.; FERNANDES, R. T. “Autonomia discente na
Universidade: Metodologias Ativas e a Cibercultura” Revista Teias, v. 20, n. 56, p.
171–187, 26 mar. 2019.




                                                                                      389

VILAÇA, F. A., SIQUEIRA, A. C., COSTA, C. H. de J., FRENEDOZO, R. de C. "Ensino
de matemática para estudantes da área da saúde: uma experiência no curso de
graduação em saúde”, Brazilian Journal of Development, v. 6, n. 11, p. 93230–
93237, 30 nov. 2020. DOI: 10.34117/bjdv6n11-654.

WHITTEMORE, R., KNAFL, K. "The integrative review: updated methodology",
Journal of Advanced Nursing, v. 52, n. 5, p. 546–553, dez. 2005. DOI:
10.1111/j.1365-2648.2005.03621.x.

XIMENES, M. A. M., BRANDÃO, M. G. S. A., CAETANO, J. Á., BARROS, L.M.
"Métodos ativos de aprendizagem como inovação na educação em enfermagem",
Revista Enfermagem Atual In Derme, v. 94, n. 32, p. e-020052, 18 nov. 2020. DOI:
10.31011/reaid2020-v.94-n.32-art.809.




                                                                               390

CHAPTER 22
 VIOLENCE AT SCHOOL: A
 PRELIMINARY STUDY INDICATIVE
 OF PUBLIC POLICIES FOR
 EDUCATING CITIES


Maria Sílvia Bacila
Doctorate in Education from Pontifícia Universidade Católica do Paraná
(PUCPR)
Universidade Tecnológica Federal do Paraná (UTFPR)
E-mail: bacila@utfpr.edu.br


ABSTRACT: Violence at school is a complex and impactful phenomenon, which
encompasses aggressive, threatening and harmful behaviors in the school
environment, such as bullying, physical and verbal aggression, discrimination
and vandalism. This study had the general objective of understanding the nature
of violence at school and the specific objectives of identifying the types of
violence prevalent in educational cities, as well as evaluating managers'
perceptions of its impact on the school environment and student performance.
Carried out through a survey-type research, the target population were
educational managers from educating cities belonging to the Brazilian Network
of Educating Cities (with 9 respondents from atotal of 33 member cities), using
the data collection technique through questionnaires via Google Forms.
Data analysis was qualitative and/or quantitative. Based on authors such as
Abamovay and Rua (2002), Guimarães (1998), Maldonado (2011), Matos and
Gonçalves (2009), Teixeira and Kassouf (2015), the study focused on 9
member cities of the Brazilian network of educating cities, committed with
the promotion of education. The results highlighted the importance of public
policies in educational cities to promote safe and           welcoming school
environments, aiming to prevent violence and improve students' academic
performance. For future studies, it is recommended to further explore the
underlying causes of violence in schools, as well as investigate effective
prevention and intervention strategies. Furthermore, it would be relevant to study
the relationship between school violence and academic performance in the long
term, as well as investigate the role of families and the community in
promoting safe and healthy school environments.

KEYWORDS: public policy, educating cities, violence at school.

RESUMO: A violência na escola é um fenômeno complexo e impactante,
que abrange comportamentos agressivos, ameaçadores e prejudiciais no
ambiente escolar, como bullying, agressões físicas, verbais, discriminação e
vandalismo. Este estudo teve como objetivo geral compreender a natureza da


                                                                              391

violência na escola e como objetivos específicos identificar os tipos de
violência prevalentes em cidades educadoras, bem como avaliar a
percepção dos gestores sobre seu impacto no ambiente escolar e
desempenho dos estudantes. Realizado por meio de uma pesquisa do tipo
levantamento, a população-alvo foram gestores educacionais de cidades
educadoras pertencentes à Rede Brasileira de Cidades Educadoras (sendo 9
respondentes de um total de 33 cidades membro), utilizando a técnica de
coleta de dados por questionários via Google Forms. A análise dos dados foi
qualitativa e/ou quantitativa. Embasado em autores como Abamovay e Rua
(2002), Guimarães (1998), Maldonado (2011), Matos e Gonçalves (2009),
Teixeira e Kassouf (2015), o estudo focou em 9 cidades membros da rede
brasileira de cidades educadoras, comprometidas com a promoção da
educação. Os resultados destacaram a importância das políticas públicas em
cidades educadoras para promover ambientes escolares seguros e acolhedores,
visando à prevenção da violência e ao melhor desempenho acadêmico dos
estudantes. Para estudos futuros, recomenda-se explorar mais a fundo as
causas subjacentes da violência nas escolas, bem como investigar estratégias
eficazes de prevenção e intervenção. Além disso, seria relevante estudar a
relação entre a violência escolar e o desempenho acadêmico a longo prazo,
assim como investigar o papel das famílias e da comunidade na promoção de
ambientes escolares seguros e saudáveis.

PALAVRAS-CHAVE: políticas públicas, cidades educadoras, violência na
escola.




                                                                         392

1. INTRODUCTION


      School violence is a complex and impactful phenomenon that
encompasses a range of aggressive, threatening, or harmful behaviors occurring
in the school environment. These behaviors may include bullying, physical and
verbal aggression, discrimination, harassment, vandalism, among others. School
violence can have various origins, such as family, social, psychological, and
cultural issues, in addition to being influenced by the school environment itself.
      The occurrence of violence in schools can have several serious
consequences, not only for the victims but also for the perpetrators and for the
overall atmosphere of the educational environment. Victims may suffer
emotional, psychological, and physical harm, which affects their academic
performance, mental well-being, and social well-being. Violence can also
contribute to school dropout rates, increased misbehavior, the deterioration of
interpersonal relationships, and student demotivation.
      To address school violence, it is essential that educational administrators,
teachers, students, and families are engaged in strategies to prevent and combat
this problem. The implementation of school coexistence policies, social-
emotional learning programs, and teacher training to identify and intervene in
cases of violence, promoting dialogue and a culture of peace are some of the
measures that can contribute to building a safe, inclusive, and learning-friendly
school environment.
      Addressing violence in schools requires a multidisciplinary approach,
involving not only repressive measures but also the promotion of ethical values,
mutual respect, empathy, and citizenship. It is essential that school systems
remain attentive to the demands and challenges related to school violence in
order to constantly seek to improve their practices and policies to ensure a
healthy and welcoming educational environment for all involved.
      According to Abramovay and Rua (2002) cited in Teixeira and Kassouf
(2015), violence in schools is not a new issue in the modern Western world. Since
the first studies conducted on the subject in the United States in the 1950s,
various facets of this phenomenon have undergone significant changes,
becoming even more concerning. Phenomena such as the emergence of
weapons in schools, the spread of drug use, and the expansion of gangs—often


                                                                                393

associated with drug trafficking—have profoundly impacted the school
environment, requiring increasingly effective responses.
       According to Guimarães (1998), school violence in Brazil has shown an
alarming increase in recent years, characterized, in particular, by the marked
presence of drug trafficking, gangs, and extreme poverty. In a study conducted
in several state capitals across the country, Abramovay and Rua (2002)
concluded that physical violence and property damage are the predominant types
of violence in schools, which have generated significant negative impacts on the
quality of teaching and learning. These effects have considerable repercussions
on the development of the country’s human capital, a crucial element for
economic development.
       The main objective of this study was to understand the origins of violence
in educational institutions. Furthermore, the study sought to identify the different
types of violence frequently observed in school environments in cities focused on
education. Additionally, it aimed to analyze the perceptions of school
administrators regarding the impact of this violence on the school climate and
students’ academic performance.


2. RESEARCH IN EDUCATING CITIES


       In this study, the research was a survey, with the target population being
educational administrators in the Educating Cities belonging to Rebrace, with 9
administrators responding out of a total of 33. The data collection technique used
was through questionnaires in Google Forms format. The analysis of the collected
data was conducted qualitatively and/or quantitatively. It is important to note that
the questionnaires were completed after the participants provided their free and
informed consent, to ensure ethics and transparency in the research process.
       The study is based on nine member cities of the Brazilian network of
Educating Cities and indicates a specific research focus on these locations, which
share a commitment to promoting education as a central pillar of their
administration, in line with the principles of the Charter of Educating Cities.
       This choice suggests that the research seeks to explore how these cities
have addressed the issue of violence in schools, considering education as a



                                                                                  394

fundamental tool for promoting school environments that are safer, more
inclusive, and conducive to student development.
       By focusing on these cities, the study seeks to understand and share best
practices, policies, and strategies that these municipalities have adopted to
prevent and combat violence in schools, in order to promote a culture of peace
and respect, as advocated by the Educating Cities approach. This integrated and
educational approach reflects the importance of considering education a central
pillar for building more just and equitable societies.
       The Charter of Educating Cities highlights the importance of promoting a
safe and inclusive school environment, free from violence. It emphasizes that
member cities commit to ensuring that schools are spaces of a community that
promotes peace, solidarity, and mutual respect, with the aim of protecting the
fundamental rights of all students.
       Furthermore, the charter emphasizes the responsibility of cities to foster
the development of critical and active citizens, capable of contributing to the
construction of a more just and egalitarian society. In this sense, the prevention
of violence in schools is essential to ensure that students can enjoy an
environment conducive to learning, personal development, and the exercise of
citizenship.
       The Charter of Educating Cities highlights the importance of promoting
schools as safe and welcoming spaces, where violence is combated and
replaced by values of respect, dialogue, and cooperation, thereby contributing to
the formation of a more just and democratic society.
       Survey research, also known as a survey, is a widely used method for
collecting information about a specific population, usually through standardized
questionnaires distributed to participants. This type of research seeks to obtain a
general and representative overview of the opinions, attitudes, behaviors, or
characteristics of a given group regarding the topic under investigation.
       By analyzing the data collected through these questionnaires, it is possible
to identify trends, patterns, and correlations that help understand the nature and
extent of the problem of school violence, as well as inform the development of
more effective and targeted prevention and intervention strategies and policies.
Survey-type research allows for a systematic and quantitative approach to



                                                                               395

investigating the issue of school violence and can provide valuable insights for
the development of solutions and preventive measures.
       In the first set of questions in the survey on school violence, the specific
aim was to investigate school administrators’ perceptions regarding three
important aspects: the volume of violence cases, the impact of violence on
student performance, and the adequacy of teacher training for addressing
violence.
       Perceptions regarding the volume of cases in educational institutions can
be fundamental to understanding the severity of the problem and directing efforts
toward the implementation of preventive and corrective measures. About 55.6%
of the 9 respondents consider level 5 to be very serious; 22.2% consider level 4
to be serious; 11.1% consider it moderately serious; and 11.1% do not consider
this increase to be noticeable.
       By asking how administrators view violence affecting student performance,
the survey seeks to understand whether there is an awareness of the negative
effects that violence can have on students’ emotional, social, and academic well-
being, as well as on the quality of the learning environment. Of the 9 respondents,
88.9% consider that violence affects student performance to the maximum
extent, and 11.1% consider it to be at level 4.
       The study by Teixeira and Kassouf (2015) states:


                       It is not possible to state with certainty exactly how the impact of
                       violence manifests itself on academic performance. However, it can be
                       inferred that violence in schools diminishes students’ concentration,
                       reduces class attendance, and also increases demotivation and
                       turnover among teachers.


       The quote from Teixeira and Kassouf (2015) highlights the complexity of
accurately quantifying the effects of school violence on academic performance.
Although it is difficult to establish a direct relationship, the study suggests that the
presence of violence in schools can result in negative impacts, such as reduced
student concentration, decreased class attendance, and increased demotivation,
which in turn may contribute to high teacher turnover. These findings highlight the
need to understand the dynamics and consequences of violence in the school
environment in order to implement effective strategies aimed at improving the




                                                                                        396

quality of education and promoting safe and conducive environments for teaching
and learning.
       The question regarding administrators’ perceptions of teacher training
aims to assess how they view this training and whether it is aligned with the needs
and challenges related to school violence. Questions related to prevention
interventions, conflict mediation, identifying signs of violence and providing
emotional support to students may be involved in this aspect. An average of
22.2% of the 9 respondents believe that teacher training meets the needs, 55.6%
rate it at level 4; 11.1% consider the possibility to be moderate, and 11.1% rate it
at level 2, which falls short of the ability to positively meet the demand.
       In the aforementioned study, the second set of questions aimed primarily
to investigate administrators’ perceptions regarding the incidence of different
types of violence in schools. The frequently encountered types of violence that
were assessed include: verbal and physical violence, as well as bullying in its
various forms.
       When examining the type of violence present in the school environment, it
can be observed that verbal violence predominates over physical violence. Of the
9 respondents, 77.8% admit that they sometimes encounter verbal violence at
school, 11.1% frequently, and 11.1% rarely. Regarding physical violence, 11.1%
admit to encountering it frequently at school, 44.4% sometimes, 22.2% rarely,
and 22.2% never.
       Verbal violence includes insults, threats, name-calling, and other forms of
verbal aggression. Physical violence involves direct physical aggression, such as
punching, kicking, shoving, and other forms of physical violence. Bullying
involves aggressive and repetitive behavior among students, characterized by an
imbalance of power.


                      Bullying is one of the most common forms of behavior in our society, in
                      which those perceived as weaker are dominated. Men oppress their
                      partners, and older children oppress younger ones. Although bullying is
                      considered a form of violence, it is not given the attention it deserves.
                      For example, most people working in schools, including faculty, do not
                      view such behaviors as threats or oppression—that is, as acts of
                      violence. (Matos; Gonçalves, 2009, p. 4).


       Matos and Gonçalves highlight an important and troubling issue regarding
how bullying is often downplayed or ignored in our society. They point out that


                                                                                           397

bullying is a form of violence that is often devalued or tolerated, especially when
directed at groups considered weaker or more vulnerable.
      The excerpt highlights that bullying manifests itself in various contexts,
ranging from peer relationships to school and home environments. They also
emphasize that bullying can occur not only among children but also in adult
relationships, such as men’s domination over their partners. Furthermore, the
quote raises the issue of a lack of awareness and understanding regarding the
impact of bullying, especially among professionals working in environments
where it is most common, such as schools. The failure to recognize bullying
behaviors as forms of violence can lead to underestimating the severity of the
problem and consequently hinder the implementation of effective measures to
prevent and combat bullying.
      It is necessary to recognize and address bullying as a serious form of
violence that can have profound and lasting impacts on victims. Therefore,
awareness, education, and the adoption of preventive measures are fundamental
to combating bullying and promoting safer and more respectful environments.
      In the survey, bullying was reported by the 9 respondents as frequently
occurring in 22.2% of cases, sometimes in 66.7% of cases, and rarely in 11.1%
of cases. The most common types of bullying investigated are: verbal bullying,
which includes insults, derogatory nicknames, and defamation; physical bullying,
which involves repeated physical aggression, such as pushing, kicking, and
punching; cyberbullying, which refers to online harassment or intimidation
through digital tools such as social media, instant messaging, and email, among
others; social exclusion, which consists of intentionally isolating, ignoring, or
excluding a person from a social group; and other forms, which may include less
common or different types of bullying, such as racial bullying and sexual bullying,
among others.
      According to Bullock (2002), cited in Matos and Gonçalves (2009, p. 5),


                      It is considered that there are three main types of bullying, namely
                      physical or direct, psychological, and indirect. The first encompasses
                      behaviors such as hitting, kicking, pushing, stealing, threatening,
                      playing in a rude and intimidating manner, and using weapons. The
                      second refers to name-calling, teasing or picking on someone, being
                      sarcastic, insulting, or abusive, making faces, and threatening. Finally,
                      the third—which is the most covert since it is not as visible—includes
                      excluding or rejecting someone from a group.



                                                                                           398

         The quote from Bullock, cited by Matos and Gonçalves, presents a
classification of the main types of bullying, highlighting three distinct categories:
physical or direct, psychological, and indirect. Each of these forms of bullying
involves different behaviors and strategies of intimidation and violence against
the victim. Below, we will briefly address each of these types:
         1. Physical or direct bullying: This is the type of bullying that involves
aggressive physical behavior, such as hitting, kicking, pushing, stealing,
threatening, intimidating in a rude manner, and even using weapons to cause
physical harm to the victim. It is a clearly visible form of violence that can result
in physical injuries and trauma for the victim.
         2. Psychological bullying: This is characterized by actions intended to
cause emotional, mental, and psychological harm to the victim. This includes
behaviors such as name-calling, intimidation, sarcasm, insults, making hurtful
comments, making faces, and verbal threats. This type of bullying can have a
significant impact on the victim’s self-esteem, mental health, and emotional well-
being.
         3. Indirect bullying: This type of bullying is more subtle and covert, as it
does not directly involve aggressive physical or verbal actions. Indirect bullying
includes behaviors such as excluding, rejecting, socially isolating, or spreading
rumors and gossip to harm the victim’s reputation and social relationships. Social
exclusion can be just as harmful as physical or verbal aggression, in addition to
causing isolation and emotional distress in the victim.
         The categorization of bullying types proposed by Bullock and mentioned
by Matos and Gonçalves highlights the diversity of forms, such as violence and
intimidation, that can manifest in the context of bullying. Understanding these
different forms of bullying is essential for identifying, preventing, and effectively
combat this complex and harmful problem, aiming to promote safer and more
respectful environments for everyone.


                        Cyberbullying is the practice of online cruelty. With the rapid
                        development of technology, cyberbullies have begun to create many
                        other ways to torment their victims. It is more terrible than bullying
                        because the harassment is relentless, potentially occurring 24 hours a
                        day, seven days a week. The victim is attacked via text or voice
                        messages on their cell phone, secretly filmed or photographed in
                        embarrassing situations that can be posted online. The perpetrator may
                        create a fake profile of the victim on social media sites to defame them



                                                                                            399

                        or alter photos in which, for example, the victim appears as a sex
                        worker, with their phone number shared through the perpetrator’s and
                        their friends’ contact lists. (Maldonado, 2011, p. 3).


       Maldonado’s      citation   highlights    the   severity    and    complexity     of
cyberbullying, emphasizing that this form of online violence is more insidious than
traditional bullying due to the constant and continuous reach that technology
offers to perpetrators. The author explores the various ways in which
cyberbullying can be perpetrated, ranging from text and voice messages to the
manipulation of photos and the creation of fake profiles to defame victims.
       This highlights how the rapid development of technology provides
aggressors with more sophisticated means to persecute, defame, and humiliate
their victims in a severe and persistent manner, transcending the limits of physical
and temporal space. The quote also highlights the extent of the harm caused by
cyberbullying, such as the dissemination of false and defamatory information,
which can have devastating repercussions on victims’ lives, including affecting
their reputation and emotional well-being.
       Maldonado’s quote underscores the need for awareness, prevention, and
action against cyberbullying and emphasizes the importance of combating this
form of online violence, which can have profound and lasting impacts on victims.
       Matos and Gonçalves (2009, p. 4) state that “bullying is intentional
behavior, with the primary objective of harming and hurting someone, and it is
repeated over time.” This statement highlights some essential points about
bullying. First, it emphasizes that bullying is intentional behavior, that is, behavior
carried out with the intention to harm or hurt someone. This implies that the
aggressor is aware of their actions and of the negative consequences they may
have on the victim.
       Furthermore, the citation emphasizes that the primary goal of bullying is to
cause harm and suffering to the victim. Bullying is often motivated by a desire for
power, control, revenge, or simply the pursuit of amusement at another’s
expense. This aspect highlights the malicious and harmful nature of bullying,
which can have significant impacts on the victim’s physical, emotional, and
psychological health.
       Another important point addressed in the quote is the repetition of the
behavior over time. This characteristic distinguishes bullying from other types of


                                                                                        400

interpersonal conflicts or isolated disagreements. The repetition of the
aggressions amplifies the victim’s suffering and creates an environment of
intimidation and constant fear, which contributes to the worsening of the harm
caused.
       The citation highlights that bullying is not a casual or sporadic behavior,
but a systematic and intentional form of violence aimed at harming the victim in
a repeated and persistent manner. Recognizing these characteristics is essential
to understanding the severity of the phenomenon of bullying and to developing
effective prevention and intervention strategies.
       Maldonado (2011, p. 3) corroborates this explanation of bullying and
distinguishes it from cyberbullying:


                       In face-to-face bullying attacks, repetition is striking, and it is one of the
                       elements that distinguishes bullying from some pranks in poor taste. In
                       cyberbullying, powerful and destructive attacks can be carried out
                       without the element of repetition, because another factor comes into
                       play that produces devastating effects: the speed at which the message
                       spreads, reaching an audience of immeasurable proportions in just a
                       few minutes. This dramatically intensifies the shame, fear, and
                       humiliation, which leaves some people feeling trapped, to the point
                       where, in desperation, they attempt suicide.


       Maldonado’s quote highlights an important distinction between traditional
bullying and cyberbullying, emphasizing the specific elements that differentiate
these forms of violence. In the case of in-person bullying, Maldonado highlights
repetition as a key factor that distinguishes prolonged aggressive behavior from
casual pranks in poor taste. On the other hand, regarding cyberbullying, she
notes that attacks can be powerful and destructive, often occurring without the
need for constant repetition, due to the rapid and massive spread of online
messages.
       Maldonado’s analysis highlights how the instant virality of messages on
the internet can exponentially amplify the impact of cyberbullying and reach a
much larger audience in a matter of minutes. This, in turn, intensifies feelings of
shame, fear, and humiliation in victims, leading some to feel trapped and
desperate, to the point of even considering suicide as a way to escape the
traumatic situation.
       By highlighting these essential differences between traditional bullying and
cyberbullying, Maldonado underscores the need to effectively understand and


                                                                                                401

address the unique challenges posed by online violence, emphasizing the
urgency of preventive and intervention measures to protect victims and combat
the spread of cyberbullying.
        Another relevant finding that contributes to understanding the issue can be
observed in the question regarding the most common types of bullying, as there
is a consensus that 75% of respondents report verbal bullying and 25% report
social exclusion, out of the 9 respondents.
        Assessing these different types of violence and bullying is essential to
understanding the dynamics and extent of the problem within the school
environment, as it enables the implementation of effective prevention and
intervention strategies.
        When asking the cities about the measures school districts have adopted
to combat violence in schools, the 9 respondents reported the implementation of
programs involving teacher training to handle adverse situations, a permanent
policy of dialogue among school staff, students, and families, psychological
support for situations identified in the school environment; coordination with the
child   welfare   network      and    adolescents.    The       responses   highlighted
interdisciplinarity and intersectorality as key factors in addressing violence in the
school environment in these cities that serve as educational hubs.
        The approach of the cities studied reflects a comprehensive and integrated
strategy for addressing school violence, highlighting the importance of a systemic
and collaborative vision to promote safer and more welcoming educational
environments. The following were highlighted:
        1. Teacher training: investing in the training of educators to handle
situations of violence is crucial, as teachers play a fundamental role in identifying,
preventing, and intervening in such cases.
        2. Ongoing   policy    of    dialogue:   establishing    open   and   effective
communication channels between school staff, students, and families is essential
to fostering an environment of trust and collaboration, promoting peaceful conflict
resolution.
        3. Psychological support: providing emotional and psychological support
to those involved in situations of violence is essential to promote the well-being
and mental health of all members of the school community.



                                                                                   402

       4. Coordination with the support network: establishing partnerships and
support networks with social services and specialized institutions to assist
children and adolescents in vulnerable situations contributes to a more
comprehensive and effective approach to combating violence.
       The emphasis on interdisciplinarity and intersectorality demonstrates an
understanding that school violence is a complex phenomenon that requires
coordinated and integrated action among different actors and sectors of society.
This collaborative and holistic approach reflects the commitment of these
Educating Cities to promoting a culture of peace and respect, while also
highlighting the importance of considering not only educational issues but also
social, emotional, and psychological factors in addressing school violence.
       The public policies of an educating city aim to promote safe and welcoming
school environments, adopting comprehensive approaches and integrated
approaches to address violence in schools. In this regard, the research highlights
the importance of a systemic and collaborative perspective. Investing in teacher
training is crucial, as teachers play a fundamental role in identifying, preventing,
and intervening in cases of violence. In addition, a consistent policy of dialogue,
with open and effective channels of communication between school
professionals, students, and families, fosters an environment of trust and
collaboration, promoting the peaceful resolution of conflicts. Psychological
support is also essential, aiming to provide emotional and psychological support
to those involved in situations of violence to promote the well-being and mental
health of all members of the school community. Coordination with the support
network, establishing partnerships with social services and specialized
institutions, contributes to a more comprehensive and effective approach to
combating violence, especially when serving children and adolescents in
vulnerable situations. This integrated and collaborative approach seeks to
transform the school into a safe, inclusive space conducive to the holistic
development of students.
       The challenges faced by the school systems in the 9 cities surveyed in
addressing school violence are multifaceted and complex. Some of the key
issues identified include:
       1. Dialogue with parents and/or guardians: a lack of effective
communication between the school and students’ parents and/or guardians can


                                                                                403

hinder the identification and resolution of behavioral problems that lead to
violence. Parental collaboration and involvement are essential to creating a safe
and welcoming school environment.
       2. Reaching families, family engagement: Often, families may not be fully
aware of the challenges their children face at school or may not be available to
support the necessary preventive and corrective measures. Family engagement
is critical to promoting appropriate values and behaviors among students.
       3. Students’ community and social reality: the social and community
conditions in which students live can directly influence their behavior at school.
Factors such as poverty, crime, and social inequality can contribute to an
environment conducive to violence and a lack of respect.
       4. Clashes of values and coexistence: the diversity of values and
experiences among students can lead to conflicts and a lack of mutual
understanding. The school plays a crucial role in promoting values of respect,
empathy, and harmonious coexistence, but it is not always easy to overcome
existing cultural and social differences.
       5. Lack of respect among some students: a lack of respect among
students can create a hostile environment prone to conflict. It is important for
schools to implement appropriate disciplinary measures and awareness
programs to foster a culture of mutual respect and cooperation.
       In light of these challenges, it is essential that school systems adopt
comprehensive and integrated strategies that involve not only the school
community but also external partners, such as government agencies, NGOs, and
social institutions. The promotion of positive values, education for peace and
conflict resolution, as well as the implementation of violence prevention practices,
are key elements for creating a safe and inclusive school environment in
educating cities.
       To address the challenges highlighted in dealing with violence in schools,
the public policies of an educating city must adopt inclusive and comprehensive
approaches that work in an integrated and collaborative manner to overcome
these challenges. Dialogue with students’ parents and guardians can be
promoted through effective communication programs and initiatives that
encourage active family participation in the student’s school life, aiming to build
a solid partnership between the school and the community. To address the issue


                                                                                404

of family engagement, it is important to implement strategies that involve raising
awareness and
      Parental engagement in educational processes and violence prevention,
strengthening the bonds between family and school.
      Considering the influence of students’ social and community realities,
public policies can include socio-educational measures that take into account the
specific needs of each community, as well as support and assistance programs
for students in vulnerable situations. To mitigate clashes of values and
coexistence, it is essential to promote diversity, mutual respect, and the pursuit
of intercultural dialogue in schools through educational activities that foster
understanding and acceptance of differences.
      With regard to the lack of respect among students, it is necessary to
implement clear and effective school policies on coexistence, which include
awareness-raising initiatives, conflict mediation, and the promotion of values
such as respect, empathy, and cooperation, with the aim of building a safe,
healthy school environment conducive to students’ holistic development. By
addressing these challenges in a collaborative and comprehensive manner,
public policies can significantly contribute to the creation of more inclusive,
peaceful, and educational schools.
      This progress can be anchored in Maldonado’s suggestions:


                     Schools that have carried out successful bullying/cyberbullying
                     prevention campaigns have worked with students and the entire school
                     staff, seeking the partnership of families to create a culture of zero
                     tolerance for bullying and cyberbullying, establishing appropriate limits
                     and consequences for aggressive behavior, encouraging the expansion
                     of resources to empower victims, enabling perpetrators to make good
                     use of their leadership skills and increase empathy, and fostering the
                     protective role of bystanders. The result is improved relationship quality
                     and the responsible use of social media. (Maldonado, 2011, p. 6).


      The highlighted quote emphasizes that schools that have succeeded in
their bullying/cyberbullying prevention campaigns have involved students, school
staff, and families to create a culture of zero tolerance for these practices.
Establishing clear boundaries and imposing appropriate consequences for
aggressive behavior, empowering victims, and encouraging perpetrators to
developing empathy and positive leadership are key strategies. Furthermore,
raising awareness among the audience about the importance of protecting


                                                                                           405

victims is also essential. These approaches aim not only to prevent bullying and
cyberbullying but also to promote healthy relationships and the responsible use
of social media in the school environment.
      Matos and Gonçalves suggest:


                        It would also be essential to understand the school context in which
                        these phenomena occur, identifying environmental factors that may
                        prevent or exacerbate them (teachers’ attitudes, attitudes of non-
                        teaching staff, training of teachers and staff, discussion of these topics
                        in school curricula, school organization from the perspective of open
                        spaces, for example). (Matos; Gonçalves, 2009, p. 13).


      The quote from Matos and Gonçalves highlights the importance of
understanding the school context to address bullying and cyberbullying,
identifying environmental factors that may influence the prevention or
exacerbation of these phenomena. Aspects such as the attitudes of teachers and
non-teaching staff, the training of education professionals, the inclusion of these
topics in school curricula, and the physical organization of the school—including
open spaces—are identified as relevant elements to be considered.
      This approach highlights the need for a broad perspective in
understanding and addressing bullying and cyberbullying, recognizing that
factors within the school environment play a significant role in fostering healthy
relationships among students and preventing aggressive behaviors. Thus, by
taking these different aspects into account, the school can adopt more effective
measures to create a safe, welcoming environment conducive to students’
holistic development.


3. FINAL CONSIDERATIONS


      Given the complexity and impact of violence in schools, it is crucial to
understand its nature and the types prevalent in educating cities. The educational
administrators play a fundamental role in identifying and addressing these issues,
as they have the capacity to promote safe and healthy school environments.
      School administrators’ perceptions of the impact of violence on student
performance highlight the need for effective public policies aimed at preventing
and combating school violence. Qualitative and/or quantitative analysis of the



                                                                                              406

collected data provides valuable insights to inform actions and strategies aimed
at promoting safety and well-being in the school environment.
      The theoretical framework provided by the cited authors strengthens the
study’s foundation and enriches our understanding of school violence. The
study’s alignment with the guidelines of the Charter of Educating Cities
underscores the importance of local communities’ commitment to promoting
quality education and ensuring an environment conducive to students’ holistic
development.
      It can be stated that the proposed objectives were successfully achieved
in this study. Understanding the nature of violence in schools, identifying the
prevalent types of violence in educational settings, and assessing administrators’
perceptions of its impact on the school environment and student performance
provided a comprehensive and well-founded perspective on the topic.
      For future studies, it is recommended to explore the underlying causes of
school violence in greater depth, as well as to investigate effective prevention
and intervention strategies. Furthermore, it would be relevant to study the
relationship between school violence and long-term academic performance, as
well as to investigate the role of families and the community in promoting safe
and healthy school environments. Longitudinal studies tracking the impact of
intervention programs over time could also contribute significantly to
understanding and resolving this complex problem.
      Finally, the results obtained reinforce the importance of Educating Cities
investing in policies and practices that combat school violence, aiming not only
at safety but also at improved performance and the well-being of students. The
joint efforts of administrators, researchers, and educators are essential for
building more inclusive, respectful, and welcoming schools, contributing to the
formation of critical and conscious citizens in more just and peaceful societies.




                                                                               407

                                 REFERENCES

ABAMOVAY, M.; RUA, M. Violence in Schools. 2nd ed. Vol. 1. UNESCO, Brasília,
2002.

GUIMARÃES, A. School, Gangs, and Drug Trafficking. Rio de Janeiro: UFRJ, 1998.

MALDONADO, Maria Tereza. Bullying and cyberbullying: what we do with what they
do to us. São Paulo: Moderna, 2011.

MATOS, Margarida Gaspar de; GONÇALVES, Sónia M. Pedroso. Bullying in schools:
behaviors and perceptions. Psychology, Health & Diseases, Lisbon, Portugal, no. 1,
vol. 10, pp. 3–15, 2009.

TEIXEIRA, E. C.; KASSOUF, A. L. Impact of violence in São Paulo schools on
students’ academic performance. Applied Economics, vol. 19, no. 2, pp. 221–240,
Apr. 2015. Available at: https://doi.org/10.1590/1413-8050/ea124436. Accessed on:
Mar. 11, 2024.




                                                                                408

CHAPTER 23
 HISTORICAL TRACES: MEDICAIS
 DIAGNOSES GO TO SCHOOL


Michele Luciana Petersen
Ph.D. candidate in Special Education, Health, and Inclusive Processes
Universidade Federal do Rio Grande do Sul (UFRGS)
E-mail: michelelucianapetersen@gmail.com

Cláudia Rodrigues de Freitas
Ph.D. in Education
Universidade Federal do Rio Grande do Sul (UFRGS)
E-mail: freitascrd@gmail.com


ABSTRACT: This study investigates, through historical and critical bibliographic
research, how medical diagnoses entered schools and began to speak for
Education, transforming differences into “learning disability” conditions. It begins
with a reflection on the proliferation of reports that shift the pedagogical focus
toward classificatory codes, silencing students’ unique characteristics. The
objective is to understand the historical trajectory that enabled the entry and
expansion of diagnoses into the educational field, identifying its main milestones
and problematizing the effects of these classifications on learning processes up
to the present day. The methodology examines different historical moments, from
the emergence of the first psychiatric classifications to the consolidation of the
DSM, analyzing how these discourses gradually shifted the focus from the
pedagogical to the medical. The results indicate that, by seeking out what is
lacking in the student, diagnoses erase living processes of learning, fixing the
child in narratives of incapacity. It is concluded that it is urgent to re-center the
pedagogical perspective, strengthening listening, bonding, and the construction
of alternative narratives about learning.

KEYWORDS: education, learning, medicalization, diagnostic history.

RESUMO: Este estudo investiga, por meio de pesquisa bibliográfica de caráter
histórico e crítico, como os diagnósticos médicos adentraram na escola e
passaram a falarpela Educação, transformando diferenças em doenças do “não
aprender”. Partese da reflexão sobre o crescimento de laudos que deslocam o
olhar pedagógico para códigos classificatórios, silenciando as singularidades dos
alunos. O objetivo é compreender o percurso histórico que possibilitou a entrada
e expansão dos diagnósticos no campo educacional, identificando seus
principais marcos e problematizando os efeitos dessas classificações sobre os
processos de aprendizagem até os dias atuais. A metodologia articula diferentes
momentos históricos, desde o surgimento das primeiras classificações


                                                                                 409

psiquiátricas até a consolidação do DSM, analisando como esses discursos aos
poucos, foram deslocacando o foco do pedagógico para o médico. Os resultados
indicam que, ao buscarem pela falta no aluno, os diagnósticos apagam
processos vivos de aprender, fixando a criança em narrativas de incapacidade.
Conclui-se que é urgente recolocar o olhar pedagógico no centro, fortalecendo a
escuta, o vínculo e a construção de outras narrativas sobre o aprender.

PALAVRAS-CHAVE:         educação,    aprendizagem,    medicalização,   história
diagnóstica.




                                                                           410

1. INTRODUCTION


        What justifies referring a student to a doctor for evaluation and diagnosis6?
What underpins the belief that a number7or an acronym can define who a student
is—or who they will not become? How did medical diagnoses become tools
capable of speaking about education? This study examines these questions, with
the aim of understanding the pathways that allowed medical discourses to enter
the educational field and their progressive consolidation over the learning
processes of schoolchildren. The intention is not to deny the existence of real
illnesses or multiple disabilities, nor the importance of medical diagnoses for
treatment and people’s quality of life. Rather, it is a matter of critically reflecting
on how certain diagnoses, upon entering the school setting, end up dictating
learning processes, as if there were a single way to learn—replacing the
pedagogical perspective and assuming responsibilities that should belong to
teachers and to education itself.
        The growing presence in schools of diagnostic reports8indicating disorders
related to learning styles has shifted the perspective on how students are
perceived: not for their individuality, but through codes that purport to translate
their ways of being and learning. The rationale for this study lies in the urgency
of shifting the focus away from the centrality of medical diagnosis to reopen space
for pedagogical agency—a movement that calls on schools to renew their
commitment to listening, building connections, and constructing alternative
narratives about learning.




6 The term “medical diagnosis” will be used to refer, broadly, to the various specialties that, in

some way, appropriate the field of learning. By adopting the term “medical,” the aim is to include
all professional categories that, through reports, diagnose so-called “learning disorders.”
7 The acronym ICD (International Statistical Classification of Diseases and Related Health

Problems) was created by the World Health Organization (WHO). In Brazil, its adoption is
mandatory and regulated by the Ministry of Health, and it is used throughout the public and private
healthcare systems. The current version in use is ICD-10, but the country is already in the process
of transitioning to ICD-11. Its main objective is to standardize the codes for diseases, health
conditions, and causes of death, ensuring uniformity in health records, notifications, and statistics.
Each condition or diagnosis receives an alphanumeric code that allows for its identification and
recording in documents such as medical reports, certificates, medical records, and official reports
8 A medical report is the document that formalizes the diagnosis—a technical record, usually brief,

that summarizes the evaluation and assigns a name to what has been identified, almost always
according to a standardized classification, such as the one used in Brazil, the ICD


                                                                                                  411

1.1 OBJECTIVE


      This study aims to analyze, from a historical and critical perspective, the
establishment and expansion of medical diagnoses in the educational field,
identifying their main milestones and questioning the effects of these
classifications on the pedagogical perspective and learning processes.


2. THEORETICAL FRAMEWORK


2.1 FOOTPRINTS ALONG THE WAY: THE WILD CHILD


      Today, we are experiencing what Frances (2016, p. 205) calls “diagnostic
inflation—and, by all indications, we are on the verge of hyperinflation.” In
schools, this phenomenon takes on its own distinct form: it involves the
proliferation of classificatory diagnoses. Reports that bear the name of the
disorder and the ICD code, but which often end up erasing the child’s name. The
individual gives way to the number. The student comes to be defined by a code,
a label, a technical assessment that places them in the category of the “non-
student”: they do not learn, they cannot, they cannot cope! How did we get here?
How did medical diagnoses come to say so much—and, at the same time, to
silence so much—about who learns and who does not?
      To understand part of this journey, it is worth returning to an opening
scene, frequently evoked in studies of special education and psychiatry: the
encounter with the “wild boy” in January 1800, in southern France.
      The “wild boy,” named Victor, was found and sent to the Central School of
Rodez and, later, to the National Institute for the Deaf and Dumb in Paris, where
he became the subject of study by the Société des observateurs de l’homme,
[Society of Observers of Man], which included distinguished men interested in
understanding human nature. Two of them stand out: Philippe Pinel and Jean
Itard, both physicians.
      Pinel, focusing on the boy’s disabilities, produced a report that anticipated
the patterns of modern diagnoses: by describing only absences, he concluded
that he “[...] had been abandoned because he was an idiot and that there would
be no possibility of educating him” (Banks-Leite; Galvão, 2017, p. 11).


                                                                               412

       Itard, on the other hand, devised and organized an educational program
with five goals focused on social integration, sensory stimulation, communication,
and mental operations, with the support of Madame Guérin throughout the
process. Through playful activities such as the game with cups and chestnuts—
which required attention and memory—he observed significant improvements in
the boy’s concentration. He also identified signs of intelligence in everyday
responses, such as in understanding routines associated with outings and in the
spontaneous use of body language. He then proposed comparison and
classification exercises with geometric shapes, which Victor solved with ease,
even as the complexity gradually increased. Encouraged by the results, Itard
introduced metal letters, and upon observing the unique way Victor handled the
materials—stacking and repositioning the letters according to his own logic—he
recognized his inventiveness and singular way of learning, further adapting his
pedagogical approaches.
       By tracing the history of these two different medical perspectives, we find
clues about the possibility of learning for those who were believed to be incapable
of it. Victor received contradictory diagnoses. Itard’s initiative—which did not stop
at diagnosing Victor but built an educational program based on the boy’s
responses and potential—invites reflection on how we view students who, at first
glance, seem to present difficulties. Often, these difficulties do not lie strictly with
the student, but in the way he is perceived—as Pinel did when he reduced Victor
to a supposed “incurable idiocy,” disregarding his potential.
       Itard invites us to recognize that, when faced with situations often
understood as learning difficulties, there are different points of view—and this is
precisely why pedagogical possibilities become necessary. After all, it is the
school’s role to sustain the teaching process, which cannot be guided by a
medical diagnosis, but rather by principles specific to the field of education.


2.2 ALFRED BINET’S METRIC SCALE


       In early 20th-century France, a concern emerged regarding the
identification of individuals’ learning abilities. Alfred Binet, in partnership with
Théodore Simon, developed the first metric scale of intelligence in 1905. The goal
was to measure intellectual abilities and establish criteria to distinguish students


                                                                                    413

suited for mainstream schooling from those destined for special education. As
Ferreira (2016, p. 20) reports, Binet believed that every child should be in the
school system, but “[...] advocated for the creation of a specific pathway—special
education—for those who presented difficulties. To this end, he considered it
essential to measure the degree of educability of each child,” since not all would
learn in the same way or at the same pace.
       Binet founded an experimental psychology laboratory in a school and
based his analyses on the belief in a normative educational system, in which the
majority of children would be endowed with “normal” intelligence. As Ferreira
(2016, p. 21) states, this involved the “[...] prior existence of a school system so
robust that it left no doubt that the vast majority of children possessed an
intelligence considered normal and to be taken as a benchmark.”
       Binet’s work responded to hygienist demands and the ideal of academic
performance. His concern was to precisely define abnormality and its traits, for
“[...] it was very important to him to present a well-defined definition of the
concept, as it was believed that this notion was the basis for the organization of
schools and, above all, for special education” (Ferreira, 2016, p. 69). The scale
was organized as a set of 60 tests ranked by difficulty. According to Ferreira
(2016, p. 101), “[...] with regard to those considered abnormal, whether or not
they took certain tests would be illustrative for establishing their differential
diagnosis as: idiots, imbeciles, and feeble-minded.”
       In this context—marked by the attempt to measure, classify, and separate
students according to levels of intellectual performance—the conditions are set
for the emergence of what Collares and Moysés (2012) call “diseases of not
learning.” Based on this scale, designed to distinguish the so-called “normal” from
the “abnormal,” a diagnostic logic begins to take hold that transforms academic
difficulties into pathologies to be corrected. As a result, students who “cannot,”
“do not keep up,” or “do not meet expectations” are subjected to a pathologizing
logic that, far from considering the school context, individualizes failure and shifts
the responsibility for cure back to medicine. In this process, “medicine artificially
constructs these disorders and expands the demand for specialized health
services, appropriating learning without altering school structures—merely
extending its normative scope” (Collares; Moysés, 2012, p. 196).



                                                                                  414

       Therefore, the metric scale paved the way for so-called “learning
disorders” to coexist with school processes. Through it, we can recognize that the
logic of measuring, diagnosing, and classifying—used to determine who could or
could not belong in school—remains present to this day, albeit under new names
and justifications.


2.3 THE EMERGENCE OF THE DSM


       With the end of World War II, the United States faced a bureaucratic crisis
linked to the reintegration of veterans into society. These individuals needed to
receive reports to obtain benefits and certificates of fitness, but the existing
classification systems could not handle the complexity of the cases—such as “[...]
chronic brain syndromes and situational reactions” (Bezerra Jr., 2014, p. 17-18).
In response, the American Psychiatric Association (APA) created the DSM-19 ,
released with 145 pages and 106 diagnostic categories. These categories were
organized “[...] in the form of paragraphs, which highlighted aspects of subjective
functioning and relational patterns” (Bezerra Jr., 2014, p. 18). Its use was
primarily focused on hospital administration and compliance with government
protocols, without significant clinical impact.
       In 1968, the DSM-2 was published, containing 180 categories. Although
limited to the U.S., it was the first to include “[...] a section dedicated to behavioral
disorders in childhood and adolescence” (Bezerra JR., 2014, p. 20), as well as
classifying homosexuality as a mental disorder—later removed in the seventh
edition following intense social pressure.
       In the 1980s, the DSM-3 marked a break with its predecessors, adopting
a descriptive rather than theoretical approach, with objective criteria for each
disorder and distinct axes. As Bezerra Jr. (2014, p. 21) explains, the diagnosis
“[...] ceased to be viewed as a key to understanding intrapsychic or relational
conflicts or disturbances underlying the symptoms, and instead became a guide
for   detecting    visible   disorders.”    The     emphasis      on   subjective        clinical
interpretations was abandoned in favor of an approach centered on the objective
description of observable behaviors. This standardization of criteria sought to

9 The acronym DSM stands for "Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders," which in

Portuguese is translated as "Manual Diagnóstico e Estatístico de Transtornos Mentais."


                                                                                             415

ensure greater uniformity in diagnoses, making them applicable in different
contexts—as Silva highlights, one of the “[...] main objectives was to expand and
standardize diagnostic processes carried out not only in the United States but
also in other countries” (Silva, 2022, p. 98). The number of categories was
expanded to 295, and according to Conrad (2015), copies of the DSM-3 sold out
immediately and were purchased by anyone with any connection to psychiatry.
       In 1994, the DSM-4 was published, coordinated by Allen Frances, with a
more rigorous approach to revision, as all methodological issues were outlined in
detail well before the work began. “There were explicit criteria for implementing
changes and a centralized method for reviewing the literature, reanalyzing data,
and conducting field experiments” (Frances, 2016, p. 207). However, Frances
himself became a critic of the excessive proliferation of categories: “[...] problems
that were once expected and tolerated aspects of life are now diagnosed and
treated as mental disorders” (Frances, 2016, p. 110).
       The DSM-5, published in 2013, took this logic to the extreme. “It contains
[...] more than 300 categories presented across 947 pages” (Silva, 2022, p. 97),
representing an explosion in classification since the two categories of 1840. The
development of the DSM-5 was described by Frances (2016, p. 207) as a “[...]
jumble of disorganized methods,” the result of autonomous working groups,
without common guidelines. The growth in categories reflected the expansion of
psychiatric logic beyond the clinical realm: ways of being, feeling, and living came
to be framed as potential disorders. This process created a paradox: in seeking
greater precision, the manual expanded the boundaries of pathology. As Frances
(2016, p. 281) warns, “[...] an accurate diagnosis can save a life; an inaccurate
one can destroy it.”
       The DSM manuals, from DSM-1 through DSM-5, show a growing
trajectory of labels and classifications in an attempt to organize human suffering,
while simultaneously expanding the scope of the medical gaze on life. As
summarized by Christofari, Freitas, and Baptista (2015, p. 11), medicine began
to produce “[...] discourses that define how we should be, what habits we should
adopt to stay healthy as long as possible; after all, being healthy is what matters.”
       It is important to emphasize that this study does not aim to delegitimize
medical diagnoses. Their value for effective treatments and improved quality of
life is recognized. However, in the educational field, caution is needed: the


                                                                                 416

medical diagnosis of “learning disorders” cannot and should not erase students’
unique characteristics and, above all, must acknowledge the diverse modes and
forms of learning.


3. METHODOLOGY


       This article constitutes a historical and critical bibliographic study, with the
aim of tracing the entry of medical diagnoses into the educational field, especially
when these began to address school learning processes. The investigation is
based on the understanding that the ways of labeling students—through
classifications, reports, and codes—are not neutral, but rather have effects on the
lives of the students who receive them, and likewise transform the ways teachers
perceive them. To this end, authors who offer fundamental contributions to this
analysis were selected, including Benilton Bezerra Jr., Ana Carolina Christofari,
Cecília Azevedo Lima Collares, Maria Aparecida Affonso Moysés, Allen Frances,
and Gisela Untoiglich, among others, whose works allow us to examine the role
played by medical diagnoses when they enter the school setting. The research is
also grounded in historical documents and successive editions of the DSM
(Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders), in order to elucidate the
transformations in diagnostic criteria and their social, cultural, and educational
ramifications.
       The methodological approach involved constructing a narrative that
connects different historical moments—from the encounter with the “wild boy” of
Aveyron in the 19th century to the publication of the DSM-5 in 2013—with the aim
of showing how diagnosis ceased to be merely a clinical tool and became a
mechanism for regulating school life. The proposed analysis is guided by an
inductive logic, which draws on historical and discursive traces to problematize
current practices, without losing sight of the tensions between the fields of
medicine and education.
       Finally, the legitimate role of medical diagnoses in healthcare, including
mental health, is acknowledged. However, this study adopts the premise that, in
the educational field, we must resist the uncritical use of these classifications as
determinants of learning trajectories, especially when we refer students for a
medical evaluation that seeks to explain why they “can’t” or “can’t handle it.” The


                                                                                   417

methodology adopted here, therefore, focuses on reclaiming agency in the face
of the complexity of the educational experience, pointing toward the construction
of other ways of understanding and supporting students in their learning
processes, beyond the meanings currently attributed to diagnostics.


4. RESULTS AND DISCUSSIONS


       So far, we have been tracing the path of a possible trajectory for
diagnoses. But, as in any journey, there comes a moment when the paths of the
new and the lived “at home” intersect. And the school setting is our home: the
familiar and the lived-in now emerge through the stories of students who have
received a medical classification diagnosis, which has assigned them a place of
non-learning—a place that, in many cases, they themselves rebel against
occupying.
       In the school context, the diagnosis is sometimes understood as a tool that
identifies those students who stand out negatively from their peers because they
exhibit different characteristics, particularly related to behavior and learning.
       In general, schools are constrained to serve students in a standardized
manner; that is, they tend to view students by homogenizing their ways of being
and learning. There are situations in which students arrive with a pre-existing
diagnosis of learning difficulties. In others, those who stand out from the rest—
due to difficulties in learning expected content, behavior that is more expressive
than expected, or ways of being or (not) expressing themselves—end up being
referred to medical professionals, as this student “must have something wrong”
or “cannot be normal,” and this uncertain diagnosis must be identified.According
to Frances (2016, p. 106), our world “is homogenizing—we have less and less
tolerance for individual differences and eccentricities and try to medicalize them
as illnesses.” Thus, according to Christofari (2023, p. 1), “[...] there is an
increasingly common modus operandi in schools of referring students to health
services with the desire for a diagnosis.” That is, according to Christofari; Freitas;
Baptista; (2015, p. 2), “[...] isolating the subject to analyze their particularities in
detail and render them pathological. This produces a way of looking at the other
as if they were a mere sum of biological and behavioral characteristics.”



                                                                                    418

       Christofari (2014, p. 37) recounts an experience with a boy named
Valentin, who, while accepting the medical-explanatory categories of the
diagnosis, also defies them, devising strategies to escape what had been
imposed on him. According to the author, the boy “[...] struggled not to internalize
a diagnosis; he was outgoing, dressed in a peculiar way, and his movements
were almost uncontrollable, considered pathological by the school.” He went to
the doctor and was quickly assigned a pathology code, an ICD.
       He arrived at school already labeled with “learning difficulties,” particularly
in the area of writing. However, when asked to bring his texts so the new teacher
could read them, she found they were marked with comments: “improve
handwriting,” “horrible handwriting,” “incomprehensible text,” but no comments
on the process of the boy’s writing creation. In fact, Valentin had just read the
texts to the teacher, demonstrating that he had a coherent story with a certain
touch of humor. At that moment, she was able to look at Valentin and see that
there was an evident learning process in his writing, which calls into question the
initial diagnosis he had received.
       Moysés (2001), similarly, presents his research experience with 75
children who were not learning in school and who had already been seen by
various professionals. The author focused on understanding the reasons why it
was possible to determine the lack of learning and, by “[...] instead of looking for
the child’s defect or deficiency, the gaze seeks what they already know, what they
have, and what they can learn from there” (Moysés, 2001, p. 42).
       In this way, by taking a different approach, she gave each child a voice so
they could speak for themselves. Of the 75 children, 71 showed no signs of
physical, emotional, or intellectual problems. The remaining four stood out from
the group due to a special characteristic: “in three of them, the internalization of
the stigma of being sick/incapable was so intense that one cannot safely rule out
an association with some degree of developmental delay development” (Moysés,
2001, p. 45). The author described the network established through the listening
process, involving the family, the school, and the child. Thus, she listened to
everyone and made observations.
       One of the cases that stands out is that of Cícero, an eight-year-old boy
whose case was analyzed by Moysés (2001). According to the boy’s teacher, if it
were the end of the school year, he would have failed due to his “slurred speech.”


                                                                                  419

She mentioned that she had asked the family several times to take him to a
speech therapist, which did not happen. Because, in her words, “the mother is
detached” (Moysés, 2001, pp. 183–184). According to the teacher’s account,
Cícero also had a brain aneurysm, but his mother did not address it and his father
was an alcoholic. The boy’s mother explained that he wasn’t learning, but she
didn’t know why. At the same time, she echoed the teacher’s claim that he wasn’t
learning because he didn’t speak. When asked by the doctor if Cícero had an
aneurysm, the mother said she had never heard of it.
       Moysés (2001, p. 183), in giving the boy a voice, heard the following: “[...]
I don’t learn because when I do my homework, my head hurts and I forget
everything. I don’t even like looking at myself in the mirror; I’m very ugly.” After
listening to everyone, and especially the child, she concluded that he spoke well,
did not mix up or omit letters. He “[...] tells stories and draws normally, except
when he talks about himself or draws himself, revealing a severely compromised
self-image. Normal child, normal development” (Moysés, 2001, p. 184).
       In her research, the author analyzed each case individually, adopting a
detailed and personalized approach, demonstrating that although these children
had received medical diagnoses, they exhibited signs of learning throughout their
developmental process. In other words, the author, who is also a physician,
maintains that it is necessary to give voice to, and consider, the individual stories,
trajectories, progress, and ways of learning of each child, even when there are
medical diagnoses indicating pathologies.
       Of the children interviewed by Moysés (2001), several already had a long
history of navigating the healthcare system. According to Rocha and Cavalcanti
(2014), this is common, as when a diagnosis arises, it revisits a need for
confirmation. Consequently, medical and health services are frequently sought
by parents who take their children to verify and validate the initial diagnoses
received. For the authors, making a diagnosis


                      [...] has become an easy task within everyone’s reach: one need only
                      list symptoms and group them under their corresponding label. In this
                      way, legions of children described as having ADHD [Attention-
                      Deficit/Hyperactivity Disorder], OCD [Obsessive-Compulsive Disorder],
                      Bipolar Disorder, and Autism Spectrum Disorder proliferate, often
                      heavily medicated (Rocha; Cavalcanti, 2014, p. 233).




                                                                                       420

       This logic of repeated validation fuels the early labeling and extensive
pharmacological treatment of children. In these contexts, students are often
referred for clinical evaluations because, as Frances (2016, p. 111) states, we
have come to set “very high goals and unrealistic expectations—especially when
it comes to children.” And thus, as Moysés (2008, p. 4) warns, a “[...] quick shift
in perspective will enable the creation of learning disorders, or rather, disorders
of not learning.” Therefore, the diagnosis is understood as a document that seeks
to affirm a place that, until then, has been hidden from the student in the school
environment. According to Christofari (2023, p. 2), “[...] the diagnosis, one of the
indelible marks on the body, tends to serve as a justification for medications and
referrals to countless treatments, exposing ‘offending’ behavior as something to
be cured, treated.” It is the definition of the presence of pathologies, of something
being within the student, and when it emerges, it simultaneously brings relief to
the school, since, “if the supposed problem lies with the student, no one is to
blame for their condition. The discourse directed at the student commonly
summarizes: this is not a matter for pedagogy, but for health” (Christofari; Freitas;
Baptista, 2015, p. 12).
       This document describes, names, and classifies each individual, creating
an impression of something bad, harmful, and unfavorable, casting doubt on
ways of being and learning, and granting the medical field permission to label a
list of symptoms and justify—or not—the acquisition of learning. For the school,
having a medical diagnosis that describes the illnesses of the non learning “[...]
implies the condition of being capable or not, according to socially defined
parameters” (Silva; Batista, 2021, p. 53).
       It has become common to find, in schools, children like Valentin and
Cícero, who arrive with multiple diagnoses, and in all these cases, the clinical
perspective takes precedence over the pedagogical one, erasing the possibility
of recognizing other legitimate ways of learning. This is a process in which the
subject’s uniqueness ceases to be understood as difference and comes to be
interpreted as a sign of deviation. As Angelucci (2015, p. 8) points out, the moral
conversion that takes place is evident:


                      [...] a personality trait, an aspect of behavior, a personal rhythm or style,
                      which, one might think, express the subject’s uniqueness, come to be




                                                                                              421

                      valued as diagnostic indicators, placing them in the realm of deviation
                      from the healthy path.


      In the face of this hasty logic of classification, Untoiglich (2006) presents
excerpts that invite us to consider a diagnosis that requires time—a time that is
not resolved by filling out questionnaires — and that presupposes dialogue
among the professionals involved with the student, possibly requiring numerous
interdisciplinary consultations. In other words, a process that demands careful
observation before arriving at any pathological classification. The author points
out that no classification is natural and that “[...] the supposedly observable data
in no way represent objective readings of reality, since they are permeated by
interpretations grounded in prior knowledge and experience” (Untoiglich, 2013,
p. 119), as such classifications are embedded in scientific aspects, but also
economic, ideological, political, and cultural ones.
      Bezerra Jr. (2014, p. 13) echoes Untoiglich by stating that “[...]
classifications are not mirrors of reality, but constructions, arrangements, that
shape a domain of reality by systematizing its multiplicity in an intelligible
manner.” For the author, when we classify, we organize information, but at the
same time, we simplify it in a way that produces a partial and superficial view of
the object in question. This bias highlights the importance of recognizing the
subjectivity present in our perceptions and analyses, understanding that reality is
not given but constructed—influenced by personal experiences, accumulated
knowledge, and cultural values.
      However, by tracing the historical trajectory of medical diagnoses, this
article aimed at more than simply reconstructing their path and entry into schools.
Above all, the intention was to shed light on the existence of other pathways—of
learning—that continue to resist classificatory logic. Amid numbers, scales, and
codes, learning processes continue to pulse, revealing themselves only when
there is space for attentive listening. Instead of focusing on what is missing or
what does not fit, we must ask: what does this student already know? How do
they learn? As Frances (2016, p. 182) points out,


                      [...] it would be better if school decisions were not so tied to a diagnosis
                      that was developed solely for relational purposes and no educational
                      hypothesis. School services should be based on needs, not on
                      diagnosis.



                                                                                              422

       Ultimately, what is being asserted here is that we need to listen more closely
to our students — for it is through this sensitive listening, which recognizes
uniqueness, that we can see learning as a living force that persists even when
everything seems to suggest otherwise.


5. CONCLUSION


       By revisiting the history of medical diagnoses and their entry into schools,
this article sought to problematize how the logic of classification came to regulate,
describe, and legitimize discourses on learning and not learning. Far from
denying the importance of diagnoses in the field of health, what is highlighted is
the urgency of shifting the pedagogical gaze away from dependence on these
classifications, reopening space for listening, connection, and the recognition of
singularities.
       The results and discussions presented show that a perspective centered
on deficiency erases the living processes of learning, transforming difference into
a problem to be corrected or treated. The history of diagnoses reveals that
classifications are not neutral: they are constructions that organize and They
simplify reality, but they also obscure what falls outside statistical parameters.
Thus, it is essential to refocus the pedagogical perspective at the center of the
debate, restoring education’s leading role in school learning—rather than leaving
it to the medical field.
       By proposing this reflection, this research contributes to society by
shedding light on practices that, under the pretext of care, crystallize inequalities
and stigmas in the school environment. For academia, it offers theoretical and
analytical insights that stimulate interdisciplinary debate between Education and
Health, without one being subordinate to the other, and proposes ways to think
about school learning from a perspective of complexity that cannot be captured
in medical reports.




                                                                                 423

                                  REFERENCES

ANGELUCCI, Carla Bianca. The pathologization of human differences and its
implications for special education. In: ANPEd ANNUAL MEETING, 37th, 2015,
Florianópolis. Proceedings [...]. Florianópolis: ANPEd, 2015.

BANKS-LEITE, Luci; GALVÃO, Isabel. The Wild Boy of Aveyron: Historical Aspects
and Debates for the 21st Century. In: BANKS-LEITE, Luci; GALVÃO, Isabel; DAINEZ,
Débora (eds.). The Wild Boy and Dr. Jean Itard: History and Contemporary
Dialogues. Campinas: Mercado de Letras, 2017. pp. 9–20.

BEZERRA J.R., Benilton. Contemporary psychiatry and its challenges. In:
ZORZANELLI, Rafaela; BEZERRA JR., Benilton; COSTA, Jurandir Freire (eds.). The
creation of diagnoses in contemporary psychiatry. Rio de Janeiro: Garamond,
2014. pp. 9–34.

CHRISTOFARI, Ana Carolina. Who benefits from the medicalization of school life? In:
ANPEd ANNUAL MEETING, 41st, 2023, Manaus. Proceedings [...]. Manaus: ANPEd,
2023.

CHRISTOFARI, Ana Carolina. Ways of being and learning in school: (in)visible
medicalization? 2014. Thesis (Doctorate in Education) – Graduate Program in
Education, Federal University of Rio Grande do Sul, Porto Alegre, 2014.

CHRISTOFARI, Ana Carolina; FREITAS, Cláudia Rodrigues de; BAPTISTA, Claudio
Roberto. Medicalization of ways of being and learning. Revista Educação e
Realidade, Porto Alegre, vol. 40, no. 4, pp. 1079–1102, Oct./Dec. 2015.

COLLARES, Cecília Azevedo Lima; MOYSÉS, Maria Aparecida Affonso. The invention
of learning disorders. In: CHACON, Miguel Claudio Moriel; MARIN, Maria José
Sanches (eds.). Education and health of special groups. Marília: Oficina
Universitária; São Paulo: Cultura Acadêmica, 2012.pp. 185–197.

CONRAD, Peter. Lecture: Medicalization and Its Discontents. [No place: n.p.], May 14,
2015. 1 video (1 hr 44 min 27 sec). Available at:
youtube.com/watch?v=3tNmN_uPAYQ. Accessed on: Dec. 13, 2023.

FERREIRA, Carla Mercês da Rocha Jatobá. In the Shadows of Scales: A Study on
the Concept of Abnormality in Alfred Binet. Belo Horizonte: Fino Traço, 2016.

FRANCES, Allen. Back to Normal. How Overdiagnosis and the Medicalization of Life
Are Destroying Our Sanity and What Can Be Done to Regain Control. Rio de Janeiro:
Versal Editores, 2016.

MOYSÉS, Maria Aparecida Affonso. The Invisible Institutionalization: Children Who
Do Not Learn in School. Campinas: Mercado de Letras, 2001.

MOYSÉS, Maria Aparecida Affonso. Medicalization in early childhood education and in
elementary school and teacher training policies: the medicalization of not learning in
school and the invention of abnormal childhood. In: ANPEd ANNUAL MEETING, 31st,
2008, Caxambu. Proceedings [...]. Caxambu: ANPEd, 2008.

ROCHA, Ana Maria; CAVALCANTI, Ana Elizabeth. Risks and limits of the use of
psychiatric diagnosis in childhood. In: ZORZANELLI, Rafaela; BEZERRA JR., Benilton;



                                                                                   424

COSTA, Jurandir Freire (eds.). The creation of diagnoses in contemporary
psychiatry. Rio de Janeiro: Garamond, 2014. pp. 233–252.

SILVA, Carla Maciel da. Disability, the school context, the pathologization of life,
and diagnostic processes: between the map and the territory. 2022. Dissertation
(Doctorate in Education) – Federal University of Rio Grande do Sul, Porto Alegre,
2022.

SILVA, Carla Maciel da; BAPTISTA, Claudio Roberto. Pathologization and
medicalization of life: childhood and the processes of schooling. In: CECCIM, Ricardo
Burg; FREITAS, Cláudia Rodrigues de (eds.). Drugs, remedies, medications: what
does education have to do with this? Porto Alegre: Rede Unida, 2021. p. 53-64.

UNTOIGLICH, Gisela. New diagnoses? In search of lost subjectivity. Revista APPOA,
Porto Alegre, vol. 13, no. 144, pp. 13–23, Mar. 2006.

UNTOIGLICH, Gisela. Biopolitical uses of the supposed attention deficit hyperactivity
disorder: what place for psychological suffering in childhood? In: COLLARES, Cecília
Azevedo Lima; MOYSÉS, Maria Aparecida Affonso; RIBEIRO, Mônica Cintrão França
(eds.). New captures, old diagnoses in the era of disorders: memories of the II
International Seminar on Medicalized Education: dyslexia, ADHD, and other supposed
disorders.Campinas: Mercado de Letras, 2013. pp. 119–132.




                                                                                   425

CHAPTER 24
 THE BODY IN PHYSICAL
 EDUCATION CURRICULA: TRENDS
 AND APPROACHES IN ACADEMIC
 RESEARCH

Guilherme Ferreira Pereira
Master’s in Health and Environmental Sciences Education
Universidade São Judas Tadeu (USJT)
E-mail: gwylhermy@yahoo.com.br

Jessica Pontes Nóbrega
Master’s in Education
Universidade São Judas Tadeu (USJT)
E-mail: jessicaolvrpontes@gmail.com

Isabel Porto Filgueiras
Ph.D. in Education
Universidade São Judas Tadeu (USJT)
E-mail: prof.isabelporto@institutoanimaeducacao.org.br

Bruna Gabriela Marques
Ph.D. in Physical Education
Universidade São Judas Tadeu (USJT)
E-mail: prof.brunamarques@usjt.br


ABSTRACT: The objective of this integrative review was to map and analyze
academic research in Brazilian graduate programs addressing the themes of Body,
Curriculum, and Physical Education. The study used academic works (dissertations
and theses) available on the CAPES Digital Thesis and Dissertation Library website
as its research source. The research was conducted in the following stages:
formulation of the research question supervisor, followed by the development of
keywords for the research; the PRISMA protocol; and finally, the selection of thirteen
academic works that comprised this study. The analysis process revealed a
predominance of dissertations and a geographical concentration in the Southeast
and South regions. The results indicate that studies on the body in the Physical
Education curriculum have been conducted predominantly through documentary
studies, followed by instruments such as interviews and questionnaires. This
demonstrates that the dimension of the body highlighted has been the biological one,
present in the male and white body; and that atypical bodies are strongly rendered
invisible and silenced in the training of Physical Education professionals. In this
sense, it is concluded that the patriarchal, biologistic model of current society is in
the process of being actively reproduced in the training of physical education
professionals, thereby marginalizing the atypical subjective bodies present in society.

KEYWORDS: body, curriculum, physical education.


                                                                                   426

RESUMO: Esta revisão integrativa teve como objetivo mapear e analisar a
produção científica acadêmica em cursos de pós-graduação brasileiros sobre o
tema Corpo, Currículo e Educação Física. O estudo utilizou como fonte de
pesquisa trabalhos acadêmicos – dissertações e teses – disponíveis no site da
Biblioteca Digital de Teses e Dissertações da CAPES. A pesquisa seguiu as
seguintes etapas: formulação da questão norteadora, seguida do
desenvolvimento de palavras-chave para a busca; aplicação do protocolo
PRISMA; e, por fim, a seleção de treze trabalhos acadêmicos que compuseram
este estudo. O processo de análise revelou predominância de dissertações, com
concentração geográfica nas regiões Sudeste e Sul. Os resultados indicam que
os estudos sobre o corpo no currículo de Educação Física têm sido
predominantemente conduzidos por meio de estudos documentais, seguidos de
instrumentos como entrevistas e questionários. Isso demonstra que a dimensão
do corpo destacada tem sido a biológica, presente no corpo masculino e branco;
e que corpos atípicos são fortemente invisibilizados e silenciados na formação
de profissionais de Educação Física. Nesse sentido, conclui-se que o modelo
patriarcal e biológico da sociedade atual está sendo claramente reproduzido na
formação de profissionais de educação física, marginalizando os corpos
subjetivos atípicos presentes na sociedade.

PALAVRAS-CHAVE: body, curriculum, physical education.




                                                                          427

1. INTRODUCTION


       The body is the form through which humans exist and are present in the
world. It is through the body that humans became human; whether through the
biological condition of being or through the creative power of the work performed
by the body, we have become social and cultural beings. It is impossible to
conceive of human existence without a material body (Daolio, 1995).
       Historically, no figure has been more striking than the role played by the
body in different spaces, cultures, and eras. Beyond the power of instincts
internalized in the genetics of bodies, the body is the means by which humans
became civilized as animals; it is in the body and through the body that societies
in different eras and distinct spaces inscribe their values, beliefs, knowledge, arts,
powers, and education (Soares, 2022).
       Therefore, each body is a product of its time, its space, and its culture. And
over time, bodies have undergone profound transformations, shifting from a
strictly biological body to a subjective body. A body that is constructed from the
subjective constructions of subjects; a body that exists beyond its biosystems, a
body defined by our social identities, our ways of seeing ourselves as subjects,
which in many cases conflicts with our biological condition (Souza, 2005).
       To such an extent that these productions of subjective bodies uniquely
mark contemporary societies, in all their spaces. In our personal or professional
lives, at one time or another we will experience these encounters with these
multiple bodies up close. Bodies that present as Black bodies, trans bodies,
Indigenous bodies, binary bodies, bodies with disabilities, fat bodies, elderly
bodies, among so many others (Stubs, 2019).
       The recognition and experience of bodily equity in the contemporary
landscape is a fundamental element for us to experience a society that is socially
just, politically democratic, culturally diverse, and environmentally sustainable
(Barbosa, 2025).
       Thus, the objective of this study was to analyze academic production in
graduate programs regarding how the body has been addressed in the curricula
of undergraduate physical education programs, through an integrative literature
review.



                                                                                  428

      Initially, a guiding question for the review was formulated, which served as
a starting point and guide for the subsequent phases of the study: how have
academic works—dissertations and theses—highlighted the dimensions of the
body in the undergraduate Physical Education curriculum?


2. METHODOLOGY


      To answer the guiding question of this study, we opted to conduct an
integrative literature review, which, according to Souza, Silva, and Carvalho
(2010), is a form of research that enables the gathering, analysis, and synthesis
of knowledge produced on a specific topic over a specific period.
      This type of study, as highlighted by the cited authors, offers the advantage
of developing comprehensive and consistent understandings based on different
studies conducted within a specific time frame. In this sense, the decision to
structure the research through an integrative review was based on it offers the
ability to identify trends, gaps, and recurring themes in the academic literature
regarding the body, the curriculum, and Physical Education within the works
included in the study.
      An electronic search was conducted for academic works indexed in the
Brazilian Digital Library of Theses and Dissertations (BDTD) database in October
2025. The search terms used were “body,” “curriculum,” and “Physical
Education,” separated by the Boolean operator “AND.”
      It is believed that these descriptors fully reflect the target theme of this
review, since the objective is to analyze studies on how academic works have
highlighted the dimensions of the body in the undergraduate Physical Education
curriculum. It is important to note that, in the database, the terms were entered
only in Portuguese.
      Regarding the time frame, we chose not to set a specific date for the
information search. This decision was made considering that, since the 1980s,
interest in studies on the body beyond the Health Sciences has been growing
significantly. The Humanities have devoted considerable time and research to
developing studies on the theme of the body. Therefore, we emphasize the
importance of a contemporary and up-to-date approach to the topic under
discussion.


                                                                               429

       In the process of identifying the works, 302 studies were retrieved from the
digital database, of which 240 were dissertations and 62 were theses. No time
frame was applied for the research, but generally speaking, the earliest work
found dates from 1993 and the latest from 2024. When the exclusion criteria were
applied: (a) Duplicate works in the database were excluded, resulting in 299
works remaining; (b) Works excluded after reviewing titles and abstracts that did
not focus on the discussion of the topic in higher education totaled 286; (c) A total
of 13 works were fully reviewed and analyzed.


                       Figure 1. Flowchart of the research stages




                           Source: Prepared by the authors.




                                                                                 430

             3. RESULTS AND DISCUSSION


                     Table 1 presents the selection of studies for analysis in this integrative
             review. It is noted that the survey identified 13 references after applying the
             exclusion criteria. Table 1 highlights: the order of the studies; followed by the
             authors and year; the graduate program where the study was conducted and the
             classification of the academic work; the title of the study; the objectives; the
             methods used in the research; and finally, the results found.


                                           Table 1. Studies analyzed
            PROGRAM/HIG
No. AUTHOR        HER               TITLE              OBJECTIVE                METHODS               CONCLUSION
     YEAR     EDUCATION
             INSTITUTION
               TYPE OF
                STUDY
                Graduate         Analysis of        To conduct a study                           The bodily experience is
               Program in   bibliographic output on publications in                              essential for students to
    Makhou,     Science     in Brazilian journals journals in the field of    Analysis of    perceive themselves and be
    Carmem   Teaching and on the body in the Physical Education               curriculum      recognized in society, since
 1   Susana   Mathematics     field of physical regarding the theme            guidance        the body, as it moves, also
     (2024) Education – UEL       education             of the body          documents          thinks, creates, feels, and
                 Thesis                                                                       imagines, generating ideas
                                                                                                       and emotions.
                                                        To analyze the                            The curriculum, which
                                                     curriculum structure                    remains a teacher education
                                   The Body in the      of the Physical                      program despite the reforms
                                 Physical Education Education Teacher        The study is     implemented, has softened
        Dias,      Graduate      Teacher Education Education Program         qualitative in the sports-oriented character
       Elionai    Program in     Program at UFRRJ:       at UFRRJ to       nature, involving inherited from the program’s
 2     Ribeiro    Agricultural      Formation and       understand the         document        role during the dictatorship
      Almeida,    Education –       Transformation    possible dialogues analysis and a             and now takes on a
       (2022)       UFRRJ         from a Decolonial       that can be         descriptive         biological health bias,
                  Dissertation        Perspective   established with local     approach.        catering to the interests of
                                                       culture through a                           the faculty and media
                                                           decolonial                                 pressure to train
                                                         perspective.                         professionals for the fitness
                                                                                                          industry.
                                                                                                 Dance is permeated by
                   Graduate                             To analyze how                       power relations that operate
                  Program in                        homosexual teachers                       in the materialization of the
      Marani,      Physical       Body, dance, and who work with dance                           body in countless ways,
     Vitor Hugo Education, State physical education: in higher education       Narrative            sometimes through
 3     (2021)    University of        subversive    negotiate gender and       research,          reiteration, sometimes
                    Maringá         experiences of     sexuality in their     interviews.       through the subversion of
                     Thesis           gender and    bodily experiences in                       norms, which inform how
                                       sexuality?    Physical Education.                       gender and sexuality have
                                                                                               been negotiated, affirmed,
                                                                                                      and challenged
                                                         To facilitate a                       In this work, Frantz Fanon
                                                      discussion on the                                    (2008,
                                                           process of                            1980, 1968) contributes,
                                                         decolonizing                           guiding the course of this



                                                                                                          431

                              Decolonizing the     pedagogical                                    cartographic process that
     Naldino,   Graduate        Black Body in    practices in the                                    ultimately aims at the
     Luciana,  Program in    Physical Education Physical Education              Cartographic            decolonization of
4     (2019) Education, UFPR Classes: Notes on a   curriculum.                     method        pedagogical practices that
                             Necessary Practice                                               educate the body—practices
               Dissertation                                                                    that, by contemplating Afro-
                                                                                                 Brazilian culture and Black
                                                                                                       people, redefine it.
                                                                                               In summary, we believe that
                                                                                                          uncovering the
                                                                                                 understanding of body and
                                 The body/corporeity        To analyze the                            corporeality among
      Paiva,       Graduate      phenomenon in the discourse regarding                                      graduates of
     Weisian,     Program in         discourse of       the understanding of                  courses in the field may be a
        and         Physical     graduating students the body/corporeality                         step toward better initial
5   Santana de     Education          in Physical       phenomenon among Interview with training and, consequently,
      Castro        Federal       Education teacher students completing         open-ended      improved quality in content
      (2019)   University of the education programs Physical Education            questions       selection and curriculum
               Triângulo Mineiro in the Triângulo         teacher education                                  planning in
                     Thesis         Mineiro region             programs.                       of Physical Education in the
                                                                                                          school context.
                                                                                                   The results indicate that
                                                       The general objective                                    gaps
                                                           of this study is to                 need to be addressed when
                                                           analyze the initial                the initial training of physical
                                                       training of teachers in                        education teachers
                                     Ethnic-Racial          school physical                         addresses the topic of
                   Graduate      Relations Education education programs                       ERER; however, we highlight
       Silva,     Program in          in Physical        and the implications                  the advances in the training
    Leandro de     Education,     Education Teacher          of this training                          of these teachers,
6     Souza         Federal       Training Programs          regarding the     Questionnaires            considering that
      (2019)      University of   in Mato Grosso do education of ethnic-                        the course curricula include
                    Grande                Sul              racial relations at                              courses with
                   Dourados                                   three higher                          syllabi and content that
                Master’s Thesis                        education institutions                      enable training from the
                                                          in Mato Grosso do                    perspective of Ethnic-Racial
                                                                   Sul.                                       Relations
                                                                                                 The discourses expressed
                                                                                                    by students and those
                                                                                                  present in the curriculum
                                                          Understanding the                         regarding the theme of
                   Graduate           Bodies and       discourses on Bodies                   bodies and differences were
      Rezer,      Program in         Differences:           and Differences                              linked to certain
     Carla dos      Science      Discourses in Initial      present in initial   Qualitative     curricular components, but
7   Reis (2019) Education –      Physical Education training in Physical approach; Focus              not as a theme that
                    Doctoral       Teacher Training            Education.          Group.        permeated the entire initial
               Program, UNIJUÍ                                                                          training process.
                     Thesis
                                                                                                  The results revealed two
                                                                                                     very different ways of
                                                                                              problematizing the body and
                                                                                              teaching Physical Education
                                                                                              in school. The first, practiced
                   Graduate      Physical Education                                            by most of the interviewees,
                  Program in     Teachers Graduated Understanding how           Foucauldian          is a problematization
      Pietrine    Education -        from Private      they problematize the methodological characteristic of biopolitics,
8      Paiva    Knowledge and Institutions and the body in their physical principles of                        aiming,
     Barbosa, Social Inclusion Problematization of education classes.             discourse   through an active lifestyle, to
      (2017)         UFMG              the Body                                 analysis and control what students do with
                Master’s Thesis                                                  interviews.       their bodies, negotiating



                                                                                                           432

                                                                                                 within the school space the
                                                                                                    notion of citizenship,
                                                                                                understood by teachers as a
                                                                                                     means of education.
                                                            To analyze the
                                                              relationships                         The value of adopting a
                                                       established between                      Physical Culture that takes
      Pereira,     Graduate        Physical Culture       the concepts and                        into account its formative
       Carlos     Program in         and Teacher        practices related to                        aspect, considering the
      Alexandr Education, State     Training in the     the development of      Qualitative      student’s individuality and
9        and      University of  Physical Education Body Culture in the          Approach.        experiences, with flexible
      Holanda        Ceará         Program at UFC          curriculum of the Questionnaires. criteria, breaking away from
       (2017)     Dissertation                          Physical Education                            any and all forms of
                                                         Teacher Education                      standardizing assessments.
                                                          Program at UFC.
                                                            To identify how
                                                        Physical Education                     This approach allowed us to
                                                       has been shaping its                           map and analyze the
                   Graduate           Curricular        curriculum since the                     meanings and significance
                  Program in        Guidelines for    implementation of the                                 regarding
       Sayão, Public Policy and Physical Education National Curriculum Interviews and Physical Education training
10    Marcelo       Human        and Contemporary Guidelines (DCNs)              Document       and the ways of addressing
       Nunes    Development - Transformations of             and in light of      Analysis                      the
       (2014)   Rio de Janeiro         the Body              contemporary                           body in circulation, the
                State University                      transformations in the                    conflicts surrounding them,
                     Thesis                                ways of viewing,                      and the existence—or lack
                                                             experiencing,                           thereof—of discursive
                                                        understanding, and                                hegemonies
                                                          intervening in the
                                                                  body.
     Hakama by Master’s Degree       The Body: Its        To examine which       Document          The results we obtained
        Érica    in Education, Representations in dimensions of the               analysis,             revealed that the
11     Milena     University of  Physical Education        body have been      questionnaire, sociocultural dimension of
       (2012)    Western São       Teacher Training        addressed in the        written    the body has been prioritized
                     Paulo                               training process of testimony, and          by the political project
                                                                                 interview.
                  Dissertation                          Physical Education                      pedagogical structure of the
                                                                teachers.                         program and the courses
                                                                                               that make up the curriculum.
                                                                                                     They show that these
                                  Physical Activities                                          students have a critical view
                                 and the Body in the                                                on issues such as: the
                   Graduate         Conception of       To characterize and                        influences on the values
     Mugnain i,   Program in     Physical Education        identify Physical                  imposed on the body and the
       Joacir   Education, São Undergraduates: Education students’                 Group      practice of physical activities,
12     Rogge      Paulo State       Analysis of the      conceptions of the     interviews.     the devaluation of Physical
       (2007)      University    Bodily Practices of body and the practice                                  Education
                Master’s Thesis University Students of physical activities,                            Physical Education
                                    in the Limeira                                               as a curricular component,
                                        Region                                                  and the attitude of Physical
                                                                                                            Education
                                                                                                       Physical Education
                                                                                                   professionals working in
                                                                                                             schools.
                                                            Examining the
                                                         conception of man                      Physical Education, in light
      Rezende                                            that permeates the Historical and          of this set of questions,
          ,        Graduate                            theoretical training of documentary must adopt a new dialectical
      Alexandr    Program in     Physical Education: physical education analysis of the paradigm that reconfigures
13    and Luiz Education – UNB Reconstruction of          professionals and       Physical       the universe of knowledge



                                                                                                           433

Gonçalves     Thesis        Corporeality         identifying the     Education     that comprises it, endowing it
 (1993)                                        different interests   curriculum.     with scientific consistency
                                             associated with their                          and maturity.
                                                    practice.
                                           Source: Authors.


              The objective of this study was to analyze academic output at the master’s
       and doctoral program level in Brazil regarding how the body has been addressed
       in academic works—dissertations and theses—from a historical perspective. In
       this regard, in this section, we will discuss the findings of the research conducted
       as an integrative review.
              To construct the discussions, we employed the Thematic Analysis method
       as a tool for analyzing the content identified during the research process.
       Thematic Analysis is a method proposed by Braun and Clarke (2006) and can be
       understood as a qualitative data analysis method for identifying, analyzing,
       interpreting, and reporting patterns—also referred to as themes—based on
       qualitative data.
              Thematic Analysis is a method that has been gaining prominence in the
       field of research across various areas of knowledge, such as the humanities, with
       an emphasis on Psychology, but it is also commonly used in the health sciences,
       particularly in Nursing (Souza, 2019).
              A search conducted on the website of the Brazilian Digital Library of
       Theses and Dissertations (BDTD) identified a total of 13 works that satisfactorily
       addressed the research question. Of the works found, there were 4 theses and 9
       dissertations, spanning the period from 1993 to 2024. As for the graduate
       programs where the works were produced, they were diverse, ranging from
       Agricultural Education, Science Education, Physical Education, Science
       Teaching, Public Policy, and Human Development, with a particular emphasis on
       Education. The works were produced at both public and private higher education
       institutions, distributed across all regions of the country, with the exception of
       northern Brazil; the largest volume of production is concentrated in the
       southeastern region with six works, produced mostly by men.
              After organizing the academic papers into a table and reading and re-
       reading them, we grouped the content into thematic categories. To determine
       these categories, we highlighted the themes that emerged most frequently across




                                                                                              434

the studies as a whole, as well as themes that were not discussed or presented
in the texts of the academic papers included in the review.


3.1 METHODOLOGICAL APPROACHES TO THE STUDY OF THE BODY


       The research method in a study represents the central element for the
success of any research, whether qualitative or quantitative in approach. It is
essential that the researcher have a clear understanding of the research
approach and method to be used to achieve their objective (Pádua, 2019).
       After repeated readings of the studies, it became evident in the
methodology sections that, for the most part, the studies present the analysis
documentary analysis, followed by interviews and questionnaires to understand
the dimensions of the body present in the curriculum structure of undergraduate
Physical Education programs.
       Within the context of research methodologies, documentary analysis is a
method widely used in the humanities, social sciences, and health sciences. It
basically consists of analyzing various documents to produce relevant
information, which allows for the interpretation of meanings and the construction
of knowledge.
       However, certain aspects of these research methods must be understood,
such as: it is a low-cost method, it allows access to existing information, it does
not interfere with the object of study, it enables the construction of a longitudinal
analysis, and it can serve as a complement to other studies. On the other hand,
it lacks fixed standardization, does not sufficiently problematize the subject,
requires careful interpretation by the researcher, has limited availability of access
to the material, and may present bias in the documents or incomplete documents.
       The study highlights the use of Pedagogical Curriculum Projects and
Teaching Plans as research sources to understand the emphasis placed on the
dimensions of the body in the training of Physical Education professionals.
Another instrument used to understand the body was the conduct of interviews
with faculty and students in the program, followed by the administration of online
questionnaires to students. It is worth noting that regardless of the research
instrument used, they present advantages and disadvantages in the construction
of research data.


                                                                                 435

       The interview is one of the most widely used instruments in research in
general, whether in the humanities, social sciences, health sciences, or other
fields of knowledge. It consists of asking questions directly to participants, which
may be structured, semi-structured, or open-ended (Leitão, 2021).
       In the studies analyzed during the research, the use of open-ended
questions to understand the participants’ perspectives was highlighted.
Interviews, in general, allow for a deeper exploration of the topic and possess
flexibility, direct contact with participants, the possibility of clarifying responses,
and a high level of detail. On the other hand, they are costly and time-consuming,
may influence participants, carry a high risk of socially desirable responses, and
require more complex analysis (Leitão, 2021)
       Another common and widely used method in academic studies was the
use of questionnaires, particularly in their online format, as a way to elicit
participants’ understanding of the body. Questionnaires, which are a widely used
tool in quantitative research, have the advantage of being low-cost, reaching a
large number of participants, featuring standardized questions, enabling rapid
data collection, and facilitating analysis; on the other hand, they have low
response rates, lack depth, make it difficult to clarify doubts, carry a high risk of
automated responses, limit the scope of the topic under study, and depend on
the quality of the questionnaire (Costa, 2023).
       Given this context, it is clear that academic studies have utilized
documentary analysis, interviews, and questionnaires with students and faculty
in Physical Education programs as a means of data collection to understand the
conceptions and understandings this audience holds regarding the body as a
phenomenon of study.


3.2 DECIPHERING THE DOCUMENTED BODIES


       Historically, the body has always represented a major taboo for societies,
particularly Western societies. In reviewing the literature, with an emphasis on
the discussions, the prominence of the biological dimension of the body becomes
evident; both in the documentary analysis, focusing on curricular pedagogical
projects, and in the curriculum itself, the emphasis placed on the biological
dimension of the body is evident, with the dominance of curricular disciplines


                                                                                   436

markedly centered on biology, such as anatomy, physiology, kinesiology,
biochemistry, biomechanics, and biophysics. This represents a deepening of the
understanding of the body in its biological constitution, focused on performance,
in sportsmanship, in competition, in distinction, linked to the bias of health and
body aesthetics. In the pursuit of the perfect body, the superbody, the body
capable of overcoming the limits of the human condition (Berguer, 2007).
       Only one of the studies analyzed cited Law No. 10,639/03—later amended
by Law No. 11,645/08—which mandates that the subject “Afro-Brazilian and
Indigenous History and Culture” be a required component of the curriculum in
teacher education programs and an elective in bachelor’s degree programs. In
this regard, even in the face of the law’s mandatory nature, compliance is not
evident in the vast majority of Physical Education teacher education programs,
resulting in the absence of diverse representations of bodies in the training of
these professionals (Santos, 2023).
       Consequently, the curricula of undergraduate Physical Education
programs have historically prioritized biological, white, male bodies, focusing on
an approach centered on physical performance, sports, and competition (Soares,
2017). In other words, the body depicted in the analyzed academic works merely
reproduces the structure of a historically patriarchal, sexist, and racist society.
One that denies the possibility of visibility for other bodies that exist socially but
still represent a minority economically.


3.3 PERSPECTIVES ON CONTEMPORARY BODIES


       After multiple re-readings of the works comprising the research subject, it
was possible to observe that they present different perspectives on the body.
However, the perspective that stands out most in the studies is the view of the
body in its biological dimension. The body as a collection of cells, tissues, organs,
and biosystems; the material body, the condition of being and existing in the
human world (Soares, 2017).
       Another striking perspective in the studies analyzed through interviews
and content analysis derived from questionnaires is the body as an object of
control and domination by men; it is the body as an instrument for colonizing
subjects, whether through domestication, education, or control imposed by social


                                                                                  437

rules and codes of conduct. The body as an affect of life, a site of illness and
health. The body worshipped by aesthetics, dominated by disciplinary rules, the
body as a form of recognition in societies (Castro, 2003).
      Of the works analyzed, only two discuss the conception of the body beyond
the biological dimension. They present the body as a sociocultural construction,
a product of historical, social, political, and cultural relations. The body as a
dialectic of the universe, capable of expressing ideas, emotions, desires, and
feelings. The body that expresses the culture in which it is immersed, with its
individualities, but also laden with collective expressions imposed by social
experiences (Lara, 2004).
      Modern bodies, a product of the diversity of human subjectivities in ways
of being and existing in the world, remain distant from professional training in
many fields of knowledge; this is largely because curricula in general, especially
those of undergraduate programs, still harbor within them traditionalism, content-
centeredness, and technicality, disconnected from social realities that are in
constant transformation (Moreira, 2013).
      The focus on emerging new groups arises through the construction of
identity movements characterized by social and political organization around
shared identities—such as gender, race, ethnicity, sexuality, religion, or culture.
These movements have gained strength and expanded their presence in recent
decades due to the expansion of globalization and social media; yet they remain
invisible and silenced by education and training systems that fail to keep pace
with the rapid changes and transformations significantly shaping contemporary
societies (Goellner, 2010).
      As a result, Black, Indigenous, Quilombola, disabled, female, gay, trans,
binary, and non-binary bodies find themselves marginalized in a historically and
structurally conservative society that uses every means to maintain its status quo
of patriarchy and whiteness (Costa, 2025).


4. CONCLUSION


      Therefore, given the context presented, when we seek to understand how
academic studies conducted through the scientific production of dissertations and
theses have highlighted the body in the curricula of undergraduate physical


                                                                               438

education programs, we observe that the studies included in this integrative
review reinforce our view that historically the biological body has been the central
theme of study in the curricula, and that subjective bodies and/or cultural bodies
have been strongly excluded, silenced, and rendered invisible in the curricular
training of Physical Education professionals.
       Among the main findings of these studies, we can highlight that: even in
the face of the profound transformations that marked the last century in social,
scientific,   economic,   political,   cultural,   technological,   and   educational
dimensions, the curriculum of the vast majority of Physical Education programs
—Teacher Certification and Bachelor’s Degree programs—still adhere to a
strongly traditional model, characterized by studies that emphasize the biological
body through the disciplines of anatomy, physiology, kinesiology, biomechanics,
biochemistry, and biophysics.
       A curriculum centered on the biological constitution of the body—a body
geared toward training, performance, and competition—to meet an aesthetic
imposed by society: the perfect body, the superbody, the overcoming of biological
limits, the athletic and healthy body. From this perspective, the curricula of
Physical Education programs have historically reproduced the dominant patterns
existing in society: the supremacy of white bodies, of male bodies, of the imposed
aesthetic of acceptable bodies, of the machine-like body geared toward
competition and performance. A curriculum that seeks to build elements to
prevent the body from aging, in the continuous pursuit of eternal youth and
immortality—a dream long cherished since the Middle Ages by alchemists.
       Another aspect highlighted in the studies is the invisibility and silencing in
curricula of bodies constructed from human subjectivities, or of identity-based
bodies, the result of identity movements of many historically dominated and
erased groups from the contemporary scene, such as Black bodies, Indigenous
bodies, disabled bodies, female bodies, gay bodies, trans bodies, fat bodies, and
elderly bodies, among many others. In this sense, the present study was
important for identifying these gaps in the relationships established between
Physical Education curricula and the multiple realities manifested in the
conditions of contemporary bodies.
       Thus, grounded in these studies, we need to rethink the education we have
and the training processes in games, to change these realities, and seek to build


                                                                                  439

an education, training processes, and curricula that establish equity and equal
importance among all bodies, respecting their singularities and individualities,
and upholding their right to exist in a multicultural society. Where all bodies can
experience their true citizenship.




                                                                               440

                                   REFERENCES

ARANDA, Rafael Assad et al. The body concept of undergraduate students in Physical
Education. Motriz: Physical Education Journal, vol. 18, pp. 735–747, 2012.

BARBOSA, Cláudia de Faria. Cultural diversity and education – reflections based
on pedagogical practices and contemporary challenges. 2025.

BARBOSA, Pietrine Paiva. Physical Education teachers in training at private
institutions and the problematization of the body. 2017.

BERGER, Mirela. The keys to the temple. Ponto Urbe electronic journal, vol. 2,
2007.

BRAZIL. Law 10,639/2003, of January 9, 2003. Amends Law No. 9,394, of December
20, 1996. Official Gazette of the Union, Executive Branch, Brasília.

BRAZIL. Law 11,645/08 of March 10, 2008. Official Gazette of the Union, Executive
Branch, Brasília.

BRAUN, V.; CLARKE, V. Conceptual and Design Thinking for Thematic Analysis.
Qualitative Psychology, vol. 9, no. 1, pp. 3–26, 2022a.

CASTRO, Ana Lucia. Body Cult and Society: Media, Lifestyles, and Consumer
Culture. Annablume, 2003.

COSTA, Giovani et al. Online consulting methods applied by Physical Education
professionals in Greater Florianópolis, SC. 2023.

COSTA, Renildes da Conceição et al. Decolonizing bodies: the transformative
potential of peripheral circus education. 2025.

DAOLIO, Jocimar. On the culture of the body. Papirus Editora, 1995.

DIAS, Elionai Ribeiro Almeida et al. The body in the physical education teacher
training program at UFRRJ: formation and transformation from a decolonial
perspective. 2022.

GOELLNER, Silvana Vilodre. The education of bodies, genders, and sexualities and
the recognition of diversity. RBCE Training Notebooks, vol. 1, no. 2, 2010.

GONÇALVES, Andréia Santos. The body in school physical education: meanings
and possibilities of (re)construction. 2010.

GUERREIRO, Raquel de Oliveira. Creating a body wholly attuned to listening: an
existential journey. 2021.

HAKAMADA, E. M. The Body: Its Representations in Physical Education Teacher
Training. 2012. 124 p. 2012. Thesis (Master’s in Education)–University of Western
São Paulo, Presidente Prudente, SP.

LARA, Larissa Michelle. The ethical-aesthetic meaning of the body in popular culture.
Campinas: School of Education, State University of Campinas, 2004.




                                                                                    441

LEITÃO, Carla. The interview as a scientific research tool: planning, execution, and
analysis. Scientific Research Methodology in Computer Science in Education: A
Qualitative Research Approach, vol. 3, 2021.

MAKHOUL, CARMEM SUSANA. Analysis of the literature in Brazilian journals on
the body in the field of physical education. 2017.

MARANI, Vitor Hugo. Body, dance, and physical education: subversive
experiences of gender and sexuality? 2021.

MINAYO, M. C. Social research: theory, method, and creativity. Petrópolis: Vozes,
2002.

MOREIRA, Antonio Flávio Barbosa. Curriculum: policies and practices. Papirus
Editora, 2013.

MUGNAINI, Joacir Rogge. Physical activities and the body in the conception of
physical education undergraduates: analysis of the bodily practices of university
students in the Limeira region. 2007.

Naldino, Luciana. Decolonizing the Black Body in Physical Education Classes:
Notes on a Necessary Practice, 2019.

NUNES, Camila Xavier. Geographies of the body: toward a geography of difference.
2014.

PÁDUA, Elisabete Matallo M. Research methodology: a theoretical-practical
approach. Papirus Publishing, 2019.

PAIVA, Weisiana Santana de Castro. The body/corporeality phenomenon in the
discourse of graduates from Physical Education degree programs in the
Triângulo Mineiro region. 2019.

PEREIRA, Carlos Alexandre Holanda. Body culture and teacher training in the
physical education program at UFC. 2017.

REZENDE, Alexandre Luiz Gonçalves de. Physical education: reconstitution of
corporeality. 1993

REZER, Carla dos Reis. Bodies and differences: discourses in initial Physical
Education teacher training. 2019.

SAYÃO, Marcelo Nunes et al. The Curriculum Guidelines for Physical Education
and contemporary transformations of the body. 2014.

SILVA, Leandro de Souza. Education on Ethnic-Racial Relations in Physical
Education Teacher Education Programs in Mato Grosso do Sul. 2019, 138f. 2019.
Doctoral Thesis. Master’s Dissertation. Graduate Program in Education, Federal
University of Grande Dourados. Dourados-MS.

SOARES, Carmen Lúcia. Body and History. Autores Associados, 2022.

SOARES, Carmen Lúcia. Physical Education: European Roots. Autores
Associados, 2017.



                                                                                    442

SOUZA, Luciana Karine de. Research with qualitative data analysis: an introduction to
thematic analysis. Brazilian Archives of Psychology. Rio de Janeiro. Vol. 71, no. 2
(May/Aug. 2019), pp. 51–67, 2019.

SOUZA, Marcela Tavares de; SILVA, Michelly Dias da; CARVALHO, Rachel de.
Integrative review: what it is and how to do it. Einstein (São Paulo), v. 8, pp. 102–
106, 2010.

SOUZA, Nádia Geisa Silveira de. The body: inscriptions of the biological field and
everyday life. Educ. Real, pp. 169–186, 2005.

STRAUSS, A.; CORBIN, J. Qualitative research: techniques and procedures for
the development of Grounded Theory. 2nd ed. Porto Alegre: Artmed, 2008.

STUBS, Roberta. Devires of a body-experience. Appris Publishing, 2019.




                                                                                   443

CHAPTER 25
 EDUCATIONAL ROBOTICS:
 TEACHER TRAINING TO TACKLE
 RESISTANCE TO
 TECHNOLOGICAL ADVANCES


Maria Vanilza Rodrigues da Silva
Master of Education
Universidad de la Integración de las Américas
E-mail: vanilsavedra@gmail.com

Alberto da Silva Franqueira
Master’s in Emerging Technologies in Education
Must University (MUST)
E-mail: albertofranqueira@gmail.com

Christiane Diniz Guimarães
Master’s Candidate in Emerging Technologies in Education
Must University (MUST)
E-mail: christianedguimaraes@hotmail.com

Marco Antonio Silvany
Master’s Student in Education, Teacher Training
Universidad Europea del Atlántico (UNEATLANTICO)
E-mail: marco_silvany@uol.com.br

Rodolfo Gonçalves da Silva
Master’s Student in Emerging Technologies in Education
Must University (MUST)
E-mail: rodolfoeconomista@gmail.com

Sandra de Oliveira Botelho
Master’s in Science Education in the Amazon
Universidade do Estado do Amazonas (UEA)
E-mail: botsandra123@gmail.com

Silvana Maria Aparecida Viana Santos
Ph.D. Candidate in Education Sciences
Facultad Interamericana de Ciencias Sociales (FICS)
E-mail: silvanaviana11@yahoo.com.br

Yara Kirya Brum
Ph.D. Candidate in Education
Facultad Interamericana de Ciências Sociales (FICS)
E-mail: kirya1982brum@gmail.com


                                                           444

ABSTRACT: The objective of this integrative review was to map and analyze
academic research in Brazilian graduate programs addressing the themes of
Body, Curriculum, and Physical Education. The study used academic works
(dissertations and theses) available on the CAPES Digital Thesis and
Dissertation Library website as its research source. The research was conducted
in the following stages: formulation of the research question supervisor, followed
by the development of keywords for the research; the PRISMA protocol; and
finally, the selection of thirteen academic works that comprised this study. The
analysis process revealed a predominance of dissertations and a geographical
concentration in the Southeast and South regions. The results indicate that
studies on the body in the Physical Education curriculum have been conducted
predominantly through documentary studies, followed by instruments such as
interviews and questionnaires. This demonstrates that the dimension of the body
highlighted has been the biological one, present in the male and white body; and
that atypical bodies are strongly rendered invisible and silenced in the training of
Physical Education professionals. In this sense, it is concluded that the
patriarchal, biologistic model of current society is in the process of being actively
reproduced in the training of physical education professionals, thereby
marginalizing the atypical subjective bodies present in society.

KEYWORDS: body, curriculum, physical education.

RESUMO: Esta revisão integrativa teve como objetivo mapear e analisar a
produção científica acadêmica em cursos de pós-graduação brasileiros sobre o
tema Corpo, Currículo e Educação Física. O estudo utilizou como fonte de
pesquisa trabalhos acadêmicos – dissertações e teses – disponíveis no site da
Biblioteca Digital de Teses e Dissertações da CAPES. A pesquisa seguiu as
seguintes etapas: formulação da questão norteadora, seguida do
desenvolvimento de palavras-chave para a busca; aplicação do protocolo
PRISMA; e, por fim, a seleção de treze trabalhos acadêmicos que compuseram
este estudo. O processo de análise revelou predominância de dissertações, com
concentração geográfica nas regiões Sudeste e Sul. Os resultados indicam que
os estudos sobre o corpo no currículo de Educação Física têm sido
predominantemente conduzidos por meio de estudos documentais, seguidos de
instrumentos como entrevistas e questionários. Isso demonstra que a dimensão
do corpo destacada tem sido a biológica, presente no corpo masculino e branco;
e que corpos atípicos são fortemente invisibilizados e silenciados na formação
de profissionais de Educação Física. Nesse sentido, conclui-se que o modelo
patriarcal e biológico da sociedade atual está sendo claramente reproduzido na
formação de profissionais de educação física, marginalizando os corpos
subjetivos atípicos presentes na sociedade.

PALAVRAS-CHAVE: body, curriculum, physical education.




                                                                                 445

1. INTRODUCTION


       Educational robotics has emerged as an innovative approach to teaching,
promoting the development of students’ technical and cognitive skills. This
technology is integrated into the school curriculum with the aim of enhancing
learning and making classes dynamic and interactive. The inclusion of robotics in
the school environment is not limited to teaching programming and mechanical
concepts, but also encompasses the promotion of critical thinking, problem-
solving, and collaborative work.
       The rationale for this research lies in the growing importance of
educational robotics as a pedagogical tool in an educational landscape that seeks
constant innovation to improve the teaching-learning process. Several studies
have shown that robotics can be an ally in the holistic development of students,
providing an environment conducive to the development of various skills.
Furthermore, training teachers in the use of this technology is essential to ensure
that robotics is utilized effectively and meaningfully in schools.
       The problem to be investigated in this research is to understand how
educational robotics can contribute to students’ educational development and to
teacher training. It is necessary to analyze the challenges faced in implementing
this technology in schools, as well as the strategies that can be adopted to
overcome them. Issues such as teacher training, curriculum adaptation, and the
availability of resources are fundamental to the effective integration of robotics
into teaching.
       The objective of this research is to analyze the impact of educational
robotics on students’ educational development and teacher training, identifying
the main advantages, challenges, and future prospects of this pedagogical
approach.
       The text is structured as follows: the introduction presents the topic, the
rationale, the problem, and the objective of the research. Next, the theoretical
framework addresses the main concepts and theories related to educational
robotics. The three main sections explore the impact of robotics on educational
development, teacher training, and future challenges and prospects. The
methodology describes the methods used in the literature review. In the
discussion and results section, the research findings, their implications for


                                                                               446

educational practice, and suggestions for future research are analyzed. Finally,
the concluding remarks summarize the main points discussed throughout the
study.


2. THEORETICAL FRAMEWORK


         The theoretical framework is structured around three main axes: the
fundamental concepts and historical evolution of educational robotics are
presented, providing a basis for understanding the topic; next, the practical
application of robotics in the educational context is explored, highlighting the
benefits and methodologies used to integrate this technology into teaching;
finally, teacher training is addressed, discussing the necessary competencies,
available training programs, and the challenges faced by educators in
implementing robotics projects in the classroom.


3.   IMPACT       OF     EDUCATIONAL        ROBOTICS       ON    EDUCATIONAL
DEVELOPMENT


         Educational robotics has demonstrated a range of benefits for the student
learning process. According to Alexandre and Alexandria (2023, p. 2165),
“educational robotics allows for the integration of different areas of knowledge,
promoting interdisciplinary and meaningful learning.” This approach facilitates the
understanding of complex concepts and stimulates students’ interest in scientific
and technological subjects. Furthermore, Azevedo, Aglaé, and Pitta (2010, p.
348) emphasize that “the use of robotics kits in the classroom contributes to the
development of critical thinking and creativity,” skills essential for the
comprehensive education of students.
         Case studies have demonstrated the effectiveness of educational robotics
in various school contexts. Campos (2017, p. 2109) reports that “in a public
school in rural Brazil, the implementation of a robotics project resulted in a
significant improvement in students’ academic performance, particularly in
mathematics and science.” This result confirms robotics’ ability to engage
students and facilitate the understanding of content considered difficult. De
Freitas Neto and Bertagnolli (2021, p. 424) conducted a systematic review of the


                                                                               447

literature and concluded that “educational robotics projects are effective in
promoting collaborative work and problem-solving, essential skills for the 21st
century.” Analysis of these studies indicates that robotics not only improves
academic performance but also develops socio-emotional skills.
       A comparison between traditional teaching methods and the robotics-
based approach reveals significant differences. De Souza, Rodrigues, and
Andrade (2016, p. 1265) state that “while traditional methods tend to be teacher-
centered, educational robotics promotes student-centered learning, where
students are active participants in the process.” This results in greater
engagement and motivation to learn. Similarly, Ferraz (2023, p. 3215) notes that
“educational robotics facilitates the practical application of theoretical knowledge,
allowing students to see the relevance of what they are learning.” This practical
application is fundamental to consolidating learning and making the educational
process meaningful.
       Therefore, it is evident that educational robotics offers a number of
advantages compared to traditional methods. Sabatke and Costa (2023, p. 509)
highlight that “educational robotics is a powerful tool for transforming education,
promoting the integration of innovative technologies into the school curriculum.”
This transformation is essential to prepare students for the challenges of the
future. Silva (2014, p. 4021) also emphasizes that “educational robotics can be
adapted to different contexts and needs, making it a versatile and inclusive tool.”
Thus, educational robotics proves to be an effective and innovative approach to
students’ educational development.
       Based on the evidence presented, it is concluded that educational robotics
has a significant positive impact on educational development. The analysis of
benefits, case studies, and comparison with traditional methods indicate that
robotics not only improves academic performance but also develops essential
skills for the 21st century. Thus, educational robotics stands out as an innovative
and effective pedagogical strategy, capable of transforming educational practice
and preparing students for future challenges.




                                                                                 448

4. TEACHER TRAINING FOR EDUCATIONAL ROBOTICS


       Teacher training for the effective use of educational robotics is of
fundamental importance to ensure that this technology is implemented
meaningfully in schools. According to De Souza, Rodrigues, and Andrade (2016,
p. 1265), “the introduction of computational thinking into teacher training is
essential for teachers to develop the skills necessary to teach educational
robotics effectively.” This training enables educators to understand the basic
concepts of programming and robotics, as well as how to integrate them into the
school curriculum.
       Various professional development and training programs have been
created to address this need. Ferraz (2023, p. 3215) highlights that “technical
courses in agriculture, for example, have incorporated educational robotics into
their teacher training programs, aiming to prepare teachers to handle new
technologies.” These programs include both initial and continuing education,
providing teachers with the necessary tools to implement robotics projects in their
classes. Similarly, Sabatke and Costa (2023, p. 509) state that “workshops and
summer schools are opportunities for teachers to update their knowledge on new
methodologies and technologies applied to educational robotics.”
       However, teachers face several challenges in implementing robotics
projects in the classroom. Xavier and Silva (2022, p. 2006) point out that “one of
the greatest challenges is the lack of material and financial resources, which often
prevents the purchase of robotics kits and other necessary equipment.”
Furthermore, resistance to change and unfamiliarity with new technologies can
hinder the adoption of educational robotics. Freitas Neto and Bertagnolli (2021,
p. 424) explain that:


                        The implementation of educational robotics faces several obstacles,
                        including the need for adequate infrastructure, the lack of institutional
                        support, and the need for a cultural shift in teaching approaches.
                        Teachers must not only learn to use the new tools but also adapt their
                        pedagogical practices to effectively incorporate robotics. This requires
                        a collaborative effort among school administrators, governments, and
                        the educational community as a whole.


       These difficulties are compounded by the lack of time available for
teachers’ continuing professional development. Azevedo, Aglaé, and Pitta (2010,


                                                                                             449

p. 348) note that “teachers, already overburdened with their daily responsibilities,
often find it difficult to participate in additional training programs.” Thus, it is
essential that educational institutions offer support and incentives so that
teachers can dedicate themselves to their professional development.
      Therefore, teacher training is a key element for the success of educational
robotics in schools. Training programs must be accessible and tailored to
teachers’ specific needs. Despite the challenges, with the right support and
sufficient resources, teachers can become agents of change in the use of
educational robotics, providing students with an innovative learning experience.


5.   CHALLENGES         AND    FUTURE      PROSPECTS        OF    EDUCATIONAL
ROBOTICS


      The integration of educational robotics into the school curriculum faces
several challenges. According to Alexandre and Alexandria (2023, p. 2165), “one
of the main obstacles is the lack of adequate infrastructure in schools, which often
lack the necessary resources to implement robotics programs.” The absence of
specific equipment and access to quality internet limits schools’ ability to offer
meaningful learning experiences to students. Furthermore, Campos (2017, p.
2109) points out that “resistance to change on the part of teachers and
educational administrators also represents a significant challenge,” as many
education professionals are not yet familiar with emerging technologies and may
hesitate to adopt new pedagogical practices.
      On the other hand, educational robotics offers countless possibilities and
future opportunities. De Souza, Rodrigues, and Andrade (2016, p. 1265)
emphasize that “robotics has the potential to transform the teaching-learning
process, making it interactive and student-centered.” This transformation can
increase student engagement and promote the development of essential skills,
such as critical thinking and problem-solving. Furthermore, Ferraz (2023, p. 3215)
notes that “educational robotics can be integrated into various fields of
knowledge, from the exact sciences to the arts, providing an interdisciplinary
education.” This interdisciplinary approach not only enriches students’ learning
but also prepares them to face the challenges of a technological and
interconnected world.


                                                                                450

      For educational robotics to reach its full potential, significant investment in
public policies and infrastructure is necessary. Sabatke and Costa (2023, p. 509)
state that “governments must invest in the ongoing training of teachers and the
acquisition of robotics equipment for schools.” This investment is crucial to
ensuring that all students have access to the same learning opportunities. Xavier
and Silva (2022, p. 2006) explain that:


                     The adoption of public policies aimed at incorporating educational
                     robotics into the school curriculum requires strategic planning that
                     involves not only the acquisition of equipment but also teacher training
                     and the development of an appropriate curriculum. It is necessary to
                     create an environment conducive to innovation, where educators can
                     experiment with new methodologies and adapt their teaching practices
                     to effectively incorporate robotics. This process demands a
                     collaborative effort among different levels of government, educational
                     institutions, and the community.


      Azevedo, Aglaé, and Pitta (2010, p. 348) emphasize that “collaboration
between educational institutions, technology companies, and governments is
essential for the creation of sustainable and effective robotics programs.” This
partnership can facilitate the development of high-quality educational resources
and ensure the maintenance and constant updating of equipment. Furthermore,
well-structured public policies can promote equity, ensuring that all schools can
benefit from the advantages offered by educational robotics.
      In short, while educational robotics faces significant challenges, such as a
lack of infrastructure and resistance to change, its potential and future
opportunities are promising. Investments in public policies and in the ongoing
training of teachers are essential to overcoming these obstacles and ensuring
that educational robotics can contribute to students’ educational development.
Thus, educational robotics emerges as a tool for building an inclusive educational
system.


6. METHODOLOGY


      This study is a literature review with a qualitative focus, aimed at analyzing
and synthesizing existing knowledge on the impact of educational robotics on
students’ educational development and teacher training. The qualitative



                                                                                         451

approach was chosen because it allows for an understanding of the phenomena
studied without the need to quantify the data.
       The instruments used in the research included the collection of secondary
data from academic sources, such as scientific articles, dissertations, theses, and
publications in specialized journals. The selection of references was based on
their relevance and recency, seeking works that addressed the topic of
educational robotics. The procedures adopted included searching academic
databases such as Google Scholar, Scielo, and specific education and
technology databases, using keywords— related to the topic, such as
“educational robotics,” “teacher training,” “educational technology,” and
“educational development.”
       The techniques used in the analysis of the collected data included critical
reading and synthesis of the contents of the selected references. The main
concepts, theories, methods, and results presented by the authors were
identified, allowing for a cohesive and structured construction of the theoretical
framework. The information was organized in a way that provided a clear analysis
of the topics addressed, facilitating the understanding and discussion of the
results.


                                  Table 1: References Used
      Author(s)                 Title as published            Year      Type of work
 AZEVEDO, Samuel;          Mini-course: Introduction to       2010   62nd Annual Meeting
  AGLAÉ, Akynara;             Educational Robotics                       of the SBPC
   PITTA, Renata
   SILVA, Jéssica    Applications of educational robotics     2014        Conference
  Ferreira Souza da            in the municipal
                                 João Pessoa
 DE SOUZA, Isabelle Introduction of computational thinking    2016    Proceedings of the
Maria Lima; DA SILVA in teacher training for educational               Workshops of the
    RODRIGUES,                      robotics                         Brazilian Congress on
     Rivanilson;                                                         Informatics in
     ANDRADE,                                                         Education, p. 1265
      Wilkerson

  CAMPOS, Flavio       Educational robotics in Brazil: open   2017      Ibero-American
    Rodrigues           questions, challenges, and future            Journal of Educational
                                    prospects                         Studies, vol. 12, no.
                                                                       4, pp. 2108–2121

 DE FREITAS NETO, Educational Robotics and Teacher            2021      Journal of New
  J. J.; DE CASTRO Training: A Systematic Review of the                 Technologies in
  BERTAGNOLLI, S.                Literature                            Education, Porto
                                                                     Alegre, vol. 19, no. 1,
                                                                         pp. 423–432




                                                                                        452

 XAVIER, Heráclito        TEACHER TRAINING AND               2022        Conference
 Santos Martins; DA      MULTILITERACIES: MULTIPLE
  SILVA, Obdália               LANGUAGES IN
  Santana Ferraz       THE CONTEXT OF EDUCATIONAL
                                 ROBOTICS
   ALEXANDRE,            ROBOTICS AS A DRIVER OF             2023   Journal of Engineering
 Francisco de Assis     EDUCATIONAL DEVELOPMENT                        Education, vol.
     Souza; DE                                                                42
   ALEXANDRIA,
   Auzuir Ripardo
 FERRAZ, Dalva de       Educational robotics for training    2023          Thesis
      Oliveira         teachers in the technical course in
                            agriculture and livestock
   SABATKE, Ana          TEACHER TRAINING IN THE             2023    13th Workshop and
  Dariley Peters; DA   CURITIBA MUNICIPAL SCHOOL                    3rd Summer School of
   COSTA, Priscila         SYSTEM FOR TEACHING                         PPGECM/UFPR
    Kabbaz Alves          MATHEMATICS THROUGH
                          EDUCATIONAL ROBOTICS
                                      Source: own work


       The reference table used in the research contains an organized list of the
main works consulted, with details on authors, titles, years of publication, and
types of work. This table was essential for systematizing the information and
ensuring that all relevant sources were considered in the analysis.
       The presentation of the reference table is fundamental to demonstrating
the scope of the literature review and the diversity of sources consulted. This
table synthesizes significant works on educational robotics, providing a basis for
data analysis and the development of subsequent discussions.
       Including the reference table after the methodology makes it easier to see
the main works that underpin this research, allowing the reader to identify the
sources and topics covered. This contributes to the transparency and credibility
of the study, in addition to guiding future research in the same field.


7. ANALYSIS OF RESULTS OBTAINED WITH EDUCATIONAL ROBOTICS


       The analysis of the results obtained with educational robotics reveals a
varied landscape rich in implications for the teaching-learning process. Alexandre
and Alexandria (2023, p. 2165) state that “educational robotics has a significant
impact on student motivation, increasing their interest in scientific and
technological subjects.” This assertion is corroborated by several studies
showing how the integration of robotics into the curriculum can engage students
more effectively than traditional methods.


                                                                                      453

       Campos (2017, p. 2109) reports that “in a study conducted at a public
school, students who participated in a robotics project “showed a significant
improvement in their math and science grades, in addition to demonstrating
greater interest and participation in class.” This result highlights robotics’ ability
to facilitate the understanding of abstract concepts through practical and
interactive activities. De Freitas Neto and Bertagnolli (2021, p. 424) complement
this perspective by stating that “educational robotics promotes not only the
learning of specific content but also the development of skills such as problem-
solving, critical thinking, and collaboration.” The inclusion of these skills is
essential for the holistic development of students.
       However, results may vary across different studies and educational
contexts. De Souza, Rodrigues, and Andrade (2016, p. 1265) observed that “the
results of implementing educational robotics can be influenced by factors such
as available infrastructure, teachers’ level of training, and institutional support.”
This variation is important to consider when analyzing the effectiveness of
robotics in different school settings. Ferraz (2023, p. 3215) highlights that “in
institutions that have infrastructure and continuing education programs for
teachers, the results tend to be more positive.”
       Furthermore, Sabatke and Costa (2023, p. 509) emphasize that “the
integration of robotics into the curriculum must be planned and structured, taking
into account the specific characteristics of each school and the students’
circumstances.” This planning is essential to ensure that all students can benefit
from educational robotics. Silva (2014, p. 4021) clarifies that:


                      The implementation of educational robotics requires a coordinated
                      effort among teachers, administrators, and the school community. It is
                      necessary to develop an action plan that includes teacher training, the
                      acquisition of equipment, and the adaptation of the curriculum to new
                      technologies. Only through joint efforts is it possible to overcome
                      challenges and achieve the desired results.


       A comparison of results across different studies also reveals that
educational robotics can be adapted to diverse contexts. Xavier and Silva (2022,
p. 2006) observed that “in rural schools, robotics has been used as a tool to bring
students closer to technologies that are often distant from their everyday reality.”




                                                                                         454

This demonstrates the flexibility of educational robotics in meeting the needs of
different contexts.
       Therefore, the analysis of the results obtained with educational robotics
shows a promising scenario, but one that requires attention to the particularities
of each school environment. The benefits evidenced in the research, such as
increased motivation and the development of essential skills, indicate that
robotics can be an effective tool in education. However, it is essential that
implementation be well-planned and supported by public policies and adequate
investments. In this way, educational robotics can transform the teaching-
learning process and prepare students for future challenges.


8. IMPLICATIONS FOR EDUCATIONAL PRACTICE


       The results obtained with educational robotics have several important
implications for educational practice. Alexandre and Alexandria (2023, p. 2165)
state that “the inclusion of robotics in the school curriculum can transform the way
students interact with knowledge, making learning meaningful.” This suggests
that educational robotics is not merely an additional tool, but a means of
reconfiguring traditional pedagogical practices.
       The adoption of educational robotics requires a shift in the teacher’s role,
who becomes a facilitator of learning rather than a transmitter of knowledge.
Campos (2017, p. 2109) highlights that “teachers need to develop new
competencies, such as the ability to facilitate project-based learning and the
capacity to integrate different areas of knowledge.” This shift is essential to
maximize the benefits of educational robotics, as it fosters a collaborative and
interdisciplinary learning environment.
       De Souza, Rodrigues, and Andrade (2016, p. 1265) point out that
“educational robotics also requires a reassessment of the assessment methods
used in schools.” Traditional methods, based solely on written exams, may fail to
capture the skills developed through robotics projects, such as critical thinking,
creativity, and collaboration. Ferraz (2023, p. 3215) suggests that “assessments
should include criteria that value the learning process, problem-solving, and the
ability to work in teams.” The implications for educational practice are also
reflected in the need for adequate infrastructure. Xavier and Silva (2022, p. 2006)


                                                                                455

state that “schools need to be equipped with the necessary resources, such as
robotics kits, internet access, and adequate spaces for conducting practical
activities.” Without these resources, the implementation of robotics may be limited
and uneven.
           Based on these results, some recommendations for teachers and
educational administrators can be made. De Freitas Neto and Bertagnolli (2021,
p. 424) emphasize the importance of ongoing teacher training: “Teachers must
have access to training programs that not only teach robotics techniques but also
how to integrate them effectively into the curriculum.” Furthermore, it is essential
that educational administrators support these initiatives by providing time and
resources for teacher training.
           Sabatke and Costa (2023, p. 509) recommend that “educational
administrators develop partnerships with technology companies and universities
to facilitate the implementation of educational robotics.” These partnerships can
offer technical support, resources, and training, expanding the opportunities for
success of robotics projects in schools. Azevedo, Aglaé, and Pitta (2010, p. 348)
clarify:


                          Collaboration between schools, companies, and universities is
                          essential for creating an ecosystem of innovation in education. These
                          partnerships can provide not only the necessary material resources but
                          also the knowledge and technical expertise that are often lacking in
                          schools. The creation of collaborative networks allows schools to share
                          experiences, challenges, and solutions, strengthening the
                          implementation of educational robotics in a sustainable and effective
                          manner.


           Therefore, the implications of educational robotics for educational practice
require changes in teaching methods, assessment, and school infrastructure.
The adoption of recommendations that include ongoing teacher training and the
development of strategic partnerships can facilitate the effective integration of
robotics into the school curriculum, ensuring that all students can benefit from this
innovative pedagogical approach.




                                                                                             456

9. LIMITATIONS AND SUGGESTIONS FOR FUTURE RESEARCH


       The studies analyzed on educational robotics reveal several limitations
that need to be considered for a greater understanding of the topic. Alexandre
and Alexandria (2023, p. 2165) highlight that “one of the main limitations is the
variability in the quality and quantity of resources available in schools,” which can
influence the results obtained. This disparity can lead to an uneven
implementation of educational robotics, where some schools are well-equipped
while others lack the necessary basic resources.
       Campos (2017, p. 2109) notes that “there is a scarcity of longitudinal
studies that track students’ development over time following the introduction of
educational robotics.” Most research focuses on short-term outcomes, without
considering the lasting impacts on students’ learning and skill development.
Furthermore, De Souza, Rodrigues, and Andrade (2016, p. 1265) state that “the
lack of a standardized curriculum for educational robotics makes it difficult to
compare different studies and educational contexts.” This lack of standardization
prevents an accurate assessment of the effectiveness of robotics as an
educational tool.
       Another significant limitation is mentioned by De Freitas Neto and
Bertagnolli (2021, p. 424), who indicate that “many studies do not consider the
role of cultural and socioeconomic differences in the implementation of
educational robotics.” These variables can influence how robotics is perceived
and used by students and teachers, affecting research results. Azevedo, Aglaé,
and Pitta (2010, p. 348) emphasize that “resistance to change by on the part of
educators and administrators is also a limiting factor, as it can hinder the adoption
of new pedagogical practices.”
       To overcome these limitations, several suggestions for future research are
proposed. Ferraz (2023, p. 3215) suggests that “future research should focus on
long-term studies that track students’ progress at different stages of their education.”
This would allow for a better understanding of the lasting impacts of educational
robotics. Furthermore, Sabatke and Costa (2023, p. 509) recommend that “future
studies include an analysis of cultural and socioeconomic variables to understand
how these factors influence the effectiveness of educational robotics.” Xavier and
Silva (2022, p. 2006) state:


                                                                                    457

                      Future research on educational robotics should consider the creation of
                      standardized curricula that can be adapted to different contexts,
                      allowing for a more accurate comparison of results. Furthermore, it is
                      essential that studies include a critical analysis of the institutional and
                      cultural barriers that may hinder the effective implementation of robotics
                      in schools. By addressing these issues, research can provide insights
                      for the formulation of effective educational policies.


      Another important aspect is the need for more qualitative studies that
explore the experiences of teachers and students with educational robotics. De
Souza, Rodrigues, and Andrade (2016, p. 1265) suggest that “interviews and
focus groups could provide an understanding of the challenges and benefits
perceived by the school community.”
      Therefore, the limitations identified in studies on educational robotics point
to the need for a standardized approach in future research. Addressing these
limitations will allow for an understanding of the impacts of robotics on education,
providing a foundation for the implementation of innovative and effective
pedagogical practices.


10. FINAL CONSIDERATIONS


      The main findings of this research indicate that educational robotics has a
significant impact on students’ educational development and teacher training. In
response to the research question regarding how educational robotics
contributes to student development and teacher training, it became evident that
educational robotics promotes student-centered learning. This increases student
motivation and engagement, facilitating the understanding of complex concepts
and promoting the development of essential skills such as critical thinking,
problem-solving, and collaboration.
      The observed benefits include an improvement in students’ academic
performance, especially in science and mathematics. Educational robotics also
has the potential to transform teaching practice, requiring teachers to develop
new competencies and adopt interdisciplinary teaching methods. These findings
highlight the importance of ongoing teacher training and the need for institutional
support for the effective implementation of robotics in schools.
      However, the research also identified several challenges in integrating
educational robotics. The lack of adequate infrastructure, resistance to change


                                                                                            458

on the part of educators and administrators, and the absence of a standardized
curriculum are significant obstacles that must be overcome to maximize the
benefits of educational robotics. These challenges indicate that, although robotics
has great potential, its implementation requires planning and ongoing support.
       The contributions of this study are relevant to understanding the role of
educational robotics in educational development. Analysis of the results shows
that robotics can be an effective tool for improving the quality of teaching and
learning, providing an engaging educational experience. Furthermore, this study
offers practical recommendations for teachers and educational administrators on
how to effectively integrate robotics into the school curriculum.
       However, it is important to recognize that further studies are needed to
complement the findings of this research. Longitudinal studies that track student
development over time are necessary to understand the lasting impacts of
educational    robotics.   Furthermore,     research     exploring    cultural   and
socioeconomic variables can provide an analysis of how educational robotics can
be adapted to different contexts. The inclusion of qualitative analyses of teachers’
and students’ experiences can also enrich the understanding of the challenges
and benefits of robotics in educational practice.
       In summary, this research contributes to knowledge about educational
robotics, highlighting its benefits, challenges, and implications for educational
practice. Educational robotics has the potential to transform teaching and
learning, but its effective implementation requires a collaborative and ongoing
effort. Future studies are needed to deepen the understanding of the impacts of
robotics and to develop strategies that ensure its successful integration into
schools. In this way, educational robotics can fulfill its role of preparing students
for the challenges of the 21st century, promoting an inclusive education.




                                                                                 459

                                    REFERENCES

ALEXANDRE, Francisco de Assis Souza; DE ALEXANDRIA, Auzuir Ripardo. Robotics
as a driver of educational development. Journal of Engineering Education, vol. 42,
2023. Available at: http://revista.educacao.ws/revista/
index.php/abenge/article/download/2165/1153

AZEVEDO, Samuel; AGLAÉ, Akynara; PITTA, Renata. Mini-course: Introduction to
educational robotics. 62nd Annual Meeting of the SBPC. 2010. Available at:
https://portalidea.com.br/cursos/b3481605419da1e917763cb33f2dc5f5.pdf

CAMPOS, Flavio Rodrigues. Educational robotics in Brazil: open questions,
challenges, and future perspectives. Ibero-American Journal of Educational
Studies, vol. 12, no. 4, pp. 2108–2121, 2017. Available at:
https://dialnet.unirioja.es/descarga/articulo/6229845.pdf

DE FREITAS NETO, J. J.; DE CASTRO BERTAGNOLLI, S. Educational Robotics
and Teacher Training: A systematic review of the literature. Journal of New
Technologies in Education, Porto Alegre, vol. 19, no. 1, pp. 423–432, 2021. DOI:
10.22456/1679-1916.118532. Available at:
https://seer.ufrgs.br/index.php/renote/article/view/118532

DE SOUZA, Isabelle Maria Lima; DA SILVA RODRIGUES, Rivanilson; ANDRADE,
Wilkerson. Introduction of computational thinking in teacher training for educational
robotics. In: Proceedings of the Workshops of the Brazilian Congress on
Informatics in Education. 2016. p. 1265.
Available at: http://milanesa.ime.usp.br/rbie/index. php/wcbie/article/view/7052

FERRAZ, Dalva de Oliveira. Educational robotics for training teachers in the
technical course in agriculture and livestock. 2023. Available at:
https://repositorio.ifes.edu.br/bitstream/handle/123456789/3215/DISSERTACA
O_Rob%c3%b3tica_Educacional_Forma%c3%a7%c3%a3o_Professores_Agro
pecu%c3%a1ria.pdf?sequence=1&isAllowed=y

SABATKE, Ana Dariley Peters; DA COSTA, Priscila Kabbaz Alves. Teacher training in
the Curitiba Municipal School System for teaching mathematics through educational
robotics. In: XIII Workshop and III Summer School of PPGECM/UFPR. 2023.
Available at: https://www.researchgate.net/profile/ Ana-Peters-
Sabatke/publication/369078509_TEACHER_TRAINING_IN_THE_CURITIBA_MUNICIP
AL_SCHOOL_SYSTEM_FOR_TEACHING_MATHEMATICS
THROUGH_EDUCATIONAL_ROBOTICS/links/65e60524e7670d36abfd
1687/TEACHER-TRAINING-IN-THE-CURITIBA-MUNICIPAL-SCHOOL_SYSTEM-
FOR-TEACHING_MATHEMATICS_THROUGH_EDUCATIONAL_ROBOTICS-
EDUCATIONAL.pdf

SILVA, Jéssica Ferreira Souza da. Applications of educational robotics in the
municipal school system of João Pessoa. 2014. Available at:
https://www.editorarealize.com.br/editora/anais/conedu/2022/TRABALHO_COM
PLETO_EV174_MD1_ID16916_TB4021_01122022171906.pdf

XAVIER, Heráclito Santos Martins; DA SILVA, Obdália Santana Ferraz. Teacher
education and multiliteracies: multiple languages in the context of educational
robotics. Available at: https://www.editorarealize.com.br/
editora/anais/conedu/2022/TRABALHO_EV174_MD1_ID11338_TB1182_20062
022192803.pdf


                                                                                        460

CHAPTER 26
 ENVIRONMENTAL EDUCATION IN
 HIGH SCHOOL: AN ANALYSIS OF
 POLITICAL-PEDAGOGICAL
 PROJECTS FROM EIGHT PUBLIC
 SCHOOLS IN JUAZEIRO-BA

Gilberto Araújo Reis
Ph.D. candidate in Education
Universidade de Pernambuco
E-mail: gilberto.reis@upe.br

Vivian Alves Pamponet
Ph.D. candidate in Education
Universidade de Pernambuco
E-mail: vivian.pamponet@upe.br

Vinícius Dias de Carvalho
Master in Education
Universidade de Pernambuco
E-mail: vinicius.dias@ifpi.edu.br

Bianca Moraes Dantas Reis
Master in Inclusive Education
Universidade de Pernambuco
E-mail: bianca.reis@unesp.br

Edivaldo Xavier da Silva Júnior
Master in Science Education
Universidade de Pernambuco
E-mail: edivaldo.junior@upe.br

Tarcísio Fulgêncio Alves da Silva
Ph.D. in Health Sciences
Universidade de Pernambuco
E-mail: tarcisio.silva@upe.br

Paulo César Marques de Andrade Santos
Ph.D. in Education
Universidade de Pernambuco
E-mail: paulo.marques@upe.br

Maria da Conceição Ferreira da Silva
Master's student in Education
Universidade de Pernambuco
E-mail: mconceicao.ferreira@upe.br


                                        461

Icaro Kleysson de Souza Carvalho
Ph.D. candidate in Education
Universidade de Pernambuco
E-mail: icaro.kleysson@upe.br

Ricardo Kenji Shiosaki
Ph.D. in Biological Sciences
Universidade de Pernambuco
E-mail: ricardo.shiosaki@upe.br


ABSTRACT: This research aimed to evaluate how Environmental Education
(EE) is being addressed in the Political-Pedagogical Projects (PPPs) of 8 state
schools in the municipality of Juazeiro-BA, according to the Bahia State EE Policy
(PEEA/BA) and the Bahia Reference Curriculum Document (DCRB). The need
for the inclusion of EE in the schools' PPPs is implicit in the DCRB, when it
reiterates the need to promote respect for socio-environmental sustainability.
Resolution CEE No. 11, of January 17, 2017, which provides for Environmental
Education in the Bahia State Education System, determines that EE must be
present in an articulated manner at all levels, stages and modalities of education
and included in the School Regulations, Political-Pedagogical Project, Course
Plan (PC), Course Pedagogical Project (PPC) and Institutional Development Plan
(PDI). The analysis of the PPPs (Political-Pedagogical Projects) was carried out
within the theoretical-analytical framework of Bardin's content analysis,
identifying the textual parts that addressed the environmental theme and
selecting those directly or indirectly related to Environmental Education. In
composing the corpus of analysis in the PPPs, it was possible to identify essential
information for the document, such as the didactic-pedagogical organization, the
history of the school unit, the teaching and administrative staff, infrastructure,
among other necessary aspects for its elaboration. It was concluded that there is
limited internalization of the environmental issue in the PPPs, and that proposals
and actions in Environmental Education are not adequately grounded for the
current configuration of secondary education. Regarding the theme related to
mycology, no references were found in the PPPs, demonstrating a gap that does
not adequately address this group of living beings.

KEYWORDS: education, environment and sustainability, secondary education,
fungi.

RESUMO: A pesquisa objetivou avaliar como a Educação Ambiental (EA) vem
sendo abordada em Projetos Político Pedagógicos (PPPs) de 8 escolas
estaduais do município de Juazeiro-BA, conforme a Política Estadual de EA da
Bahia (PEEA/BA) e do Documento Curricular Referencial da Bahia (DCRB). A
necessidade da inclusão da EA nos PPPs das escolas fica implícita no DCRB,
quando reitera a necessidade de promover o respeito à sustentabilidade
socioambiental. A Resolução CEE Nº 11, de 17 de janeiro de 2017 que dispõe
sobre a Educação Ambiental no Sistema Estadual de Ensino da Bahia determina
que a EA deve estar presente de forma articulada em todos os níveis, etapas e
modalidades de ensino e inserida no Regimento Escolar, Projeto Político
Pedagógico, Plano de Curso (PC), Projeto Pedagógico de Curso (PPC) e Plano


                                                                               462

de Desenvolvimento Institucional (PDI). A análise dos PPPs foi realizada dentro
do fundamento teórico-analítico da análise de conteúdo de Bardin, identificadas
as partes textuais que abordavam a temática ambiental, selecionando-se
aquelas relacionadas direta ou indiretamente com a EA. Na composição do
corpus de análise nos PPPs analisados, foi possível identificar informações
indispensáveis ao documento, como a organização didático-pedagógica, história
da unidade escolar, corpo docente e administrativo, infraestrutura, dentre outras
necessárias à sua elaboração. Concluiu-se que há reduzida internalização da
questão ambiental nos PPPs, como também não estão presentes propostas e
ações em EA fundamentadas para a atual configuração do Ensino Médio.
Quanto à temática relacionada com a micologia, não foram encontradas
referências nos PPPs, demonstrando uma lacuna que não contempla
adequadamente esse grupo de seres vivos.

PALAVRAS-CHAVE: educação, meio ambiente e sustentabilidade, ensino
médio, fungos.




                                                                             463

1. INTRODUCTION


       Environmental Education (EE), a topic focused on the protection and
improvement of environmental conditions, has been on the international political
agenda since the 1972 Stockholm Declaration. In Brazil, EE attained the status
of National Policy in the late 1990s and is defined in Law 9.975/1999, Article 1, in
terms of the relationships established between the individual and the community,
which encompass “the development of social values, knowledge, skills, attitudes,
and competencies focused on environmental conservation, a common good,
essential for a healthy and sustainable quality of life” (Brazil, 1999, n.p.).
Furthermore, EE must be permanently integrated and disseminated at all levels
and in all forms of education.
       Law No. 9,394/96, the Law on Guidelines and Foundations of National
Education (LDBEN), establishes the pedagogical policy project (PPP) as an
essential component for all schools (Brazil, 1996). The document contains all the
pedagogical proposals, goals, and objectives that the school seeks to achieve
during the school year, making it crucial for the school’s pedagogical policy.
Constructed collaboratively, the PPP makes it possible to restore the human,
scientific, and liberating meaning of planning, promoting changes in daily
conceptions and practices, and outlining guidelines for the educational process.
It stands in contrast to the logic of bureaucratic or purely strategic planning, which
is widespread in the more conservative spheres of education and in the neoliberal
reforms of the 1990s (Rebouças et al., 2021).
       By highlighting the reflective and transformative potential of collective
action as a pedagogical political project, Gadotti (1998) clarifies that such action
does not negate what has already been established by the school, such as its
history, its curricula, its methods, its internal and external staff, and its way of life.
A project always confronts what already exists with what can be built.
       Loureiro (2020) points out that EA is an educational and social practice
whose objective is to promote the construction of values, concepts, skills, and
attitudes that enable an understanding of the reality of life and the conscious and
responsible actions of individuals and social groups in the environment.
Contributing to the search for a new civilizational and societal paradigm, based



                                                                                      464

on a new ethic in the relations between society and nature (Silva; Schiavetti,
2012).
         Therefore, to effectively transform this structural and conjunctural crisis,
EE is, by definition, a strategic element for the development of a broad critical
consciousness that comprehends the social and production relations that situate
human insertion in nature, with the PPPs serving as a guiding document for these
practices in the school environment and the socio-environmental relations that
permeate it. Thus, education professionals must provide students with
opportunities to engage with scientific knowledge, the relationship between
humans and other living beings, and nature, fostering a worldview that allows
them to observe it from a different perspective.
         Among the content that can be linked to EA are studies of microorganisms,
particularly fungi, which are fundamental to sustaining life on the planet, as they
participate in the decomposition of organic matter, the recycling of nutrients, and
the production of various compounds beneficial to human and animal health (Reis
et al., 2024).
         Despite all their economic and environmental importance, fungi are still
little known and valued by most people, who often associate them only with
diseases and pests. It is commendable that the school highlights, in its
Pedagogical Policy Statement, a distinctive pedagogical approach, utilizing
resources accessible to students and bridging the gap between scientific
knowledge and popular knowledge, with the aim of clarifying the subject. Reis et
al. (2024) mention the lack of contextualization in the teaching of mycology in
high school, particularly from the perspective of environmental education, and
further state that an immersion in the concepts underpinning the STSA (Science,
Technology, Society, and Environment) movement is necessary for students’
critical and reflective thinking.
         The State Policy on Environmental Education of the State of Bahia –
PEEA-BA, in its Article 18, stipulates that “formal education systems must
promote the inclusion of environmental education in school regulations and in
schools’ Educational Project Plans (PPPs), at all levels and in all types of
education” (Bahia, 2011).
         To situate AE within a more specific context, the State of Bahia drafted
and validated the State of Bahia Environmental Education Policy (PEEA/BA)


                                                                                 465

through Law 12,056 of January 7, 2011, regulated by Decree 19,083 of June 7,
2019, to be implemented in all its Territorial Identity (TI) (Bahia, 2011, 2019). The
PEEA/BA is a public policy that incorporates, within its educational framework,
the principles of the Treaty on Environmental Education for Sustainable Societies
and Global Responsibility and the Earth Charter; it organizes implementation
plans within a specific territory; and it must be institutionalized as the fulfillment
of the State’s obligation to ensure conditions that facilitate society’s effective
participation in decision-making processes and public management.
       In light of the aforementioned questions and considering the PPPs as
relevant documents in the AE movement within formal educational settings, a
study was conducted to examine how AE, and its relationship with content on
fungi, has been addressed in Pedagogical Policy Projects at 8 state schools in
the municipality of Juazeiro, from the perspective of the Bahia State
Environmental Education Policy (PEEA/BA) and the DCRB.


2. METHODOLOGICAL APPROACH


       This study is a documentary research project with a qualitative approach
and exploratory nature, conducted in 2023. It consisted of an analysis of PPPs
from 8 state high schools located in the municipality of Juazeiro, Bahia. Juazeiro
is located in the far northern interior of Bahia in the São Francisco Valley
mesoregion, approximately 500 km from Salvador, the capital of Bahia, and
adjacent to Petrolina, Pernambuco, separated by the São Francisco River. It has
a population of 235,816 inhabitants (IBGE, Demographic Census, 2022).
       The study proceeded to search for and analyze the current PPPs of the
state high schools in the municipality. These documents were requested from the
Coordination of the Territorial Education Center (NTE-04) in Juazeiro, Bahia,
which promptly provided contact information for the state schools in the
municipality and issued a document to the schools, informing them of the nature
and objective of the research. The schools that provided the documents were not
identified in this study, ensuring their anonymity and confidentiality.
       Eighteen high schools in the state system were contacted via email, of
which only 8 submitted their PPPs in a timely manner for inclusion in this study.



                                                                                  466

These schools were identified as: School-A, School-B, School-C, School-D,
School-E, School-F, School-G, and School-H.
       The analysis of the PPPs was conducted within the theoretical-analytical
framework of content analysis by Bardin (2016), beginning with a pre-analysis
involving an initial, flexible reading that adapted to the flexibility with which each
school’s documents were drafted, as well as the specific nature of what the
research aims to present. This was followed by an exploratory reading, identifying
and assigning codes to relevant passages. After rereading the excerpts, the
categories of analysis were established.
       Textual passages addressing environmental themes were identified,
selecting those directly or indirectly related to EE, and after a more thorough
analysis, the excerpts were included in the results of this study in a table showing
the frequency of occurrence of the categories. The year of update for the PPPs
was also recorded, along with the frequency of occurrence of certain descriptors
related to EA, such as: “Environmental Education”; “Sustent” (ability)(able);
“Environment”; “Biodiversity”; “Socio-environmental.” Figure 1 presents the main
stages of the research.


                Figure 1 – Diagram illustrating the methodological approach.




                                   Source: Author, 2024.




                                                                                  467

3. RESULTS AND DISCUSSION


       In compiling the corpus for analysis—specifically, the PPPs examined—it
was possible to identify information essential to the document, such as the
didactic-pedagogical organization, the school’s history, the teaching and
administrative staff, and infrastructure, among other details necessary for its
development. All analyzed documents highlighted the need for interdisciplinary
work in school activities. As an example, here is a quote from School A’s PPP:
       The contextual and interdisciplinary implementation of high school
curriculum content is achieved through interdisciplinarity, the interrelationship
between teachers and their respective subjects, and through the conduct of
extracurricular activities involving all subjects. This will ensure interdisciplinary
experiences of the curriculum content so that students can experience, in
practice, the significance of systematic studies.(School A’s PPP, p. 25).
       Table 1 presents the frequency of occurrence of various descriptors used
in the EA.


                     Table 1 – Frequency of occurrence of descriptors.

                                          Descriptors
                                                                                                      Environmental
                             Environme




                                                             Environment
                             Education

                                          Sustainable




                                                                                 Biodiversity
                                           (ability)




                                                                                                      Social and


                                                                                                                      Fungi
                             ntal




                 Percentage*             25%            87%                100%                 12.5%                 25%     0%

                   School A               0             04                  03                    0                     0     0
                  School – B             01              0                  03                    0                     0     0
                  School – C             03             09                  09                   02                     0     0

                  School – D              0             02                  03                    0                    01     0

                  School – E              0             04                  04                    0                     0     0
                 School – F           0        02        04          0          0       0
                 School – G           0        04        04          0         02       0
                 School – H           0        01        01          0          0       0
    *% of schools that include this category in their PPP out of a total of 8 analyzed.
   Source: School PPPs (Field research conducted between August and December 2023).


       The term “Environmental Education” was mentioned only in School C’s
PPP and was superficially addressed in School B’s document, but it did not


                                                                                                                              468

appear in the other documents analyzed. However, in the PPPs of the 8 schools,
it was possible to identify passages, actions, and curricular components that are
directly or indirectly associated with EE.
       It was observed that the PPPs have been outdated since their creation, as
can be seen in Table 2, especially with regard to the DCRB (Bahia, 2022).
However, a concern was noted on the part of administrators and coordinators
regarding the reformulation of the documents in light of the current challenge
schools face in adapting to changes in high school education.


                     Table 2 – Year of update for the PPPs analyzed.
   Schools       A             B          C        D        E        F    G      H
   Year of     2015 to      2016 to      2019 2023 Not reported 2023     2022   2021
    update      2018          2019
  of the PPP
            *Schools report that the PPP was developed for the four-year period.
    Source: School PPPs (Field survey conducted between August and December 2023).


       The term “Biodiversity” was mentioned only by School C. The study
conducted by Rodrigues et al. (2022) concluded that “the dissemination of
scientific literature on Environmental Education and biodiversity is related to
issues that go beyond environmental concerns, contributing to social, economic,
and sustainable development aspects”; however, greater emphasis should be
placed on the importance of biodiversity conservation, including the complexity
of ecological relationships among living organisms. From this perspective, fungi,
for example, are underrepresented in terms of their ecological importance in
schools (Silva and Gown, 2021; Rizzon et al., 2017), and other potential
applications are also overlooked. Fungal bioremediation has emerged as a
sustainable alternative for remediating areas contaminated with toxic compounds
(Pesenti et al., 2023; Carvalho, 2023), as it is a process that utilizes
microorganisms—fungi—which possess metabolic versatility and the ability to
degrade complex compounds (Zeghal et al., 2021) and transform them into less
harmful or biodegradable compounds.
       Biological control is an ecological alternative to chemical pest control
methods, which can be harmful to the environment and human health; it consists
of the use of microorganisms, particularly bacteria and fungi (Dias da Silva et al.,
2023; Miranda et al., 2023). Dias da Silva et al. (2023) highlight its effectiveness
in controlling pests and diseases, reducing environmental impacts, increasing


                                                                                     469

food security, and decreasing rural workers’ exposure to toxic substances,
thereby contributing to more sustainable agriculture.
        Kramer and Estevam da Silva (2023) emphasize that fungi, due to their
ability to capture metal ions in solution through sorption, mobilization, and
adsorption, can be used in the biosorption process, accumulating high
concentrations of heavy metals in their cells, thereby enabling the removal of
these    contaminants        from     water.                         Heavy                      metals,                          because          they   are
bioaccumulative, can enter the food chain, causing physiological and biochemical
changes and posing carcinogenic risks to humans (Kramer; Estevam da Silva
2023). And in soil regeneration, with the consequent increase in agricultural
production, in addition to the recovery of degraded areas using arbuscular
mycorrhizal fungi (Prado et al., 2023; Lima et al., 2017; Soares et al., 2023).
Therefore, it is beneficial for schools to incorporate fungi as a cross-cutting and
integrative theme that can foster the development of critical environmental
education.
        Table 3 presents the frequency of the categories identified in the analyzed
PPPs:


                    Table 3 – Categories present in the PPPs related to EE.
                                                   Frequencies
                                                                                                                    School – G
                                      School – A

                                                   School – B
                                                                School – C

                                                                             School – D




                                                                                                                                  School – H
                                                                                          School – E

                                                                                                       School – F




              Category                                                                                                                         Percentage*



            Projects for EA             3 1                 1                          37.5%
  Information on the community’s        1                                              12.5%
     socio-environmental issues
         served by the school
            Events for EA               1              1                                25%
 EA in educational goals, objectives,            1     1    1    1      1              62.5%
        principles, and values
   Existence of regulations for EA                     1    1                           25%
         EA in the curriculum                    1                           1          25%
        *% of schools that include this category in their PPP out of a total of 8 analyzed.

     Source: School PPPs (Field survey conducted between August and December 2023).


        The analyzed PPPs do not provide information on environmental
conditions in their surroundings, which would be essential to justify the need for
including environmental education ( ) projects and interventions; however,



                                                                                                                                                         470

environmental education projects were identified only at School-A, School-B, and
School-E. A study conducted in four state schools in Juazeiro also found a lack
of programs and projects involving the local community, as well as the “absence
of essential content and elements in the curricular Environmental Education
process” (Souza et al., 2023, p.205). However, it is worth noting that all schools
reported that they are in the process of updating and adapting their PPPs to the
new high school curriculum. The ProEASE document (Bahia, 2015) had already
warned of the limited integration of environmental issues into pedagogical policy
documents. CEE Resolution No. 11, dated January 17, 2017, which addresses
Environmental Education in the State Education System of Bahia, stipulates that
EE: [...] must be present in a coordinated manner at all levels, stages, and
modalities of education and incorporated into the School Regulations,
Pedagogical Policy Document, Course Plan (PC), Course Pedagogical Project
(PPC), and Institutional Development Plan (PDI).
      School A cites projects such as “Citizen School,” in partnership with the
State University of Bahia (UNEB), for the preservation of the São Francisco River,
and the “Vegetable Garden and Garden” project; however, although they are
mentioned in the PPE, it was not possible to find further details regarding their
objectives, implementation, or continuity. The document presents social
problems faced by the target audience and some proposals for intervention, but
we did not identify any issues related to the “Sustainable Environment” project,
as described in Figure 2:


                       Figure 2 – Excerpt from School-A’s PPP.




                            Source: School-A PPP, 2023.


      Among the initiatives to foster collaboration between the school and
parents, as well as between the school and the local community, mention was
made of a visit by students to a Science Fair on the theme “Environment and




                                                                              471

Sustainability.” The 3rd Science and Mathematics Fair was held under the theme
“Respecting nature is respecting oneself.”
       According to Souza et al. (2019), the methodology for integrating
environmental education (EE) into the socio-educational context is not limited to
formal education; however, the school is viewed as the primary vehicle for
introducing the subject. This qualified discussion regarding the integration of EE
into School Development Plans (SDPs) depends on the ongoing professional
development of the stakeholders responsible for their development. However,
there are several obstacles, as mentioned in the study conducted by Nascimento
et al. (2020) at a school in Curaçá, Bahia, in which negative responses were
obtained from the surveyed teachers when asked about their participation in EA
courses offered by the Bahia State Department of Education (SEC-BA). The
study by Souza et al. (2019) also presents an analysis of the PPPs of four schools
in the municipalities of Juazeiro, Bahia, and Petrolina, Pernambuco. The authors
conclude that, in addition to the lack of preparation among professionals in
delivering EA content, elementary and secondary education programs contain
little information on the subject within their pedagogical policy documents.
       School-B submitted its PPP for the 2016–2019 quadrennium, still
following the 2012 National Curriculum Guidelines for Secondary Education,
CNE/CEB Resolution No. 2 of January 30, 2012 (BRAZIL, 2012) and Law
9394/96, the Law on Guidelines and Foundations of National Education (BRAZIL,
2017), with a work proposal for the cross-cutting themes of Ethics, Health,
Environment, Sexual Orientation, Cultural Plurality, Work, and Consumption.
       The school also presents as a goal for 2016 in its PPP the revitalization of
the interdisciplinary project “I Take Care of My Environment,” without providing
further details about the project.
       School C offers high school education integrated with vocational training,
having already submitted its updated PPP in 2019. The document highlights that:
[...] the curriculum of the courses includes knowledge related to: [...] quality
management, social and environmental responsibility and sustainability. Among
the PPP’s objectives, the following stands out: “Develop an environmental
awareness project.” In the presentation of the work areas, it was possible to
identify approaches to environmental education and sustainability. The following
excerpts from the PPP are noteworthy:


                                                                               472

    • In the Environment and Health work area, in the presentation of the Envi-
         ronmental Technician course:


                       [    ] proposes measures to minimize impacts and restore already
                       degraded environments. Implements environmental management
                       systems. Organizes environmental education programs based on the
                       monitoring, correction, and prevention of anthropogenic activities, and
                       the conservation of natural resources through preventive analyses.
                       Organizes the reduction, reuse, and recycling of waste and/or
                       resources used in processes. (School-C PPP, p.20)


    • In the Infrastructure area, the proposal for the Technical Course in Building
         Construction presents:


                       [ ] apply environmental control and protection measures to mitigate the
                       impacts generated by construction activities. (School-C PPP, p.22)


    • In the Environment and Health pillar:


                       The ENVIRONMENT AND HEALTH technology track encompasses
                       technologies associated with improving quality of life, as well as the
                       preservation and use of nature. [. ] It covers actions for the protection
                       and preservation of living beings and environmental resources, the
                       safety of people and communities, risk control and assessment, and
                       environmental education programs. (School-C PPP, p.46)


         It is also important to note that the document presents the curriculum for
each technical course offered, and based on the title of each course component—
without consulting the syllabi—one can identify those that include approaches
within    Environmental Education         and     sustainability,    namely:      Biology     –
Environment, Occupational Health and Safety; Analysis and Assessment of
Environmental      Impacts;   Sustainable       Rural    Development;         Environmental
Management: Legislation and Environmental Protection; Education, Legislation,
and Environmental Protection; Ethics, Citizenship, and the Environment;
Environmental      Aspects    and    Impacts;      Environmental        Management         and
Sustainability in Occupational Safety.
         Escola-D presents the PPP updated in 2022. The appreciation and
preservation of the environment is mentioned once within the educational
principles and values of the school community, which is reinforced by the
introduction of EA fundamentals for the development and implementation of



                                                                                            473

school projects, as presented in the following excerpt:


                     [...] there is a constant focus on the environment, seeking to foster a
                     holistic view of our students that goes beyond social issues. Several
                     initiatives have been undertaken in recent years, including
                     environmental awareness and conservation efforts starting at the
                     school level. With the aim of strengthening environmental awareness,
                     we have organized campaigns, fairs, lectures, transdisciplinary
                     activities, and integrated the theme of ecology across the curriculum.
                     These efforts have proven effective, though we recognize that these
                     attitudes must be consistently monitored and that learning must be
                     continuously reinforced. Today, you’ll hardly find any paper, snacks, or
                     lunch wrappers in the hallways. The school must begin by changing
                     everyday attitudes, teaching students to care for and preserve the local
                     environment before moving on to consider global-scale issues. Thus, it
                     is necessary not only to create campaigns and promote sporadic events
                     but also to work in a continuous and systematic, cross- y manner,
                     fostering the acquisition of knowledge, values, attitudes, commitment,
                     and skills necessary for the protection and improvement of the
                     environment. Within the planned program, the school’s main
                     ecological actions include: Maintaining and harmonizing
                     environmental spaces that were previously degraded, such as plazas,
                     flower beds, and gardens within the school grounds; Developing
                     campaigns for cleaning and preserving the school grounds—such as
                     the “Adopt a Classroom” campaign; Engaging the surrounding
                     community in environmental issues, clarifying their impacts; Identifying
                     and valuing successful initiatives that can inspire new projects;
                     Promoting environmental campaigns such as recycling and guidance on
                     selective waste collection. (School PPP-D, p.45, Emphasis added)


      The need to include Environmental Education (EE) in school curriculum
plans is implicit in the Bahia Reference Curriculum Document (DCRB), which
reiterates the need to promote respect for socio-environmental sustainability. EE
appears in the document as one of the integrative themes, which are a new
formulation of what were previously known as cross-cutting themes, as shown in
Figure 3.




                                                                                         474

      Figure 3 – Environmental Education as an integrating theme in the DCRB (2022).




                                  Source: Author, 2024.


       According to the DCRB (Bahia, 2022), the Integrating Themes seek to
promote the construction of a more just, fraternal, equitable, inclusive, and
sustainable society, without losing sight of the importance of secularism. They
advocate for an approach to social interaction that plays a fundamental political
and pedagogical role in formal contexts of humanization, stimulating debate on
challenges related to rights violations. The DCRB is the state regulatory
framework divided into 3 volumes, among which Secondary Education is covered
in Volume 2.
       Escola-E presents as one of its goals the landscaping of the outer
perimeter with trees and their preservation as a sustainability initiative. Structural
projects also use environmental issues as a central theme. The school also
includes, among its priority actions, the Sustainability and Environment Project –
Com Vida, which aims to:


                       [...] to raise awareness within our school community regarding
                       environmental stewardship, valuing our school grounds as well as the
                       surrounding environment, as a means of fostering an ecologically
                       healthy environment through the work carried out by our students
                       during the school year under the guidance of our dedicated faculty and
                       the democratic leadership of our innovative administration and the
                       Student Council (School-E PPP, p.24)




                                                                                         475

       School-F includes “Environment and Sustainability” as one of its
educational principles, and among its educational objectives, we can highlight
two that are associated with critical environmental education:


                      [...] Recognize the ethical and moral boundaries that have guided social
                      interaction; [...] Identify, analyze, and evaluate natural, social,
                      economic, cultural, and political transformations in their community [...]
                      (School-F PPP, p.6).


       For the new high school curriculum, the school proposes interdisciplinary
work using the STEAM approach (Science, Technology, Engineering, Arts, and
Mathematics), in addition to emphasizing the importance of integrating the school
with external partners such as NGOs and companies, which exposes students to
other realities and learning opportunities.


                      [...] STEAM education is an interactive, multidisciplinary, and
                      integrated teaching methodology that fosters students’ development in
                      all areas through resources that cover content in the following fields:
                      Science, Technology, Engineering, Arts, Mathematics, Humanities, and
                      Environmental Awareness, where the interplay between these
                      disciplines is precisely what “resonates” with students, thereby
                      stimulating their autonomy, creativity, and cognitive abilities, among
                      other skills, through the resolution of real-world problems (School F’s
                      PPPs, p. 21, emphasis added).


       School-G presents a vision, goals, and objectives similar to those of
School-E. In the course plan for the Portuguese language curriculum component,
we highlight two competencies also related to critical EA.


                      [...] C3. Use different languages (artistic, bodily, and verbal) to exercise,
                      with autonomy and collaboration, agency and authorship in personal
                      and collective life, in a critical, creative, ethical, and supportive manner,
                      defending viewpoints that respect others and promote human
                      rights, socio-environmental awareness, and responsible
                      consumption at the local, regional, and global levels. [...] C5. Argue
                      based on facts, data, and reliable information to formulate, negotiate,
                      and defend common ideas, viewpoints, and decisions that respect and
                      promote human rights, socio-environmental awareness, and
                      responsible consumption at the local, regional, and global levels, with
                      an ethical stance regarding care for oneself, others, and the planet
                      (School-G’s PPPs, p.49, emphasis added)


       School-H states in its PPP that its curriculum includes knowledge related
to social and environmental responsibility and sustainability. Among its
objectives, the one most closely aligned with EA work was: “To foster the


                                                                                              476

development of critical and autonomous citizens capable of sound reasoning,
aware of their rights and duties toward humanity” (School-H PPP, p.17).
       The information from all PPPs identified as relating to EA was presented
here in its entirety, which highlights the superficiality with which the topic is
addressed in the documents, as also concluded by the studies by Nascimento et
al. (2020) and Souza et al. (2019) conducted with schools in the region. Nor are
there proposals or actions grounded in the new structure of secondary education,
which already offers an interdisciplinary approach to addressing current socio-
environmental issues. Furthermore, it is important to note that this document on
school identity must include the legal framework underpinning EA.


4. CONCLUSION


       Significant changes in the structure of secondary education call for the
revision of Pedagogical Project Plans (PPPs), adapting them to new curricular
concepts and organization, which must also address society’s current needs in
the face of enormous challenges to sustainability; thus, Environmental Education
emerges as the most powerful tool for raising public awareness and sensitivity.
To this end, schools will need to address the challenges of organizational
restructuring of pedagogical policy projects so that they can better align with the
DCRB (BAHIA, 2022), and from there, meaningfully integrate Environmental
Education into their interdisciplinary pedagogical projects and publicize them
through channels with unrestricted access to the entire school community.
       EA must also be integrated into the school’s pedagogical policy projects,
the organization and planning of each curricular component, in its pedagogical,
political, and ethical dimensions; furthermore, activities and projects planned and
executed during interdisciplinary sessions—which are indispensable for the
collective engagement so necessary for Environmental Education—must be
urgently internalized.
       With regard to the topic of fungi, no reference is found in the PPPs. This
absence highlights a gap that fails to adequately address this group of living
organisms, which is so relevant and present in students’ daily lives. Furthermore,
this gap may reinforce the marginalization of fungi in culture and science,
perpetuating myths, prejudices, and misinformation about these organisms.


                                                                               477

      The actions proposed in the PPPs, with regard to Environmental
Education, can and should be planned, implemented, and evaluated with the
effective participation of the entire school community and, within the applied
school curriculum, should involve all curricular components, especially Biology
and the educational pathways offered by the school. In these components, it is
essential to develop critical awareness of human action throughout the
biosphere.




                                                                           478

                                   REFERENCES

BAHIA. Decree 19,083 of June 7, 2019. Regulates Law No. 12,056, of January 7,
2011, which establishes the Environmental Education Policy of the State of Bahia
and provides other measures. Salvador: 2019.

Law No. 12,056, of Jan. 2011. State Policy on Environmental Education.
Government of the State of Bahia. SEMA, Salvador, 2011.

Bahia’s Reference Curriculum Document for High School (v.2) Bahia State
Department of Education. Rio de Janeiro: FGV Editora, 2022

Environmental Education Program of the Bahia Educational System – ProEASE /
Bahia State Department of Education. 2nd Edition – Salvador: SEC, 2015

Bahia State Department of Education. Bahia Reference Curriculum Document for Early
Childhood and Elementary Education. Rio de Janeiro: FGV Editora, 2019.

BARDIN, Laurence. Content Analysis. São Paulo: Edições 70, 2016.

BRAZIL. Law No. 9,394, of December 20, 1996. Establishes the Guidelines and
Foundations of National Education. Official Gazette of the Union, Brasília,
December 23, 1996. Available at:
<http://www.planalto.gov.br/ccivil_03/leis/L9394.html>

Law No. 9,795, of April 27, 1999: provides for environmental education, establishes the
National Policy on Environmental Education, and makes other provisions. Brasília:
Official Gazette, April 28, 1999

Ministry of Education. National Education Council. Chamber of Basic Education.
Resolution No. 2, dated January 30, 2012. Defines National Curriculum Guidelines for
Secondary Education. Brasília, DF, 2012. Available at:
http://portal.mec.gov.br/index.php?option=com_docman&view=download&alias=9864-
rceb002-12&Itemid=30192.

BRAZIL. Presidency of the Republic. Law No. 13,415, of February 16, 2017. Available
at: http://www.planalto.gov.br/ccivil_03/_ato2015-2018/2017/lei/l134 15.htm.

CARVALHO, J. M. Fungal bioremediation of microplastics in the ocean. 15th Scientific
and Technological Conference of ifsuldeminas. v. 15 n. 1 2023

DIAS DA SILVA, E.; SANTOS, E. E. de S.; SANTOS, A. dos; OLIVEIRA, F. J. V. de.
Biological control of postharvest pathogens in grapevines. Scientific Electronic
Archives, [S. l.], v. 16, n. 8, 2023. DOI: 10.36560/16820231760. Available at:
<https://sea.ufr.edu.br/SEA/article/view/1760>. Accessed on: Jan. 18, 2024.

GADOTTI, M. Political-pedagogical project of the citizen school. In: Leap into the
future: building the citizen school, a political-pedagogical project. Secretariat of
Distance Education. Brasília: Ministry of Education and Sports, SEED, 1998.

BRAZILIAN INSTITUTE OF GEOGRAPHY AND STATISTICS (IBGE). 2022. Rio de
Janeiro: IBGE, 2022.

KRAMER, D. G.; ESTEVAM DA SILVA, G. S. Bioadsorption of heavy metals: a
literature review. Unoesc Joaçaba Research and Extension Yearbook, [No place],
vol. 8, p. e32965, 2023. Available at:


                                                                                    479

<https://periodicos.unoesc.edu.br/apeuj/article/view/32965>. Accessed on: Jan. 18,
2024.

LIMA, K. D. R. D., CAMARA, R., CHAER, G. M., PEREIRA, M. G., & RESENDE, A. S.
D. (2017). Soil fauna as a bioindicator of recovery of degraded areas in the Caatinga
biome. Revista Caatinga, 30(2), 401–411. 2017 Available at:
https://doi.org/10.1590/1983-21252017v30n215

LOUREIRO, C. F. B. Theoretical and methodological contributions to environmental
education with traditional peoples. Education, Health, and Environment, June 4, 2020

MIRANDA H. R.N.; SOUSA, E.S.B.de; SANTANA, G.de G.. Biological control:
sustainable pest management during the vegetative stage of corn. JNT – Facit
Business and Technology Journal, Ed. 46. VOL. 02. Pp. 328–342. 2023. ISSN:
2526-428

NASCIMENTO, R.; NOGUEIRA, E.M.S.; RAMOS, P.R. Environmental Education in the
Semi-Arid Region of Bahia: Knowledge, Applications, and Needs. Revbea, São Paulo,
Vol. 15, No. 7: 423-439, 2020

PESENTI, M.A.; MARQUES, T.A.; CAMPOS, V. A.; URATA, S.L.; PRATES, K. V. M.
C. Evaluation of the bioremediation potential of Candida spp. and Trichophyton spp.
fungi in the treatment of leachate from a landfill. HOLOS, [S. l.], v. 5, n. 39, 2023.
Available at: <https://www2.ifrn.edu.br/ojs/index.php/HOLOS/article/view/16307>.
Accessed on: Jan. 18, 2024.

PRADO, K. A. C.; SILVA, A. C. C. P.; PACHECO, C. S. G. R.; OLIVEIRA, F. F.; SILVA,
A. F.; MARINHO, C. M.; LIMA, R. L. F. A. Mycorrhizal Fungi Arbusculars as Indicators
of Degraded Area Recovery in the Caatinga Ecosystem: An Integrative Review In:
Climate Change and Its Socio-Environmental Impacts: Concepts, Foundations,
Theories, and Mitigation Practices – Ed. Cintífica Digital, vol. 1. 2023. ISBN 978-65-
5360-384-4

REBOUÇAS, J. P. P.; LIMA, G. F. da C.; SILVA, E. da. Challenges of Critical
Environmental Education in Public Schools in Mossoró (RN). Brazilian Journal of
Environmental Education (RevBEA), [S. l.], vol. 16, no. 3, pp. 59–78, 2021. DOI:
10.34024/revbea.2021.v16.11307. Available at:
https://periodicos.unifesp.br/index.php/revbea/article/view/11307. Accessed on: Jan.
24, 2024.

REIS, G. A.; NASCIMENTO, A. R. N.; CAMPOS, M. A. DA S.; SANTOS, P. C. M. DE
A., SCHWINGEL, P. A.; CARVALHO, V. D. DE; SHIOSAKI, R. K. A The importance of
mycology in high school. Revista Acervo Educacional, vol. 6, e14552, 2024.
Available at: <https://doi.org/10.25248/rae.e14552.2024>

RIZZON MZ, et al. Bread and Wine Fermentation: A Proposal for Interdisciplinary
Action. Scientia cum Indústria; 5(3): 129-136. 2017

RODRIGUES, A. P. D.; DOS SANTOS, C. P.; CASTRILLON JUNIOR, D. A. de C.;
REIS, G. L. M. E. dos; COCHEV, J. S.; SILVA, W. S. Environmental Education and
Biodiversity: A Bibliometric Analysis of Publications from 1945 to 2021.
Multidisciplinary Journal of Education and Environment, [S. l.], pp. 10–18, 2022.

SILVA, M. O. da; SCHIAVETTI, A. Analysis of Environmental Education in the State of
Bahia: Support for the Development of State Public Policy. REMEA – Electronic



                                                                                     480

Journal of Environmental Education, [No place], vol. 28, 2012. DOI:
10.14295/remea.v28i0.3182.

SILVA, A. da C.; GOUW, A. M. S. Students’ perceptions and knowledge of fungi.
Scientia Plena, [S. l.], v. 17, n. 6, 2021. DOI: 10.14808/sci. plena.2021.064401.
Available at: https://scientiaplena.emnuvens.com.br/sp/ article/view/5929. Accessed
on: Jan. 18, 2024.

SOARES, I. A.; FILHO, A.C.P. de M.; VENTURA, M., V, A. (2023). Biofactories in The
Current State of Brazilian Agriculture: A Review. Brazilian Journal of Science. 2. 16–
33. 2023. Available at: <https://doi.org/10.14295/bjs.v2i1.246>

SOUZA, N. S.; BRITO, A. J. C.; RAMOS, P. R. Environmental Education as Public
Policy in the Curricula of Schools in the São Francisco Valley. UNIVASF Extension
Journal, Petrolina, vol. 7, no. 2, pp. 086–103, 2019.

SOUZA, N. da S.; AMORIM, R. J. R.; AMORIM, D. G. Inclusion and Practice of
Environmental Education: Development of Pedagogical Policy Projects in State
Schools in Juazeiro (BA). Brazilian Journal of Environmental Education (RevBEA),
[S. l.], vol. 18, no. 7, pp. 195–210, 2023

ZEGHAL, E. et al. The Potential Role of Marine Fungi in Plastic Degradation – A
Review. Frontiers in Marine Science, vol. 8, Nov. 29, 2021.




                                                                                      481

CHAPTER 27
 THE PROFILE OF THE SCHOOL
 MANAGER UNDER THE VIEW OF A
 DEMOCRATIC MANAGEMENT

Olmira Bernadete Dassoler
Ph.D. in Education
Universidade Católica de Brasília (UCB)
E-mail: olmirabd@gmail.com

Carlos Kanzler
Master's student in Education
Pontifícia Universidade Católica do Paraná (PUC - PR)
E-mail: carloskanzler@gmail.com

Priscilla Garcia Zilio
Master's student in Education
Pontifícia Universidade Católica do Paraná (PUC - PR)
E-mail: priscillagzilio@gmail.com

Poliana Steffany de Almeida
Master's student in Education
Pontifícia Universidade Católica do Paraná (PUC - PR)
E-mail: polialmeida286@gmail.com

Sirley Terezinha Filipak
Ph.D. in Education
Pontifícia Universidade Católica do Paraná (PUC - PR)
E-mail: sirley.filipak@pucpr.br


ABSTRACT: The purpose of this article is to outline the profile of the school
manager from the perspective of democratic management, given the rapid
changes brought about by the evolution of information technology that have
affected the way people work and relate to each other in different aspects of their
lives. Deepen the concept of school management and what characteristics
permeate the pro-file of the school manager in organizations, in this case,
educational organiza-tions. Arguing that the director is much more than an
administrator, he is a school manager who involves several aspects within the
scope of educational processes, requiring human talent with an open vision for
the leadership of democratic management. The methodology used is a qualitative
approach, with bibliographic and documentary literature, thus contributing to
developing the ideas of the work, based on different theorists who deal with the
topic. As a re-sult, we realized that the manager seeks to reduce the
bureaucratization that permeates the school, as well as minimizing the


                                                                               482

challenges he needs to face, since the work involves the decentralization of
power and weaknesses at the administrative level, the formulation of policies and
objectives of the institution. The conclusion of the article brings an understanding
of how much the as-pects that involve the practice of school management, when
observed and de-veloped assertively and, in line with the management team,
contribute to an integral education of the human being, producing greater equity.

KEYWORDS: profile and characteristics of the school manager, decentralization
of power, practice of democratic and participatory management, leadership.

RESUMO: O presente artigo tem como propósito delinear o perfil do gestor
escolar sob o olhar de uma gestão democrática diante das rápidas mudanças
proporcionadas pela evolução da tecnologia da informação que têm atingido a
maneira como as pessoas trabalham e se relacionam em diversos aspectos de
suas vidas. O estudo busca aprofundar o conceito de gestão escolar e quais as
características que permeiam o perfil do gestor escolar nas organizações, nesse
caso, organizações de ensino. Argumentar que o diretor muito mais que um
administrador, é um gestor escolar que envolve vários aspectos no âmbito dos
processos educativos, exigindo talento humano com uma visão aberta para a
liderança de uma gestão democrática. A metodologia utilizada é de abordagem
qualitativa, com literatura bibliográfica e documental, contribuindo, assim, para
desenvolver as ideias do trabalho, embasada em diferentes teóricos que versam
sobre o tema. Como resultado, percebemos que o gestor procura reduzir a
burocratização que permeia a escola, assim como minimiza os desafios que
precisa enfrentar, uma vez que o trabalho envolve a descentralização do poder
e as fragilidades no plano administrativo, a formulação de políticas e objetivos
da instituição. A conclusão do artigo traz uma compreensão sobre o quanto os
aspectos que envolvem a prática da gestão escolar, quando observados e
desenvolvidos de modo assertivo e em consonância com a equipe gestora,
contribuem para uma educação integral do ser humano, produzindo maior
equidade. de modo que sua atuação garanta uma melhoria na qualidade
pessoal, profissional e na missão de todos os envolvidos na instituição de ensino.

PALAVRAS-CHAVE: perfil e características do gestor escolar, descentralização
do poder, prática da gestão democrática e participativa, liderança.




                                                                                483

1. INTRODUCTION


       The purpose of this study is to outline the profile of the school administrator
from the perspective of democratic management, taking into account the intense
and rapid transformations driven by advances in information technology. These
changes have significantly impacted the way people work and interact in various
aspects of life.
       Furthermore, the study seeks to deepen understanding of school
management and the essential characteristics of the administrator as an
educational leader, highlighting their role in building a participatory school
environment aligned with the new demands of the educational landscape. More
than just an administrator, the school principal assumes a strategic role, acting
as a manager/leader who integrates different educational processes. Their role
requires interpersonal skills, a broad vision, and a participatory approach—all
fundamental to building efficient democratic management.
       For this study, we adopted a qualitative approach, utilizing bibliographic
and documentary research. This methodology allowed us to guide and develop
the ideas presented throughout the study, grounded in the work of various
theorists who discuss the topic, such as Lück (2006; 2009, 2011), Moran (2000),
and Juliatto (2007), among others. In addition, the research draws on legal
documents, such as the 1988 Federal Constitution and the Law on Guidelines
and Bases for National Education (LDBEN No. 9,394/96), which provide
normative support for the analysis.
       This article sought to contribute to a reflection on the profile of the school
administrator from the perspective of democratic management within the daily
context and trajectory of educational institutions, since this trajectory constitutes
a construction of the administrator as a mediator with positive participation in
engagement with education professionals. Such engagement encompasses
cultural,   pedagogical,   administrative,    financial,   human,    material,   and
organizational mechanisms. In this sense, Lück (2006, p. 21), in presenting the
concept of management, states that it must be considered “as a process of
mobilizing the competence and energy of people, collectively organized, in the
pursuit and achievement of educational objectives.”



                                                                                  484

      The author emphasizes that the role of the school administrator and their
competencies are not an easy task within an educational institution, as it
constitutes a process that requires engagement with the entire educational
community , which aims to achieve objectives and improvements in the trajectory
of   teaching   and    learning.   It   is   understood,   therefore,   that   the
administrator/principal must act as a coordinator across various spheres.
Furthermore, they must possess a vision for the future and planning skills
combined with a collaborative and democratic approach, always attentive to new
technological trends that can contribute to and benefit the performance of
students, teachers, staff, and collaborators.
      In fact, the administrator is responsible for coordinating and implementing
educational policies in collaboration with the teaching staff and the educational
community. Thus, it is inherent to the school administrator’s role to evaluate the
development of the pedagogical proposal and learning indicators with a view to
improving the school’s performance. Another important aspect for the school
administrator is to have a thorough understanding of the educational institution,
so that they can address potential challenges based on scientific knowledge that
enables them to refine and comprehend the political and social factors influencing
the progress of the entire school process. Given this context, the study aims to
provide historical, conceptual, and normative insights into school administration.
      It is known that, through knowledge and experience, combined with a clear
vision of their mission as a manager, they earn the trust of their staff in the
implementation and execution of their projects. This raises the following
questions: What are the essential characteristics of a school administrator’s
profile in an educational institution? What actions, in the daily school routine,
demonstrate the practice of democratic and participatory management? These
questions are fundamental to the analysis that follows.


2. SCHOOL MANAGEMENT AND THE PROFILE OF THE ADMINISTRATOR


      Throughout Brazil’s history, efforts have been made to understand the
concepts and origins of educational and school management practices. Brazilian
educational administration has been influenced by external models of public and
educational management, primarily from Europe and the United States, in


                                                                               485

addition to the particularities of each of the country’s political and economic
contexts.
      During the colonial period, public administration was based on Roman
administrative law, which incorporated Christian values and positivist ideals. The
access to formal schooling was restricted to a minority, generally composed of
men who were not firstborn sons. Furthermore, education was strongly linked to
the Catholic faith, with the Jesuits serving as the first educators in Brazil. Their
mission was to “sow the seed of faith” through educational activities, which
became a tool for conversion to Christianity (Dassoler, 2009, p. 74).
      With the emergence of the Escolanovista movement, there was a growing
concern with contemporary reality and its influences on the school environment.
This movement sought to address educational needs in a more practical, realistic
manner aligned with the principles of democratic renewal:


                      The renewal of education will be brought about within this movement of
                      transformations, which took place within societies. The vision was for
                      an education capable of responding to the challenges posed by the
                      modern society that was desired and, above all, one that aimed at the
                      social control of the masses through the selection, classification, and
                      organization of individuals to meet the demands of productive labor. In
                      this sense, the renewal of education stems from a critique of the
                      education system developed up to that point, conceived as traditional,
                      on the grounds that the education practiced in schools no longer
                      responded to the modern demands of emerging societies or, indeed,
                      that it would be shaped by the interests of a dominant elite, which saw
                      in education the possibility of realizing its intent to mold individuals to
                      the new era of progress (Gonçalves e Filho, 2021, p.7).


      Following the perspective of democracy and contemporaneity in the school
environment, educational ideals have gradually taken shape over time. It is not
difficult to see that these changes have significantly impacted school
management. In this context, it is worth highlighting the importance of the term
“management” and its relevance to education.
      Starting in the 1990s, the concept of management gained prominence in
the educational landscape, and today its use is widespread. Lück (2011, p. 21)
defines management as:


                      One way to conceptualize management is to view it as a process of
                      mobilizing the competence and energy of collectively organized people
                      so that, through their active and competent participation, they promote




                                                                                            486

                      the achievement, as fully as possible, of the objectives of their work
                      unit—in this case, educational objectives.


      Continuous professional development is essential for the role of the
manager, especially in light of technological advances, which have provided new
tools to optimize the routines of management teams. In the 21st century, the
implementation of information systems, digital tools, and online platforms has
brought greater security in communication and efficiency in school administration.
As an example, the student enrollment and re-enrollment process has been
significantly improved. With the help of integrated systems, it is possible to carry
this out online, reducing lines and streamlining the work of the educational team,
which previously had to plan, coordinate, and execute all stages manually.
       Another example is resource management, where administrators can
track necessary supplies and materials through integrated systems and
spreadsheets, which streamlines work and reduces the time spent on
bureaucratic tasks, allowing teams to integrate more effectively, since, with the
reduction and simplification of manual processes, managers can view their entire
team in a more human way and plan meetings and actions so that everyone
participates in the continuous improvement of the institution’s management and
educational processes.
       In addition to the direct benefits for school management, integration
between the institution and students’ families has also been enhanced through
the use of digital communication and interaction channels. This closer connection
strengthens the monitoring of academic performance and the school community’s
participation in the educational process.
       For students, the integration of technologies into pedagogical planning
makes learning more dynamic and engaging. Classes and activities become
more interactive and challenging, allowing students, with a simple click, to explore
new knowledge and connect with the entire world:


                      Over the past few decades, digital information and communication
                      technologies, also known as ICTs, have transformed the ways we work,
                      communicate, interact, and learn. In education, ICTs have been
                      incorporated into teaching practices as a means to promote more
                      meaningful learning, with the aim of supporting teachers in
                      implementing active teaching methodologies, aligning the teaching-
                      learning process with students’ realities, and sparking greater interest




                                                                                          487

                       and engagement among students at all stages of Basic Education.
                       (Brazil, 2018, p. 1).


        Although technological evolution brings countless benefits to the
educational system, it is essential to take a critical look at the structural conditions
of educational institutions. The physical infrastructure needs to be modernized to
support this new work dynamic, with equipment suitable for the systems and
programs essential to carrying out activities.
        Furthermore, the training of education professionals is indispensable. For
many years, the main tools used by school teams were merely paper, pens, and
pencils, and in many cases, this model still predominates. As Moran states:


                       Each teacher can find the most appropriate way to integrate various
                       technologies and methodological procedures. But it is also important
                       that they expand their knowledge and learn to master forms of
                       interpersonal/group communication as well as audiovisual/telematic
                       communication (Moran, 2000, p. 12).


        Training and ongoing professional development pose challenges for the
management team, as some professionals may be resistant due to difficulties in
using and understanding new technologies. In this context, the role of the school
administrator becomes essential, as it is their responsibility to closely monitor all
departments—both administrative and educational—ensuring that they remain
open to learning and adopting these innovations. The major challenge for
administrators is to involve the entire staff in the professional development
process, respecting the individual needs and paces of each professional.
        In general terms, school management encompasses the organization of
the school at different levels, including the educational curriculum, personnel
management, and financial administration, among other aspects. The journal
Educação em Foco (2023, p. 18) highlights that, through efficient management,
it is possible to establish clear goals and objectives, promote continuing
education, and ensure the development of the entire educational community.
        Understanding school management and defining the ideal profile of a
manager allows for the identification of the institution’s main demands, ensuring
they are met through leadership committed to education.
        Regarding the administrator as a leader, Lück (2009, p. 3) emphasizes
that:


                                                                                       488

                      [...] In the school, the principal is the professional responsible for
                      leading and organizing the work of everyone involved, in order to guide
                      them in developing an educational environment capable of promoting
                      student learning and development at the highest possible level, so that
                      students are equipped to face the new challenges they encounter.


       A good school administrator is capable of leading, motivating, planning,
communicating, innovating, and solving problems within the educational
institution. They must also possess a strategic, flexible, and accessible vision to
address the challenges and changes in the educational landscape. There are
different types of school administrators, such as principals, coordinators,
pedagogical coordinators, and pedagogical directors, among others. Each has
their own specific duties and responsibilities within the school organization;
however, all must share certain essential competencies to perform their roles
efficiently and effectively (Cardoso, 2018, p. 3).
       The Law on Guidelines and Foundations of National Education, No. 9,394
(Brazil, 1996), in its Article 12, defines the duties of educational institutions that
must be carried out by the school administrator, who represents the educational
institution. The administrator’s responsibilities begin with the development and
implementation of the educational institution’s pedagogical proposal, in addition
to managing the teaching staff, technical and administrative personnel, and
material and financial resources. With the support of the pedagogical technical
team, the administrator must ensure compliance with the teachers’ work plan, the
established school days and class hours, and the necessary resources for the
academic remediation of lower-performing students.
       Integrating the school with the family and the community is also part of the
school administrator’s responsibilities. In 2009, Law No. 2013 mandated that
educational institutions must inform students’ guardians about attendance and
academic performance, in addition to publicizing their educational proposal.
Subsequently, in 2019, Law No. 13,803 made it mandatory to notify the municipal
Child Protection Agency when a student exceeds 30% (thirty percent) of
absences relative to the limit permitted by law.
       To comply with these legal requirements, school administrators face daily
challenges, requiring empathy, effective communication, accessibility, and a
deep understanding of current legislation. In addition to these responsibilities,
Laws No. 13,663 and No. 13,840, of 2018 and 2019, respectively, expanded their


                                                                                         489

duties, including the need to implement actions to promote a culture of peace in
schools, as well as to raise awareness, prevent, and combat all types of violence,
especially bullying and drug use or dependence. This new scenario poses
additional challenges for administrators and the teaching staff, who must act
strategically and collaboratively. However, building a safe school environment
depends on the involvement of the entire society, especially families. Without this
partnership, the school alone cannot guarantee a truly safe and welcoming space
for everyone.
      Despite the importance of the administrator’s role, their profile is still rarely
discussed in the field of education. Although the National Framework Law on
Education (LDBEN) No. 9,394/1996 established democratic management for
public schools and some systems use elections to select administrators, others
still maintain the practice of appointments. Regardless of the model adopted, it is
essential that the selection process take into account the appropriate profile of
the administrator, ensuring that they are prepared to handle the multiple
responsibilities that the role demands.
      Clemente Ivo Juliatto, in his work *Educational Partners: Students,
Teachers, Staff, and Leaders* (2007, p. 189), discusses the diverse and
numerous responsibilities of the administrator, presenting a decalogue:


                      1. Embrace the institution’s mission and objectives as their own. 2.
                      Assume full responsibility for compliance with all administrative
                      procedures. 3. Represent the institution or sector to both the internal
                      and external communities. 4. Ensure and promote, by all means at their
                      disposal, the quality of education. 5. Promote the ongoing evaluation of
                      their team’s performance using reliable quantitative and qualitative
                      indicators. 6. Encourage academic productivity and demand high
                      performance from other administrators, faculty, and students. 7.
                      Support sound academic initiatives; recognize and reward the effort and
                      strong performance of other administrators on their team, faculty,
                      students, and staff. 8. Meet frequently, both formally and informally, with
                      the managers on their team and with the general administration. 9.
                      Promote the professional growth of their teachers and staff. 10. Foster
                      a cordial atmosphere among members of the academic community and
                      ensure fair and equitable treatment for all.


      In addition to the responsibilities described and the duties established in
educational legislation, there are many other un s that arise in daily school life
and require the manager to possess a wide range of skills to successfully
implement democratic and participatory management.



                                                                                            490

3. DEMOCRATIC AND PARTICIPATORY MANAGEMENT


       Democratic management is an administrative model that promotes the
active participation of all members of an organization or system in decisions that
influence its operation. Based on participation, collaboration, dialogue, and
transparency, this approach strengthens collective engagement, making
management more inclusive and effective. It can be applied in various fields, such
as education, health, politics, and the business sector.
       In   the    educational        context,   democratic   school    management       is
characterized by the active participation of the entire school community in the
administration of the educational institution. This model goes beyond the role of
administrators and coordinators, also involving teachers, staff, students, families,
and others impacted by the school. In this way, it seeks to build a more
participatory     and   pluralistic     educational   environment      aligned   with   the
community’s needs.
       Democratic school management is based on the pedagogical and
administrative autonomy of public basic education schools, the development of a
collective and participatory political-pedagogical project, the definition and
oversight of financial resources by the school community, the disclosure and
transparency of financial reporting, the institutional evaluation of the school by all
stakeholders, and the direct election of the principal. For Heloísa Lück (2006),
participatory management is a commitment that must be embraced and assumed
by all, reinforcing the importance of shared responsibility in building a more
democratic and inclusive educational environment.
       Democratic and participatory management is a model that seeks to
promote a more just, inclusive, and efficient organizational culture. It stimulates
the development of individual and collective competencies among members of
the organization or system. It also fosters the alignment of individual goals with
organizational or systemic goals. Furthermore, it contributes to strengthening
identity and a sense of belonging to the organization or system. Again, Lück
(2006, p. 41), when referring to democratic management— —explains that “it
occurs to the extent that school practices are guided by consistent philosophy,
values, principles, and ideas, present in the minds and hearts of people,
determining their way of being and acting.”


                                                                                        491

      After all, the role of the administrator is to ensure the school’s effective
performance and to find solutions to challenges that contribute to better student
learning, thereby strengthening the values that dignify human beings.
      The democratic management of public education was enshrined in the
1988 Federal Constitution and in the Law on Guidelines and Bases for Education
No. 9,394 of 1996. As Drabach and Mousquer (2009, p. 2) state:


                      recognized as an achievement of civil-democratic forces, it aims to
                      introduce a new type of school organization, based on the principles of
                      democracy, autonomy, and collective construction, in opposition to the
                      centralizing and bureaucratic character that had been guiding this field.


      However, the Law on Guidelines and Bases for National Education
highlights the need for education systems to guarantee schools pedagogical,
administrative, and financial management autonomy. This guideline has
generated numerous debates on the role of the school administrator, leading to
the following reflection: What should be the profile of the school administrator to
ensure professional, competent, and high-quality management?
      From the perspective of the collective construction of democracy in
schools—or from the perspective of holding school officials accountable for
educational outcomes—concerns regarding the training and working conditions
of school leaders become evident. After all, effective management depends not
only on autonomy but also on leaders who are qualified and well-prepared to face
the challenges of everyday school life.
      A school administrator who practices democratic and participatory
management must involve the entire school community, encouraging everyone
to participate in addressing challenges and planning the educational process.
      In this context, the profile of the school administrator is a determining factor
for the success of an educational institution. Above, we have listed some
essential competencies for a leader whose participatory and dialogic approach is
reflected in management and extends to the entire educational team (Santos
2020). These competencies are fundamental to ensuring not only efficient
administration but also a school environment that fosters student learning and the
achievement of promising results.




                                                                                           492

4. CONCLUSION


       This article sought to reflect on the profile of the school administrator from
the perspective of democratic management in the educational context. As
objectives, we developed an analysis of the relevance and clarity of the concepts
of school administrator, participatory democratic management, and the
administrator’s profile in an educational institution, drawing on various theorists.
By deepening our understanding of school management from a democratic and
participatory perspective, we highlighted some essential characteristics and skills
that, in everyday school life, define the profile of the administrator in educational
organizations.
       We argue that the administrator goes beyond the role of manager; they
are an indispensable professional whose work requires planning, reflection, and,
above all, an ethical, educational, and efficient commitment. School
management, led by the administrator, involves multiple aspects and challenges,
demanding not only technical competence but also human sensitivity and a broad
vision to lead democratic management.
       The results point to the importance of an assertive approach to education,
especially in the face of technological transformations, which introduce new tools
and methodologies capable of making teaching more attractive and dynamic.
This scenario reinforces the need for continuous training of the entire educational
team, in conjunction with the leader/manager, to ensure an innovative and
participatory learning environment.
       We believe in education as an essential instrument of transformation, as
its primary function is to promote the renewal of society. This concept requires
ongoing professional development and a constant pursuit of knowledge,
providing an education grounded in values and committed to building a more just
and equitable society.
       Education plays a central role in the social development of the individual,
empowering active and critical citizens, prepared to intervene and transform the
world in a conscious and responsible manner. In conducting this research, we
prioritized the analysis of the role of the school administrator, educational
management, and the responsibilities of each participant, emphasizing how
effective leadership can modify, improve, and maintain quality learning


                                                                                 493

environments. Such leadership must avoid both excessive authoritarianism and
neglect of the human condition of all those involved, promoting practical,
cooperative, and collaborative management, sustained by dialogue and human
interaction.
       We seek to clarify the concepts of school management and democratic
and participatory management, highlighting the importance of an administrative
model that respects and integrates the internal norms of each educational
institution. Furthermore, we present the characteristics that make up the profile
of the school administrator and that translate into educational practice, grounded
in the collective commitment assumed by professionals in the daily dynamics of
educational institutions.
       Thus, we identify that leadership in school management is realized
through participatory and dialogic actions among administrators, teachers, and
families, performing an essential function of cooperation (Santos, 2020).
       We hope that the readers of this study, whether current or future school
administrators, can draw upon the aspects discussed to enhance their
performance in institutional management and leadership. May this mission,
focused on human development through education, be strengthened daily by the
hope that drives and invigorates all educational endeavors.




                                                                              494

                                   REFERENCES

BRASIL. Ministério da Educação. BASE NACIONAL COMUM CURRICULAR,
Tecnologias Digitais da Informação e Comunicação no contexto escolar:
possibilidades, 2018. Disponível em:
http://basenacionalcomum.mec.gov.br/implementacao/praticas/caderno-de-
praticas/%20aprofundamentos/193-tecnologias-digitais-da-informacao-e-comunicacao-
no-contexto-escolar-possibilidades?highlight=WyJocSJd. Acesso em: 12 nov. 2024.

BRASIL. Presidência da República. Constituição da República Federativa do Brasil
de 1988. Brasília, DF: 1988. Disponível em:
http://www.planalto.gov.br/ccivil_03/Constituicao/Constituicao. Acesso em: 12 nov.
2024.

BRASIL. Lei de Diretrizes e Bases da Educação Nacional, n.º 9.394/96, de 20 de
dezembro de 1996. Fixa as Diretrizes e Bases da Educação Nacional. Diário Oficial da
União. Brasília, 1996. Disponível em:
https://www.planalto.gov.br/ccivil_03/leis/l9394.htm Acesso em: 12 nov. 2024.

CAMARGO, Renata Freitas de. Tudo sobre Peter Drucker: conheça quem foi o Pai
da Administração Moderna e autor de O Gestor Eficaz. Disponível em:
https:/www.treasycom.br/blog/peter-drucker Acesso em: 15 mai. 2024.

CARDOSO, Douglas Henrique Souza; BAYER, Mariana Ferreira. O perfil de gestor
escolar. Grupo de especialização em Gestão Escolar. Disponível em:
https://www.google.com/search?q=o+perfil+de+gestor+escolar+henrique+cardoso&rlz
=1C1GCEA_enBR1001BR1001&oq=O+PERFIL+DE+GESTOR+ESCOLAR&gs_lcrp=
EgZjaHJvbWUqBggBECMYJzIGCAAQRRg5MgYIARAjGCcyBggCEEUYO9IBCTEzMj
AwajBqNKgCALACAA&sourceid=chrome&ie=UTF-8>2018 Acesso em: 24 nov. 2024.

DASSOLER, O. B. A relação entre a gestão administrativa e a gestão pedagógica
na escola católica: o impacto sobre os resultados. 2009. vi, 185f. Dissertação
(Mestrado em Educação) – Universidade Católica de Brasília, Brasília, 2009.

DRABACH, Neila Pedrotti; MOUSQUER, Maria Elisabete Londero. Dos primeiros
escritos sobre administração escolar no Brasil aos escritos sobre gestão escolar:
mudanças e continuidades. Currículo sem Fronteiras, v. 9, n. 2, p. 258-285, jul./dez.,
2009. Disponível em:
https://repositorio.ufsm.br/bitstream/handle/1/1573/Drabach_Neila_Pedrotti.pdf.
Acesso em: 18 nov. 2024.

GONÇALVES, Irlen Antônio. FILHO, Luciano Mendes de Faria. Tecnologias e
educação escolar: a escola pode ser contemporânea do seu tempo?. Educ. Soc.,
Campinas, v. 2, p. 1 – 14, 2021. Disponível em:
https://www.scielo.br/j/es/a/9R9PBy6R5MnBYbxpJbVW78h/?format=pdf&lang=pt.
Acesso em: 23 out. 2024.

JULIATTO, Clemente Ivo. Parceiros educadores: estudantes, professores,
colaboradores e dirigentes. Curitiba : Champagnat, 2007, p.189-193.

LÜCK, Heloísa. A gestão participativa na escola. Petrópolis, RJ: Vozes, 2006. Série
Cadernos de Gestão, v. III.

LÜCK, Heloísa. Dimensões de gestão escolar e suas competências. Curitiba:
Editora Positivo, 2009, p. 3 e p. 13.


                                                                                    495

LÜCK, Heloísa. A gestão participativa na escola. Petrópolis, RJ: Vozes, 2011.

MORAN, José Manuel. Mudar a forma de ensinar e aprender com tecnologias.
Interações, São Paulo,v. 5, n. 9, p. 57 – 72, 2000. Disponível em:
https://www.redalyc.org/pdf/354/35450905.pdf Acesso em: 12 jan. 2024.

SANTOS, Almir Paulo dos; PSRYBYCIEM, Moisés Marques; BONEZ, Jualine.
Desafios na gestão escolar: liderança em discussão.Educação em Perspectiva,
Viçosa, v. 11, p. 1 – 16, 2020 Disponível:
https://periodicos.ufv.br/educacaoemperspectiva/article/view/9238/6664 Acesso em: 05
nov. 2024.

SECRETARIA DE ESTADO DA EDUCAÇÃO DO PARANÁ. Educação em foco.
Superintendência da Educação. Departamento da Educação (s.d.). Disponível:
https://professor.escoladigital.pr.gov.br/educacao_em_foco. Acesso em:14 nov. 2024.




                                                                                 496

CHAPTER 28
 SEE, REFLECT, AND TRANSFORM:
 SHORT FILMS AS A TOOL FOR
 ENVIRONMENTAL EDUCATION


Gisele Keise Junges
Master’s Degree in Natural Resources and Sustainability
Universidade Tecnológica Federal do Paraná (UTFPR)
E-mail:giselekjunges@gmail.com .

Maristela Rosso Walker
Ph.D. in Education from the State University of Maringá (UEM)
Universidade Tecnológica Federal do Paraná (UTFPR)
E-mail:maristelawalker@gmail.com


ABSTRACT: The contemporary environmental crisis stems from a development
model based on the intensive exploitation of natural resources and unbridled
consumption, which calls for a rethinking of the relationship between society and
nature. In this context, Environmental Education (EE), which gained traction
following events such as the Stockholm Conference (1972) and the Tbilisi
Conference (1977), takes on a critical, interdisciplinary, and emancipatory
character and should be integrated across all aspects of daily school life, as
guided by the BNCC (2017). Film, especially in the form of short films, serves as
a privileged pedagogical resource because it mobilizes emotion, critical
reflection, and meaningful learning. Due to their brevity and narrative impact,
short films foster interdisciplinary debates and bring schools closer to
contemporary media culture, raising students’ awareness of socio-environmental
issues. Reported experiences show that watching, analyzing, and producing
short films contributes to students’ critical and participatory education (Menezes;
Duarte, 2007), broadening their cultural repertoires and strengthening their
ecological awareness. However, challenges such as a lack of teacher training,
inadequate infrastructure, and superficial approaches still limit their pedagogical
potential (Rosa, 2000; Napolitano, 2005). Overcoming these challenges requires
intentional planning and careful selection of materials, and integration into
interdisciplinary and community-based projects. It is concluded that the short film,
by bringing together science, art, and citizenship, serves as a transformative
resource for Environmental Education, fostering the development of critical
individuals committed to sustainability and socio-environmental justice.

KEYWORDS: environmental education, sustainability, cinema, short film,
pedagogical practices.




                                                                                497

RESUMO: A crise ambiental contemporânea decorre de um modelo de
desenvolvimento baseado na exploração intensa dos recursos naturais
e no consumo desenfreado, o que demanda repensar a relação entre
sociedade e natureza. Nesse cenário, a Educação Ambiental (EA),
consolidada a partir de eventos como Estocolmo (1972) e Tbilisi (1977),
assume caráter crítico, interdisciplinar e emancipatório, devendo estar presente
de forma transversal no cotidiano escolar, conforme orienta a BNCC
(2017). O cinema, especialmente na linguagem do curta-metragem,
apresenta-se como recurso pedagógico privilegiado por mobilizar emoção,
reflexão crítica e aprendizagem significativa. Por sua brevidade e impacto
narrativo, os curtas favorecem debates interdisciplinares e aproximam a
escola da cultura midiática contemporânea, sensibilizando os estudantes
para questões socioambientais. Experiências relatadas evidenciam que
assistir, analisar e produzir curtas contribui para a formação crítica e
participativa dos alunos (Menezes; Duarte, 2007), ampliando repertórios
culturais e fortalecendo a consciência ecológica. Contudo, desafios como a
carência de formação docente, infraestrutura precária e abordagens
superficiais ainda limitam seu potencial pedagógico (Rosa, 2000; Napolitano,
2005). Superá-los requer planejamento intencional, seleção criteriosa de
materiais e integração a projetos interdisciplinares e comunitários. Conclui-
se que o curta-metragem, ao articular ciência, arte e cidadania, constitui
recurso transformador para a Educação Ambiental, promovendo a formação de
sujeitos críticos e comprometidos com a sustentabilidade e a justiça
socioambiental.

PALAVRAS-CHAVE: educação ambiental, sustentabilidade, cinema, curta-
metragem, práticas pedagógicas.




                                                                            498

1. INTRODUCTION


       The environmental crisis that defines our contemporary era is the result of
a long historical process of unbridled exploitation of natural resources, the
intensification of production and consumption, and the consolidation of a
development model that prioritizes economic growth at the expense of socio-
environmental sustainability. Since the 1970s, global events such as the
Stockholm Conference (1972), the Tbilisi Conference (1977), and Rio-92 have
established Environmental Education (EE) as an essential dimension for
transforming social values and practices, with the aim of rethinking the
relationship between society and nature (Dias; Leal; Júnior, 2016; Loureiro,
2004). In this context, schools are called upon to play a central role in shaping
critical thinkers capable of understanding the complexity of environmental issues
and acting responsibly in the present and the future.
       The National Common Core Curriculum (BNCC, Brazil, 2017) establishes
that schools must promote the development of competencies focused on socio-
environmental sustainability, encouraging individual and collective alternatives
for a more balanced way of life. This means that Environmental Education cannot
be limited to commemorative dates or one-off activities, but must be integrated
into everyday educational practice in a cross-cutting, interdisciplinary, and critical
manner (Layrargues; Lima, 2014). In this sense, the use of artistic and cultural
languages—including cinema and, in particular, short films—emerges as a
powerful strategy for engaging students.
       From its very origins, cinema has been an art form, a cultural expression,
and a medium of communication. More than just entertainment, it functions as a
language that weaves together narratives, images, and sounds capable of
evoking emotions, reflections, and learning. As Napolitano (2005) points out,
working with film in the classroom enables schools to engage with contemporary
culture, bringing together aesthetics, leisure, ideology, and social values within a
single work. Edgar Morin (1989) adds that cinema is a “dream machine” and, at
the same time, a “social mirror,” as it reveals dimensions of human reality and
subjectivity. In this sense, watching films and short films in the classroom is not
merely a recreational activity but an opportunity for critical learning.



                                                                                  499

      The short film, due to its brief duration, accessible language, and creative
nature, serves as a prime resource for Environmental Education. In addition to
presenting diverse themes in a concise and impactful format, it allows teachers
to explore content dynamically, without the need to set aside large blocks of time
within their lesson plans. According to Rosa (2000), the break from routine
caused by showing audiovisual materials in the classroom captures students’
attention and evokes their emotions, fostering meaningful learning. Menezes and
Duarte (2007) emphasize that audiovisual resources foster students’ critical
reflection on socio-environmental issues, as they connect with their everyday
experiences and evoke feelings of belonging and responsibility.
      This article aims to discuss the pedagogical possibilities of using short
films in the classroom, especially for teaching environmental education and
sustainability. It seeks to understand how the act of “watching films” can
contribute to students’ critical development, highlighting authors who address
cinema, short films, and their interface with education— Furthermore, the aim is
to analyze experiences and propose methodological approaches that facilitate
the integration of this resource into daily school life, taking into account the
challenges faced by teachers.
      To achieve these objectives, the article is organized into sections. First, it
presents a reflection on film, education, and critical learning. Next, it discusses
Environmental Education and sustainability as foundations for pedagogical
practice. Subsequently, it analyzes the characteristics of short films and their
educational potential. Subsequently, the article addresses authors and research
that deal with the use of film and short films in the field of education, with an
emphasis on Environmental Education. It also discusses methodological
proposals and practical experiences that highlight the contribution of audiovisual
resources to teaching. Finally, it presents challenges, possibilities, and
concluding remarks that point to ways to expand the use of short films in schools.


2. CINEMA, EDUCATION, AND CRITICAL LEARNING


      Since its emergence in the late 19th century, cinema has established itself
as one of the most expressive forms of artistic and cultural language in modernity.
Initially conceived as a technological curiosity, it quickly assumed the role of a


                                                                                500

mass medium, capable of telling stories, disseminating ideologies, and
influencing social behavior (Napolitano, 2005). In the educational context, cinema
serves as a pedagogical resource capable of broadening horizons, stimulating
critical reflection, and integrating interdisciplinary knowledge.
       According to Edgar Morin (1989), cinema is both “art and industry,” but
above all, a formative experience, as it places the viewer before symbolic
representations that engage with their own experiences and emotions. For the
author, watching a film is not a passive act, but an active process of constructing
meaning, in which the viewer both recognizes and finds something unfamiliar in
themselves, experiences feelings, projects themselves onto the story, and learns.
Thus, the Showing films in the classroom enhances not only cognitive learning
but also students’ aesthetic, ethical, and social development.
       The use of film in the school setting, however, should not be limited to an
illustrative or recreational role. Napolitano (2005) warns that showing films merely
as a supplement to content or as an entertainment activity undermines their
pedagogical potential. This practice must be linked to clear educational objectives
that facilitate the connection between curricular content and students’ critical
reflection. In this sense, film helps schools reconnect with contemporary culture
by bridging formal and informal knowledge.
       Authors such as Gava and Xavier (2008) emphasize that audiovisual
media, by possessing its own everyday language, allows students to articulate
diverse worldviews in a stimulating way. Moving images, combined with sound
and narrative, engage emotion and cognition in an integrated way, enabling
meaningful learning (Ausubel, 2003). Linhares and Reis (2013) highlight that
audiovisual material facilitates discussion of scientific and social topics, going
beyond the role of a mere source of information to become a tool for dialogue,
debate, and critical inquiry.
       In the field of Environmental Education, cinema proves even more
relevant, as it engages ethical and affective dimensions related to caring for
nature and socio-environmental responsibility. Gadotti (2000) emphasizes that
Environmental Education must be critical and emancipatory, not merely
informative. To this end, films and short films serve as tools capable of raising
awareness, posing questions, and proposing new perspectives on the
relationship between human beings and the environment. By combining


                                                                                501

aesthetics and reflection, they broaden ecological awareness and promote
interdisciplinary learning. Furthermore, cinema aligns with the practices of
Freirean critical education, as it proposes a dialogical process of reading and
interpreting the world. According to Paulo Freire (1996), education must start from
the reality of the individuals involved and foster their ability to act upon it. In this
context, films and short films can be interpreted as “cultural texts” that offer
concrete situations for analysis, allowing students and teachers to engage in
dialogue about the environmental and social problems depicted, relating them to
their own experiences and contexts.
       Therefore, when cinema is purposefully incorporated into the educational
process, it ceases to be mere entertainment and becomes a powerful teaching
tool. More than simply conveying information, it encourages critical reflection,
fosters interdisciplinary debate, broadens cultural horizons, and strengthens civic
education. Based on this understanding, it is pertinent to explore the relationship
between film, environmental education, and sustainability, discussing how this
medium can contribute to transformative pedagogical practices.


3. ENVIRONMENTAL EDUCATION AND SUSTAINABILITY


       Environmental Education (EE) emerged as a field of knowledge and
pedagogical practice amid the intensifying global ecological crisis, beginning in
the second half of the 20th century. International discussions initiated at the
Stockholm Conference (1972) and consolidated at the Tbilisi Conference (1977)
highlighted the need to include the environmental dimension at all levels and in
all forms of education, with a view to fostering citizens who are aware of and
committed to the preservation of the planet (Dias; Leal; Júnior, 2016). Since then,
Environmental Education (EE) has established itself as a cross-cutting,
interdisciplinary field focused on transforming the relationship between society
and nature.
       According to Reigota (2009), Environmental Education should be
understood as a social practice that seeks to promote values, knowledge, and
attitudes oriented toward sustainability. More than simply conveying content
about ecology, it is an educational process that questions development models
and encourages ways of coexisting based on respect, cooperation, and collective


                                                                                    502

responsibility. From this perspective, the school is a prime setting for fostering a
critical ecological consciousness capable of addressing contemporary socio-
environmental challenges.
       Sustainability, a concept associated with the Brundtland Report (1987),
refers to the ability to meet the needs of the present without compromising the
needs of future generations. Gadotti (2000) emphasizes that this is not merely
about ecological balance, but rather a civilizational project that integrates social,
cultural, political, and economic dimensions. For the author, sustainability
requires structural changes in patterns of production and consumption, as well
as the formation of a global citizenship. Environmental Education (EE), in this
context, is a fundamental tool for raising awareness and mobilizing individuals
and communities toward a more just and balanced way of life.
       Authors such as Leff (2001) advocate for the need for a “new
environmental rationality,” capable of overcoming the instrumental and utilitarian
logic that governs contemporary society. This rationality presupposes recognition
of the complexity of the environment, understood not merely as a set of natural
resources, but as a network of relationships among ecological, cultural, and social
processes. Critical environmental education, in this sense, must challenge the
contradictions of the capitalist development model and propose sustainable
alternatives. Layrargues and Lima (2014) complement this view by presenting the
macro-trends in environmental education—conservationist, pragmatic, and
critical—emphasizing that only the critical perspective is capable of addressing
the structural causes of the environmental crisis.
       In the school setting, Environmental Education must be approached in a
cross-curricular manner and integrated into various areas of knowledge. The
BNCC (Brazil, 2017) stipulates that contemporary issues, such as environmental
concerns, should be addressed in an interdisciplinary way, connecting science,
culture, and citizenship. This means that Environmental Education should not be
limited to commemorative dates but incorporated into daily teaching as an
ongoing practice that sparks students’ interest and engagement. In this context,
the use of artistic and cultural media, such as film and short films, enhances this
approach, as it speaks directly to students’ sensibilities and imagination.
       Furthermore, critical environmental education recognizes that the
environmental crisis is also a social and ethical crisis. Jacobi (2003) emphasizes


                                                                                 503

that it is impossible to separate ecological issues from social inequalities, since
the impacts of environmental degradation fall disproportionately on different
population groups. Sustainability, therefore, can only be achieved through an
integrated approach that promotes social justice, equity, and democratic
participation. In this sense, addressing Environmental Education through short
films helps highlight these interrelationships, fostering students’ critical thinking
and encouraging them to devise collective solutions.
       Finally, it is important to emphasize that Environmental Education should
not be understood merely as a school subject, but as a broad educational practice
that involves families, communities, and social movements. Films and short films,
by circulating in both school settings and community environments, reinforce this
broad nature of Environmental Education, promoting intergenerational and
intercultural dialogues around sustainability.


4. THE SHORT FILM: CHARACTERISTICS AND EDUCATIONAL POTENTIAL


       The short film, as a cinematic genre, is characterized by its short running
time—generally less than 40 minutes according to international standards, and
up to 15 minutes under Brazilian law (Law No. 6,281/1975). This brevity, far from
being a limitation, constitutes its greatest strength, as it demands condensed,
creative narratives with a strong aesthetic and emotional impact. According to
Ramos (2004, p. 22), “the short film is a privileged space for aesthetic and
narrative experimentation, allowing for bold approaches that often find no place
in commercial cinema.”
       Historically, short films have been fundamental to the development of
cinema as a language, from the Lumière brothers’ first screenings in 1895 to the
avant-garde movements of the 20th century. In Brazil, they have also played a
decisive role, whether in independent production or as an educational and
political resource, especially during periods of social and cultural upheaval, such
as in the 1960s with the Cinema Novo movement and the film *Cinco vezes
favela* (1962).
       From an educational standpoint, short films offer unique advantages over
feature-length films. Because they require less screening time, they can be easily
integrated into regular classes without compromising the curricular organization.


                                                                                 504

Furthermore, due to their narrative conciseness, they spark students’ interest and
facilitate immediate discussion of the topics addressed. Rosa (2000, p. 39) had
already pointed out that “the break from routine caused by the presentation of an
audiovisual resource is beneficial, as it alters the classroom routine and stirs
students’ emotions.”
       Menezes and Duarte (2007) add that audiovisual materials, due to their
aesthetic and symbolic dimensions, enhance students’ critical reflection on socio-
environmental issues, as they resonate with their life experiences. According to
the authors, “short films are ideal tools for science and environmental education,
as they stimulate students’ curiosity, questioning, and engagement” (Menezes &
Duarte, 2007, p. 77).
       Another relevant aspect is that short films allow for the in-depth exploration
of diverse themes, even within brief narratives. According to Napolitano (2005, p.
11), “working with film in the classroom helps schools rediscover a culture that is
both everyday and elevated, as film synthesizes aesthetics, leisure, ideology, and
social values within a single work of art.” This synthesis is even more evident in
short films, which, by condensing ideas into just a few minutes, have an
immediate impact on the viewer.
       From the perspective of Environmental Education, this characteristic
becomes even more relevant. Issues such as pollution, deforestation, climate
change, consumption, and inequality can be presented in animated shorts or
documentaries in a playful and thought-provoking way. As Rosso and Vieira
(2011, p. 88) observe, “films and documentaries, by combining emotion and
knowledge, contribute to a critical understanding of complex problems involving
nature and society.”
       Furthermore, short films engage directly with young people’s digital and
media culture. In the age of YouTube, TikTok, and other platforms, the concise
and visual language is familiar to students. Thus, using short films in the
classroom brings the school closer to students’ cultural world, making learning
more meaningful. According to Gava and Xavier (2008, p. 55), “the language
enables students to articulate worldviews in a stimulating way, since it is part of
their daily lives and an integral part of their social experience.”
       In summary, short films are an effective educational resource for
environmental education and sustainability, as they combine brevity, impact, and


                                                                                 505

the ability to raise awareness. Their use in the classroom allows for an
interdisciplinary, critical, and contextualized approach to teaching content,
promoting learning that unites emotion, reason, and action.


5. THE USE OF SHORT FILMS IN THE CLASSROOM


       The incorporation of short films into the school environment should not be
viewed as a secondary or merely recreational activity, but rather as an intentional
pedagogical practice aimed at promoting meaningful and critical learning. For this
to occur, teachers must make informed choices regarding audiovisual
productions, establish clear objectives, and plan activities that foster reflection
and dialogue.
       According to Napolitano (2005, p. 21), “film is not merely an illustrative
teaching resource, but a language that, when deciphered, contributes to students’
cultural and critical development.” This means that short films should not be
shown in isolation, but rather integrated with discussions and activities that foster
critical thinking.
       One of the most recommended methodologies is holding discussion
groups after the screening, in which students can express their impressions,
feelings, and interpretations. According to Linhares and Reis (2013, p. 62),
“audiovisual material is an important resource for promoting discussion of
scientific topics in the classroom, going beyond its use as a supplement to
information conveyed by teachers.” This dialogic process aligns with Freirean
pedagogy, in which the act of “reading the world” precedes “reading the word”
(Freire, 1996).
       Another possibility is the critical analysis of elements of cinematic
narrative, such as characters, plot, settings, and soundtrack. This analysis allows
students to understand how cinema constructs meanings and conveys
ideological messages. Rosa (2000) argues that, when working with audiovisual
materials in the classroom, teachers should encourage students to recognize the
intentionality of images and the relationship between emotion and knowledge.
       Short films can also be used as a catalyst for interdisciplinary projects.
When discussing, for example, a short film about river pollution, it is possible to
incorporate content from Science (ecological impacts), Geography (use of water


                                                                                 506

resources), History (environmental policies), Portuguese Language (writing
argumentative texts), and the Arts (aesthetic expression). This approach aligns
with Sauvé’s (2005) proposal, which views Environmental Education as an
interdisciplinary field that integrates diverse bodies of knowledge around
sustainability.
       In addition to screening existing films, an innovative pedagogical practice
consists of encouraging students to produce their own short films. Thiollent
(2011) points out that action research, when applied to education, enhances
learning through students’ active participation. Producing a short film requires
research, planning, scriptwriting, filming, and editing, mobilizing cognitive,
technical, and socio-emotional skills. Menezes and Duarte (2007) state that
“audiovisual production by the students themselves promotes not only content
learning but also the development of authorship, creativity, and critical
awareness” (p. 84).
       Finally, it is important to select short films that resonate with the students’
sociocultural context. Gadotti (2000) notes that Environmental Education must be
context-specific and participatory, respecting local realities and encouraging
youth leadership. In this sense, animated shorts, community documentaries, or
independent productions may be more effective than major commercial films, as
they present narratives that are closer to the students’ lived experiences.
       Thus, the use of short films in the classroom constitutes a pedagogical
practice that unites art, science, and citizenship. Screening them, discussing
them critically, and even producing them with students expands the potential of
Environmental Education, transforming the school into a space for reflection,
creation, and social transformation.


6. AUTHORS AND PERSPECTIVES ON CINEMA AND ENVIRONMENTAL
EDUCATION


       The relationship between cinema, environmental education, and
sustainability has been the subject of study by various authors, who recognize
audiovisual media as a language capable of raising awareness and fostering
critical citizens. The perspectives of these thinkers highlight both the aesthetic
dimension of cinema and its pedagogical and political functions.


                                                                                  507

       Edgar Morin (1989) is one of the pioneers to highlight cinema as a
formative experience. For him, “cinema is the most powerful dream machine ever
invented” (Morin, 1989, p. 17), capable of bridging reality and imagination, reason
and emotion. This characteristic gives films—and, in particular, short films—the
ability to engage viewers beyond the rational, appealing to their emotional and
ethical dimensions.
       Along the same lines, Napolitano (2005, p. 11) argues that “working with
film in the classroom helps schools rediscover a culture that is both everyday and
elevated, since cinema synthesizes aesthetics, leisure, ideology, and social
values within a single work of art.” Thus, film should not be viewed merely as
entertainment, but as an art form that communicates values and ideologies and
that, when critically analyzed, can broaden students’ awareness of their social
and environmental roles.
       In the specific field of Environmental Education, authors such as Loureiro
(2004) advocate for a critical perspective that goes beyond isolated and purely
informative practices. According to the author, “Environmental Education must be
understood as a political-pedagogical process that contributes to social
transformation” (Loureiro, 2004, p. 38). In this sense, the use of films and short
films in the classroom becomes a tool for fostering debates on consumption,
environmental justice, and sustainability, encouraging students to understand the
structural roots of the ecological crisis.
       Reigota (2009) expands on this view by stating that Environmental
Education should be understood as a social and cultural practice, rooted in
people’s daily lives. According to the author, “Environmental Education is not
neutral, but carries values and intentions, and should promote critical and
democratic participation” (Reigota, 2009, p. 24). By showing short films that
depict local problems, such as river pollution or deforestation, teachers enable
students to make connections between their own reality and major global
challenges.
       Gadotti (2000), when discussing sustainability, emphasizes the need for
an education that fosters global citizenship. According to him, “sustainability is
not only ecological, but also social, political, and cultural” (Gadotti, 2000, p. 67).
In this context, film is a privileged resource for articulating these dimensions, as



                                                                                  508

it can represent the interdependence between society and nature through
accessible and compelling visual narratives.
       Jacobi (2003), in turn, draws attention to the inseparability of
environmental crisis and social inequality. The author argues that environmental
education should promote socio-environmental justice by valuing citizen and
community participation. By showcasing stories of communities affected by
environmental disasters or social exclusion, short films play a fundamental role
in raising awareness and mobilizing students toward collective action.
       Leff (2001) also offers the perspective of the “new environmental
rationality,” which involves moving beyond the instrumental logic of modern
society and adopting a complex view of ecological relationships. For the author,
“the environment constitutes a social rationality, shaped by behaviors, values,
and knowledge” (Leff, 2001, p. 224). Feature films and short films, by presenting
stories that connect ecology, culture, and society, can contribute to this shift in
rationality.
       Finally, Sauvé (2005) highlights the plurality of approaches within
Environmental Education, such as the naturalist, conservationist, critical, and
sustainability approaches. Each of these approaches can be explored through
short films, which, by representing different worldviews, stimulate classroom
debate.
       Thus, it can be observed that the leading authors addressing the
intersection of cinema and Environmental Education emphasize the role of
audiovisual media as a language that engages reason and emotion, culture and
politics, contributing to a critical and transformative education.


7. EXPERIENCES AND METHODOLOGICAL PROPOSALS


       The use of short films in the classroom has already been the subject of
experiments in various educational contexts, revealing their pedagogical potential
for raising students’ awareness and fostering critical thinking. These practices
show that this resource can be used both as a catalyst for reflection and as a
structuring element for interdisciplinary projects.
       One of the most common approaches is screening short films followed by
discussion circles, in which students share their impressions and discuss the


                                                                               509

issues presented. According to Rosa (2000, p. 39), “the break in rhythm caused
by the presentation of an audiovisual piece is beneficial, as it alters the classroom
routine and engages students’ emotions.” This methodology promotes
meaningful learning (Ausubel, 2003), as it connects new content to students’ prior
experiences.
        Another effective approach involves integrating the short films into
interdisciplinary projects. For example, an animated short film addressing
deforestation can be explored in Science (ecological impacts), Geography (land
use),   History   (environmental    policies),   Portuguese    Language      (writing
argumentative texts), and Arts (aesthetic interpretation). As Sauvé (2005) points
out, Environmental Education should be interdisciplinary, integrating diverse
bodies of knowledge to understand the complexity of socio-environmental
problems.
        Some schools and universities have developed short-film production
workshops with their own students. In this type of activity, students research a
socio-environmental issue, write scripts, shoot footage, conduct interviews, and
edit the material into a short film. This practice not only familiarizes young people
with audiovisual language but also fosters creativity, leadership and engagement.
Menezes and Duarte (2007, p. 84) emphasize that “audiovisual production by the
students themselves promotes not only the learning of content but also the
development of authorship, creativity, and critical awareness.”
        Another example is the use of short films in rural schools and traditional
communities, where screening films about family farming, sustainable land use,
or water conservation can serve as a catalyst for community discussions. Gadotti
(2000) asserts that Environmental Education must be contextualized and
participatory, respecting local realities and fostering global citizenship. In these
cases, short films function as a tool for cultural mediation, connecting folk wisdom
and scientific knowledge.
        Projects reported by Jacobi (2003) also demonstrate that critical
Environmental Education can be strengthened through the use of short films that
address socio-environmental inequality. Screening short documentaries that
portray communities affected by flooding, mining, or a lack of sanitation, for
example, allows students to connect local problems to structural processes of



                                                                                 510

exclusion and environmental degradation. This encourages reflection on socio-
environmental justice and the role of citizens in transforming reality.
       Furthermore, in the context of digital technologies, short films can be
integrated into virtual platforms and online learning environments. Teachers can
design activities in which students watch short films at home and participate in
virtual discussion forums, thereby expanding the scope and duration of learning.
As Gava and Xavier (2008, p. 55) point out, “audiovisual language is part of
everyday life and an integral part of students’ social experience,” which facilitates
its integration into hybrid teaching practices.
       Finally, it is worth noting that methodological proposals should be
accompanied by participatory assessment processes, in which students are
invited to reflect not only on the content they have learned but also on their
feelings, values, and attitudes toward environmental issues. As Freire (1996)
reminds us, education should be a practice of freedom, in which the student is an
active participant in the process and not merely a recipient of information.
       Thus, the experiences reported here demonstrate that the use of short
films can be incorporated into schools in multiple ways: as a teaching resource
for discussing content, as an artistic language for aesthetic interpretation, as a
tool for community mobilization, and as a practice fostering youth authorship and
leadership. All of these possibilities point toward a more critical, participatory, and
transformative environmental education.


8. CHALLENGES AND POSSIBILITIES


       Despite the pedagogical potential of short films, their implementation in the
classroom faces several challenges. One of the main challenges is the lack of
specific training for teachers. As noted by Napolitano (2005) and Rosa (2000),
many teachers have not received adequate training to work with film, which can
lead to a superficial use of the resource or to the perception of audiovisual media
solely as entertainment. For short films to fulfill their educational role, it is
necessary to invest in continuing education programs that address both cinematic
language and its integration with educational objectives and socio-environmental
themes.



                                                                                   511

       Another challenge is school infrastructure. Screening short films requires
adequate audiovisual equipment, such as projectors, screens, speakers, and
access to digital content. In socially vulnerable contexts or in rural schools, these
conditions are not always available. Menezes and Duarte (2007) emphasize that,
in such situations, it is necessary to seek creative alternatives, such as the use
of laptops, community televisions, or activities that prioritize the production of
short films by the students themselves, thereby minimizing dependence on
external resources.
       The choice of short films is also a sensitive issue. Teachers should select
works that are relevant to the curriculum, culturally appropriate, and capable of
stimulating critical reflection. As Gadotti (2000) states, environmental education
must be context-specific, respecting the local context and the students’ reality.
Short films that are too far removed from students’ experiences can lead to
disinterest or superficial learning, whereas works rooted in everyday life foster
engagement and identification.
       Furthermore, integrating the short film into the curriculum requires careful
pedagogical planning. Showing the film in isolation, without accompanying
activities or critical analysis or interdisciplinary interdisciplinary projects,
undermines the        educational potential. Napolitano (2005, p. 21) warns that
“film only fulfills its pedagogical role when it is analyzed, critically examined, and
contextualized within the educational process,” which requires time, dedication,
and integration with other content.
       Despite these difficulties, there are numerous possibilities for expanding
the use of short films in schools. Digitization and access to online video platforms
make it more feasible to screen high-quality short films, including independent
productions and environmental documentaries. Furthermore, the production of
short films by the students themselves provides an opportunity for active learning,
engaging cognitive, technical, and socio-emotional skills, as noted by Thiollent
(2011) and Menezes and Duarte (2007).
       Another possibility is collaboration with community and interdisciplinary
projects, connecting schools, families, and society. Short films can serve as a
starting point for local debates, production workshops, environmental awareness
campaigns, and the exchange of cultural experiences. This approach reinforces
the critical, participatory, and emancipatory nature of Environmental Education,


                                                                                  512

transforming cinema into a tool for citizenship and social mobilization (Jacobi,
2003; Sauvé, 2005).
       From a pedagogical perspective, challenges become opportunities when
short films are incorporated in a planned, contextualized, and reflective manner.
They enable not only the transmission of content but also the development of
critical, aesthetic, and social skills. The dialogue between film and Environmental
Education, therefore, represents a promising path for strengthening innovative
educational      practices,   interdisciplinarity,   and   student   engagement    in
understanding and transforming the socio-environmental reality.


9. CONCLUSION


       This article demonstrated that short films are a valuable pedagogical
resource for Environmental Education and the promotion of sustainability in
school settings. Their brevity, aesthetic richness, and ability to evoke emotion
and foster critical reflection allow them to be used in dynamic, interdisciplinary,
and participatory ways. As demonstrated, watching, analyzing, and producing
short films in the classroom contributes to the development of cognitive, socio-
emotional, and ethical competencies, fostering the formation of critical, conscious
individuals who are engaged with contemporary socio-environmental challenges.
       The theoretical framework analyzed shows that cinema, as a cultural and
artistic language, goes beyond entertainment. Morin (1989) and Napolitano
(2005) emphasize that films and short films are capable of articulating
imagination, reason, and emotion, bringing students closer to contemporary
culture and promoting critical learning. When integrated into Environmental
Education, these resources make it possible to address complex issues such as
pollution, climate change, deforestation, and socio-environmental inequality,
making reflection meaningful and contextualized (Gadotti, 2000; Reigota, 2009;
Jacobi, 2003).
       The pedagogical experiences reported indicate that short films can be
used in a variety of ways: as discussion starters, as components of
interdisciplinary projects, as material for critical analysis, or as products created
by the students themselves. This diversity of approaches reinforces the genre’s
versatility and its suitability for innovative educational practices (Menezes;


                                                                                  513

Duarte, 2007; Sauvé, 2005). Furthermore, the integration of digital technologies
expands learning spaces and enables closer interaction with students’ media
culture (Gava; Xavier, 2008).
       However, the use of short films in the classroom presents challenges that
must be addressed strategically. Among these are the need for specific teacher
training, the availability of adequate infrastructure, the careful selection of
materials, and alignment with clear pedagogical objectives (Napolitano, 2005;
Rosa, 2000). Overcoming these difficulties requires investment in training,
collaborative planning, and the valorization of local, community-based, and
participatory experiences.
       In short, short films offer transformative potential, enabling Environmental
Education to be critical, interdisciplinary, and context-specific. By fostering
reflection, dialogue, creativity, and active participation, this resource contributes
to the development of citizens who are aware of their role in caring for the planet
and in building more just and sustainable societies. Thus, using short films in the
classroom represents an innovative educational practice that connects culture,
art, and science and strengthens education as an instrument of social
transformation.




                                                                                 514

                                 REFERENCES
AUSUBEL, D. P. Knowledge Acquisition and Retention: Theory and Practice of
Meaningful Learning. São Paulo: Editora Moraes, 2003.

BRAZIL. National Common Core Curriculum: Early Childhood Education and
Elementary School. Brasília: Ministry of Education, 2017.

DIAS, G.; LEAL, S.; JÚNIOR, L. Environmental Education: Concepts, Policies, and
Practices. São Paulo: Cortez, 2016.

FREIRE, P. Pedagogy of Autonomy: Knowledge Necessary for Educational Practice.
30th ed. São Paulo: Paz e Terra, 1996.

GADOTTI, M. Environmental Education: Principles and Practices. São Paulo:
Cortez, 2000.

GAVA, A.; XAVIER, E. Education and Media: New Perspectives for Teaching. Porto
Alegre: Artmed, 2008.

JACOBI, P. R. Critical Environmental Education and Social Participation.
Campinas: Papirus, 2003.

LAYRARGUES, P.; LIMA, M. Critical Environmental Education: Approaches and
Practices. Belo Horizonte: Autêntica, 2014.

LEFF, E. Ecology and Rationality: Environmental Rationality as a Challenge. Rio de
Janeiro: Bertrand Brasil, 2001.

LOUREIRO, C. Critical Environmental Education: Reflections and Pedagogical
Practices. São Paulo: Moderna, 2004.

MENEZES, M.; DUARTE, C. Film and Environmental Education: Experiences and
Possibilities. Rio de Janeiro: DP&A, 2007.

NAPOLITANO, M. Film and Education: Theory and Pedagogical Practice. São Paulo:
Summus, 2005.

REIGOTA, M. Environmental Education: Principles and Critical Practices. 3rd ed.
São Paulo: Cortez, 2009.

RAMOS, M. The Short Film: Language and Experimentation. Rio de Janeiro:
FUNARTE, 2004.

ROSA, J. M. Audiovisual Media in Schools: Theory and Practice. São Paulo: Cortez,
2000.

ROSSO, L.; VIEIRA, A. Cinema and Environmental Education: From Awareness to
Action. Curitiba: Appris, 2011.

SAUVÉ, L. Environmental Education: Theory and Practice in an International
Context. São Paulo: Cortez, 2005.

THIOLLENT, M. Action Research. 15th ed. São Paulo: Cortez, 2011.



                                                                                  515

 Agência Brasileira ISBN
ISBN: 978-65-83309-62-4




                           516