Available online at www.ijournalse.org


                                                 Emerging Science Journal
                                                                 (ISSN: 2610-9182)

                                                            Vol. 6, No. 4, August, 2022

  Review Article




    Neuroleadership as an Asset in Educational Settings: An Overview

                Evgenia Gkintoni 1* , Constantinos Halkiopoulos 1 , Hera Antonopoulou 1
         1
             Entrepreneurship and Digital Innovation Laboratory (EDI LAB), Department of Management Science and Technology, University of
                                                                   Patras, Greece.



                                                                                                             Keywords:
 Abstract
                                                                                                             Educational Leadership;
 Objectives: The goal of this research is to investigate the scientific basis for integrating neuroscience   Cognitive Neuroscience;
 in general, and cognitive neuroscience in particular, into the field of educational leadership. In recent
 decades, the scientific community has shown a great interest in integrating neuroscience into higher        Decision-Making;
 education and the many levels of leadership education and decision-making that are crucial to a             Emotional Management;
 range of educational difficulties that leadership leaders are called upon to handle. Methods/Analysis:      Cognitive Flexibility;
 The present effort involves a systematic review of research publications published in the preceding
 two decades after a keyword search of reputable international databases. This review incorporates           Mirror Neurons.
 papers from Scopus, PubMed, Elsevier, and PsycINFO databases. The terms neuroleadership and
 education were used in combination with the four subfields outlined in the research: Among them
 are decision-making and problem-solving abilities, emotional control, cooperation and influence
 with others, and facilitation of change. Findings: The review's results underscore the vital relevance      Article History:
 of neuroscience integration into educational leadership difficulties and highlight ethical concerns
 regarding its deployment in educational settings. Novelty /Improvement: The novelty of this work is         Received:            28   September 2021
 that it conducted a review of the literature on neuroleadership using a combination of executive            Revised:             06   April       2022
 function parameters, more precisely cognitive flexibility, decision-making, problem-solving,
 emotional regulation, the mirror neuron system, and behavioral data from studies conducted in               Accepted:            02   May         2022
 educational and administrative settings.                                                                                         31   May         2022
                                                                                                             Available online:




1- Introduction
1-1- Integration of Neuroscience in Leadership and Education
   Various researchers have been interested in the study of neuroscience and its relationship to leadership for decades
as they seek a framework that underpins leaders and organizational performance. The study of neuroscience and its
influence on human behavior and reaction systems compels educational leaders to delve deeper into human dynamics
and their impact on defining an organization's culture and mission [1]. In addition, educational leaders may use brain
research to tap into other people's abilities and grow and train their brains via effective communication. This is
characterized by a high degree of social, emotional, and cultural intelligence. Numerous studies have illustrated various
types of leadership and specifically referred to transformational leadership as an effective leadership style [2]. According
to Bass, transformational leadership entails four critical qualities of the leader: i) charisma; ii) inspiration; iii) spiritual
development, and iv) a customized strategy. Various researchers in the fields of educational research and organizational
management point to certain changes in the profile and requirements of executives that must be met in order to conduct
effective leadership. An effective leader must prioritize values shared by his subordinates, seek their education and
growth, and promote a common vision and purpose. Furthermore, an effective educational leader possesses qualities

* CONTACT: evigintoni@upatras.gr


DOI: http://dx.doi.org/10.28991/ESJ-2022-06-04-016
© 2022 by the authors. Licensee ESJ, Italy. This is an open access article under the terms and conditions of the Creative
Commons Attribution (CC-BY) license (https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/).



                                                                                                                                             Page | 893

                                                                                            Emerging Science Journal | Vol. 6, No. 4

that foster collaboration, problem-solving abilities, and an ability to adapt to change. Nonetheless, effective educational
leaders demonstrate empathy and a genuine interest in people as humans, not simply as employees. According to Mayer
et al. (2000) [3], an effective (educational) leader is capable of recognizing emotions in both himself and others. To
properly manage, one must be able to interpret emotions. Thus, an effective educational leader should be able to acquire
the confidence and loyalty of others, thereby increasing the organization's efficiency and effectiveness. Neuroscientists
are reinventing leadership in the twenty-first century by imbuing the neurological foundation and neural basis of
leadership effectiveness with new meaning for leading oneself, others, and an organization renowned for its threefold
emphasis on effectiveness [4, 5].
    According to neuroleadership practitioners, understanding the neurological underpinnings of leadership success
requires grasping the neuroscience of social behavior for engagement, motivation, and peak performance. In addition,
neuro-leadership abilities are required of 21st-century leaders to develop connections, manage emotions, make choices,
and encourage people to accomplish corporate goals to meet the challenges of reducing achievement gaps and adapting
to changing populations [6, 7]. Nonetheless, several contradictory studies address the critical nature of incorporating
neuroscience into educational leadership and contribute to its increased effectiveness [8, 9]. The scientific community
appears to be skeptical. According to Lindebaum & Raftopoulou (2017) [8], recorded knowledge of brain patterns has
little practical effect on existing social behaviors. Neuroimaging research has shown comparable results, indicating that
integrating neuroscience discoveries into educational leadership would not modify management paradigms, i.e., [9]. On
the other hand, neuroscience has posed a challenge to organizational management and given new meaning to
organizational and leadership performance [10]. Neuroscientific data can be critical in defining educational leadership
in terms of cognition, specifically in terms of the decision-making, problem-solving, emotional regulation, and personal
qualities of academic leaders.
    Over the past decades, the scientific community in the neuroscience and education sectors has emphasized the
biological parameters involved in leadership combined with the personality traits of the leader that determine decision
making. This scientific interest has given impetus to the development of neuro-leadership studies. Neuroscience, the
subject of neuroleadership, is a branch of study that studies the interplay of neurons that underpin human behavior and
its consequences. Neuroleadership, defined as the ability to link brain regions with leadership actions, attempts to bolster
the leadership sector via the use of neuroscience research. Neuroleaders lead their organizations by developing a
management plan based on brain research. Neuroscience provides significant growth opportunities for leaders and
managers through studying biological and neurochemical processes in the brain for instance decision-making and
emotional regulation. As a result, academics may develop better educated theories and leadership styles by delving into
the neural underpinnings of behavior.
   The purpose of this study is to examine the value of integrating neuroscience into education, particularly in the area
of decision making and problem solving, by stressing executive function characteristics such as cognitive flexibility,
emotional regulation, and the visual system of mirror neurons. Those are critical components in the performance of
rational educational leadership, if feasible.

2- Literature Review
2-1- Neuroleadership in Education – Brain Facts and Theory Implications
    The frontal cortex is the apex of a brain area hierarchy that integrates external and internal factors in order to reflect,
arrange chronologically, and execute complicated mental and behavioral responses to environmental obstacles, such as
those related with leadership. The frontal cortex is connected to almost all other cortices, subcortical areas, and brain
stem nuclei, allowing it to access and control a wide variety of cognitive resources. Additionally, it has been
demonstrated that a substructure known as the ventromedial prefrontal cortex collaborates with limbic areas as an
emotion regulator to facilitate efficient mental functioning in the pragmatics of social life, including self-regulation of
agency and goal-directed activity, social self-awareness, decision-making, and moral behavior [11-13]. Additionally,
frontal lobe participation has been shown in investigations of episodic memory (for example, hemisphere encoding and
retrieval asymmetry) [13, 14]. Semantic memory is associated with the left prefrontal cortex [15]. Thus, encoding is
required for both episodic and semantic memory. While semantic memories might begin in a personal context, they can
progressively shift from episodic to semantic memory as their sensitivity and identification with individual events
diminish. Thus, self-awareness may grow more generic over time, enabling it to be applied to novel circumstances. As
a result, it's unsurprising that both depend on frontal lobe functions. Thus, the frontal lobes include a large number of
the neurological abilities necessary for leadership [13].
   The term “neuroleadership” evolved out of a desire to learn more about how humans may improve overall leadership
abilities and effectiveness. It arose when neuroscientists were able to watch live human brains (through functional
Magnetic Resonance Imaging (fMRI) scanners, for example) and gain new insights into how the human brain works.



                                                                                                                      Page | 894

                                                                                          Emerging Science Journal | Vol. 6, No. 4


Neuroleadership is an area of study that focuses on the neurological underpinnings of leadership and management
techniques. It synthesizes results from various disciplines within neuroscience, including social cognitive and affective
neuroscience, cognitive neuroscience, integrative neuroscience, neurobiology, and others. It is believed that establishing
a science of leadership that incorporates the mind's and brain's physiology would become more accessible to leaders
interested in learning and improving themselves and others. Additionally, it converts the soft skills associated with
professional growth into practical talents by using scientific evidence. Neuroleadership is divided into four subfields of
research. These include decision-making and problem-solving, emotional control, collaboration and influence with
others and change-facilitation. Each one of these sub-dimensions, has the potential to integrate a neuroscience
perspective with established models that assist us in resolving common problems. Due to the brain's neuroplasticity, the
fusion of leadership and neuroscience opens new avenues for leaders to learn how to adapt and alter their leadership
methods and behaviors to become more successful practitioners [1, 16].
   Furthermore, neuroleadership can boost effective educational leadership due to the fact that effectiveness in
educational leadership and in the field of human resource management is established on the capacity to control one's
emotions [17]. A leader's emotional intelligence defines their ability to influence behavior and contribute to an
individual's personal growth by mobilizing, motivating, and stimulating their mental talents. An emotionally savvy
leader may inspire trust and loyalty in his subordinates and push them to work harder to accomplish a mutually agreed
objective. Leaders' emotional intelligence is critical to their capacity to encourage people to accomplish corporate goals.
Emotional intelligence and leadership behavior [18], particularly in the decision-making process, are inextricably linked.
With theoretical perspectives on transformational leadership and its link to emotional intelligence, empirical research
has established a favorable correlation between these notions. A survey performed by the global Johnson & Johnson
Consumer Care and Personal Care Group discovered that executives with the highest job performance have considerably
greater emotional intelligence than other executives.
    Additionally, research evaluating the success characteristics of a broad sample of Latin American, Japanese, and
German CEOs is intriguing [19]. Successful and unsuccessful managers were shown to have distinct profiles in three
critical areas: seniority and advanced experience, cognitive intelligence, and emotional intelligence. Typically,
unsuccessful managers have a much greater level of cognitive competence and professional experience than successful
managers. Additionally, he has a poor level of emotional intelligence. On the contrary, effective managers have a much
greater degree of emotional intelligence in addition to a sufficient level of cognitive intelligence and job experience.
   Several studies [17] have examined leaders' capacity to identify others' feelings, how leaders may use emotions to
monitor their followers in working groups, and how leaders can utilize emotions to build leadership skills. These
qualities and skills are critical in leadership processes because they influence how followers view their leaders. As a
result, the relationship between transformative leaders and their followers develops into a highly emotional one.
Transformational leaders demonstrate various non-verbal emotional qualities (for instance, their perspective on others
and their verbal comfort) that make them fascinating and charismatic leaders. In addition, influential, transformative
leaders must have the intuitive ability to empathize with people and offer counsel when necessary [20].
   In the realm of education, transformational leadership is instrumental. Education is a critical social framework for
the future of society. Schools in the twenty-first century must adapt successfully to a rapidly changing world. Changes
occurring in the global environment consider the teacher-position leader vital to any transformation's success [21-23].
Teachers, as change agents, must possess the essential skills and capacities to teach tomorrow's citizens, successfully
building their intellectual, emotional, and social capital at all levels of school [24].
   Emotionally intelligent teachers appear to be more successful leaders because they can recognize and regulate their
own and pupils' emotions, such as anger or irritation, and adapt their conduct to varied situations. Additionally, given
the evidence that increased stress and psychological exhaustion contribute to teachers' intention to resign from effective
knowledge management, research into the influence of emotional teachers' intelligence appears to be particularly
promising for success.

3- Research Design and Methods
    The current study's systematic review intends to combine studies including the following scientific fields:
Νeuroscience, Cognition, Leadership, Decision-making, and Emotional regulation, in the field of education and learning
process—the publications included span the last decade, more precisely from 2010 to 2021.The research methodology
is described in the following figure (Figure 1).




                                                                                                                    Page | 895

                                                                                          Emerging Science Journal | Vol. 6, No. 4




                                        Figure 1. Research Methodology Flowchart

   The methodology adopted in the current study is systematic review. Firstly, research articles after detailed searching
integrated in the study from databases of Scopus, PubMed, Elsevier and PsycINFO. Keywords that used the term of
neuroleadership, education in conjunction with the four subfiends that have been described in research: These include -
decision-making and problem-solving, emotional control, collaboration and influence with others and change-
facilitation. Additionally, other parameters, such as personality and cognitive flexibility, were integrated to combine
neuroleadership research findings for the purpose of sculpting a neuroleader personal profile for transformational
leadership in education (Figure 1). All of the studies were further divided into groups based on their experimental
models, which may be qualitative or quantitative, as well as their inclusion criteria, which included the following:
    Year of publication from 2010- till today (N=96);
    Primary search terms referred to the theoretical or methodological approaches in the context of neuroleadership,
     cognitive neuroscience and education in conjunction with the sub-dimensions of neuroleadership: decision-
     making, emotional control, collaboration with others, change-facilitation and in addition with specific parameters
     of decision-making, cognitive flexibility (dimension that is considered as crucial for an educational leader and the
     idiosyncrasy as defined by the notion of mirror neurons so as to describe a complete theoretical framework for
     neuroleadership);
    Method of study: Qualitative data;
    Study population: Employees in Educational and Management settings.
   In this study, the systematic literature review method was adopted. A systematic literature review is a type of
scientific investigation in which the studies conducted on a particular subject are scanned in detail, and the findings are
synthesized after the criteria of exclusion and inclusion in the collection of related studies. Basic topics, research
questions, and goals are the starting point for a systematic literature review. Then, the related publications are defined;
the selection, evaluation, and interpretation of the studies are based on a conceptual perspective; the sources of the data
used and the way they are analyzed and synthesized are clarified, and finally, the findings, limitations, and inferences
are discussed. All literature reviews are carried out within a specific stage and steps.
   After initial judgments had been taken prior to this evaluation, the first phase in the data collection procedure was to
determine the keywords. The following keywords were employed specifically: Leadership, Education, Cognitive
Parameters, and Neuroscience and other combined parameters with terms like neuroleadership, neuroeducation but also
by searching for terms related to the part of decision making (key parameter in leadership), such as cognitive flexibility,
emotional regulation.
   Following that, the studies were indexed in the most prestigious and widely recognized research databases, including
Scopus, PubMed, Elsevier, and PsycINFO. A search revealed a total of 96 (N=96) searches based on keyword
combinations. The title of the article and a summary of each one relating to the predefined keywords served as the
inclusion criteria for screening the surveys in the second step (Step=2). This stage led to the formation of sixty-four
(N=64) articles that met the aforementioned inclusion criteria.



                                                                                                                    Page | 896

                                                                                         Emerging Science Journal | Vol. 6, No. 4

   In step three (Step=3), articles whose entire text was inaccessible or hard to find were excluded (N=19). Additionally,
they were excluded due to linguistic constraints (N=5); specifically, related works with content authored in a language
other than English were excluded. This screening considered the following criteria: studies should be written in English,
published between 2010 and 2020, and have practical consequences for neuroleadership research or conceptual talks.
There were a total of forty works that matched the criteria mentioned above (N=40). Seven (N=7) research papers were
excluded from step four (Step=4) due to a lack of research data. These studies made no direct connections between
neuroleadership and outcomes and were therefore excluded from the research group denoted by the flowchart's "Data
Quality Score." The study's major themes were established as a result of the papers evaluated. Neuroleadership
implications for educational leaders (school leaders and instructors) in terms of decision-making, emotional regulation,
and problem-solving were included as themes if they were also supported by other analyzed studies (Figure 2).




                                         Figure 2. Systematic Review Flowchart



                                                                                                                   Page | 897

                                                                                           Emerging Science Journal | Vol. 6, No. 4

4- Results and Discussion
4-1- Neuroleadership - Decision-Making and Problem Solving
   Neuroleadership is founded on two fundamental concepts: decision-making and issue resolution (problem-solving).
Adaptability is a behavioral component associated with effective neuroleadership in the education and management of
other organizations. It is a cognitive dimension that encompasses innovative problem-solving in response to changing
conditions, uncertain or unpredictable scenarios. Adaptation requires a high level of self-awareness and the capacity to
steer critical decisions in leadership and, more significantly, educational contexts. A leader should recognize changes in
the work environment, interpret them to formulate goals, and forecast future occurrences that need a high degree of
adaptation or change. Likewise, Paulhus & Martin (1988) [25] as is cited by Hannah et al. (2013) [13], observed that a
diverse repertoire of information, actions, and tactics is a feature shared by several conceptualizations of a leader’s
adaptability [26]. The learning that underpins such flexibility in leaders includes both task and personal development.
The latter improves one's awareness of oneself, identity, capacities, and other task-related characteristics. Thus, the self-
acts as a link between the actions of leaders and the underlying processes that underpin adaptive performance.
Educational leaders face task demands; identity structures are primed to initiate self-regulation functions at five
hierarchical levels: (a) perception, (b) consciousness, (c) goal emergence, (d) affect systems, and (e) at the top of the
hierarchy, these lower structures aggregate to activate a tailored working self-concept. Thus, leaders who have the
greatest access to a breadth of relevant knowledge and skills, as well as self-regulatory structures, in order to comprehend
problems and develop tailored working self-concepts, should be better equipped to engage the self in deliberations and
guide the process toward their goals and priorities.
   According to an emerging body of neuroscience research, the neural pattern observed at rest represents the brain's
underlying functional connections and an individual's inherent and constant brain function or aptitude [27]. Indeed,
Cacioppo et al. (2003) [28] argued that the brain is not inert during rest but performs various potentially important
neuronal activities, including memory consolidation and learning [13]. Fox & Raichle (2007) [19] discovered that
patterns of brain activity during rest correlate to patterns of task involvement. Waldman et al. (2011) [29] have suggested
that the brain's resting state may indicate genuine leadership skills. At this stage, integrating neuroscience into the
explanation of leadership styles can provide relevant concepts for developing a better knowledge of the brain activity of
leaders, particularly educational leaders. And therefore, to shed light on the fundamentals of effective leadership. The
brain basis for a leader's self-complexity may also provide insight on leadership development. An increasing field of
social neuroscience research is shedding light on the functions and processes of many brain regions. Additionally,
growth in this area may be tracked over time using EEG, fMRI, and other techniques. Butler et al. (2016) [30] found
that more competent leaders had reduced alpha coherence in the prefrontal cortex, which is largely responsible for
executive processes such as self-regulation [13, 30]. Thus, it is possible to submit leaders to activities designed to
enhance their metacognitive capacity and then evaluate changes in prefrontal brain activity over time as they advance
toward a normative index. Undoubtedly, the neurocognitive revolution in educational leadership studies has shifted
focus to leaders' thinking processes in order to better understand their actions and effectiveness.

4-2- Neuroleadership - Emotional Regulation
    Emotional regulation is another perspective that has been studied in neuro leadership research. Neuroscientific
methods can explain a further understanding of emotions and unconscious processes that interfere with them and lead
human behavior. Communication between educational leaders and colleagues or, between instructor and learner is a
essential part of the educational process and is characteristic in learning environments. Educational leadership is highly
interested in communication processes expertise since this process exists at all levels of management, beginning with
communication between leaders and employees and ending with peer communication between colleagues.
Communication is the primary tool for sharing practices inside an organization, and executives have long recognized
communication as critical to their success. For an extended period, academics and psychologists asserted that a
competent leader's role was to foster a specific "social climate" within the group, which impacted the members' moods
and performance. Thus, a transformative leader maintains a healthy balance of production and group member happiness.
Additionally, we know that leaders with a higher level of emotional intelligence can sympathize with employees'
emotions and exhibit more emotionally appropriate interactions and behaviors [17]. Empathy, or the capacity to
empathize with the feelings of others, refers to both cognitive and emotional processes that enable us to represent other
people's mental and affective processes cognitively and to generate an actual reaction consistent with their actions. The
literature demonstrates a strong correlation between emotional empathy and the capacity to identify facial expressions.
Observing their facial expressions may deduce their emotional states [31]. Educational leadership aims to explain a
leader's behavior structure using neuropsychology and cognitive neuroscience insights. These advancements enable the
examination of the brain systems behind emotions and communication and the personal profile and behavioral style of
an educational leader or instructor.



                                                                                                                     Page | 898

                                                                                            Emerging Science Journal | Vol. 6, No. 4

    May-Vollmar (2017) [32] conducted a study on emotional intelligence and school leader performance and discovered
that emotional intelligence is a significant predictor of an individual's ability to execute successful leadership practices.
Along with school, leaders can control their emotions; they must recognize their position in facilitating change. Leaders
who demonstrate self-awareness and self-control, for example, can recognize when an encounter is causing them to feel
irritated and will be able to manage their emotional response throughout the contact. For instance, a leader may have
had extensive training in the art of inspiring others to share a vision. However, the leader's dissatisfaction might obstruct
the leader from adequately executing the leadership practice. The leader's capacity to comprehend and recognize
emotional triggers resulting from developing self-awareness of their own emotions and those of others enables them to
boost motivation and engagement levels by strategically considering how to minimize workplace stress and elicitation
of negative emotions.
   Saxe (2011) [33] conducted a study on school leaders' emotional and social intelligence and discovered that effective
leaders cultivate strong relationships:
    By empathizing with people and being just;
    By ensuring autonomy and predictability during the transition process;
    By elevating people' standing via personalized assistance and partnership.
   Saxe (2011) [33] provided the following research findings. In the five-brain model indicated that the limbic system
is composed of the amygdala, hippocampus, fornix, cingulate cortex, septum, mammillary bodies, and striatum.
According to Rock and Cox (2013) [34], when an individual compares his or her position to that of another, the cingulate
cortex (dorsal anterior cingulate cortex) is engaged, the same brain area that processes pain. Additionally, as status
improves and pleasure is received during social processing, the reward brain circuitry in the striatum is engaged. As a
result, Rock and Cox (2013) [34] assert that "Information validating one's status can activate the reward brain circuitry.
While a person receives a social benefit, namely when believing that he or she was establishing a positive reputation
with others, activity in the striatum [is stimulated]." When individuals feel important to their colleagues and school
administrators, their status improves as a result of the reward brain circuitry being triggered. By identifying changes to
elevate the status of individuals who work in a school environment, influential school leaders can reduce the danger
circuitry of the brain and boost the reward circuitry. In a school context, opportunities to elevate others' status include
open invitations to serve on committees, encouragement to develop supervisory skills, solicitation of additional talents
and experience, and customizing professional development to ensure ongoing progress. Educational administrators in
the twenty-first century may be, wish to foster healthy, balanced school cultures. In this situation, skills in teaching and
learning, strategic management, and social, emotional, and cultural awareness of both kids and adults are required. To
promote change and impact individual behaviors and cooperation, school leaders must understand how to nurture and
grow everyone's potential, leveraging school leader intelligence to improve clarity and foster autonomy aligned with
organizational success. "Leadership success is contingent upon a leader's capacity to solve a complicated social problem,
such as the coordination of ideas and behaviors within social groupings".

4-3- Neuroleadership – Mirror Neurons
   “Social intelligence is a kind of emotional intelligence that focuses on interpersonal relationships. Daniel Goleman's
approach consists of four domains: self-awareness, emotional self-management, empathy, social awareness, and social
skills – or relationship management. Furthermore, the second two of those components, empathy and social ability,
comprise social intelligence”. The neuroleadership idea is based on the mirror neurons effect and how great leaders can
connect with their followers through rapport-building in order to develop highly focused and effective teams that are
just as fascinated with the goal as their leader is. Social neuroscience, a subfield of neuroleadership, argues that a leader
must be an expert in his area and possess social intelligence.
   A true leader demonstrates empathy for his team, instilling a strong belief in the vision. Thus, the neuroleadership
idea encompasses both the aspiration to succeed and the united objective. Employees search for clues from supervisors
and instinctively emulate their conduct. This demonstrates the critical nature of having a positive perspective and setting
an example of desired conduct for leaders. Additionally, leaders may have a better knowledge of others by first gaining
a better awareness of themselves.
    Thus, mirror neurons offer a unique chance for humans, particularly those who exert educational leadership, to put
themselves in the footsteps of another and experience the world from another (physical and mental) perspective,
comprehending its intentions, actions, and feelings. This tendency is in conjunction with the executive parameter that is
referred to as cognitive flexibility (and will be analyzed later). It enables the individual to learn from others and so alter
its conduct as necessary (switching). Mirror neurons are the neurobiological mechanism underlying the most humanistic,
if not the most compassionate, element of humanity [35]. Their role is to provide the individual with the required tools
for social interaction. It supports the development of interpersonal relationships in a professional or, more precisely,
educational setting. Furthermore, this is the same human behavior that robotics has been attempting to replicate for a



                                                                                                                      Page | 899

                                                                                           Emerging Science Journal | Vol. 6, No. 4

significant period [36]. The emergence of electronic computing systems based on distributed and parallel computing
was a major force of innovation in robotics and artificial intelligence. This method is partially inspired by the idea of
human intelligence as the management of symbolic representations and the flow of information at hierarchical and
sequential levels of processing in a convergent and divergent way [37]. Artificial neural networks, deep learning, and
machine learning are all terms that refer to systems that replicate some human cognitive abilities required for leadership
exercise, such as logical thought, learning, pattern identification, decision making, and problem-solving. However, the
novelty of technological advancements that replicate the function of mirror neurons is that they extend their function in
the realm of emotions to what is known as affective computing. All of the above converges towards establishing an
innovative digital leadership system that incorporates artificial intelligence and neural networks.

4-4- Neuroleadership and Cognitive Flexibility – A Reborn Leader’s Promising Field
    The executive functions of the brain are beneficial cognitive parameters for an organizational leader. Cognitive
flexibility is one of these cognitive parameters of executive functions. Cognitive flexibility refers to our brain's capacity
to adjust our behavior and thought processes to the novel, alternate, or unexpected circumstances. Cognitive flexibility
is critical for learning and problem-solving in complicated situations. It enables us to choose the approach that must be
followed to adapt to the various conditions we experience. By contrast, cognitive rigidity refers to the difficulty of
modifying habits and ways of thinking when they are ineffective or unable to accomplish the initial objectives. Cognitive
flexibility is a competitive advantage for managers and leaders seeking to maximize their potential. In psychology, the
term "flexibility" refers to adapting a skill to new situations unrelated to the ones used to train. Thus, a high degree of
flexibility should enable an individual to swiftly move from one processing method or style to another, maximizing the
advantages and avoiding the disadvantages of each. Cognitive flexibility has been identified as a significant predictor
of incredibly complicated and unstructured. It is described broadly as "the capacity to adjust behavior to changing
circumstances."
   For many years, neuroscientists and psychologists believed that a fixed and predominantly static brain constrained
adults' capacity for change. On the other hand, it was believed that children's brains were malleable, continuously
changing learning machines capable of absorbing knowledge and randomly rewiring themselves.
   To a large extent, it was believed that the differences between adults and children were due to how human brains
developed. Around 100 billion neurons are born in the human brain. As people interact with and interpret their
environment, connections between these neurons grow. By the time a child reaches the age of two, they have made
around 1000 trillion connections. These connections continue to build throughout childhood, assisting the child's growth
and learning. The brain undergoes a period of consolidation and considerable neuronal pruning during adolescence.
Numerous neurons in the human brain that are seldom utilized die, leading in a loss of around half of all connections,
or 500 trillion.
   Adult brains are extraordinarily adaptable, and individuals may rewire their brains to accomplish astonishing
achievements with the correct approach, patience, and effort. In 1992, for example, Dr Jeffrey Schwartz taught persons
with Obsessive Compulsive Disorder (OCD) how to adjust their perceptions of and responses to their disorder's
symptoms. (e.g., reclassifying obsessions and compulsions as false alarms or misleading information, attributing these
symptoms to hyperactivity in specific brain circuits, devaluing unwanted thoughts as unimportant or unwanted, and
redirecting their attention away from their symptoms and toward a specific, desired, and constructive behavior).
   After ten weeks of practice and hard effort, Schwartz's patients reported significant improvement in their symptoms
and a sense of control over their sickness - a remarkable reversal for individuals who had previously felt completely
enslaved by their symptoms. Perhaps more astonishing, Schwartz noticed a difference in the way these people' brains
physically functioned over the same ten-week period. Their perspectives of OCD and the accompanying brain processes
appeared to have evolved as a result of their frequent, persistent, and purposeful application of will and attention.
   Similarly, Arrowsmith-Young (2012) devised a set of cognitive exercises in the 1970's to aid her in overcoming a
crippling mental block.' Barbara possesses a near-perfect memory but is unable to comprehend the meaning of symbols.
For example, she was unable to comprehend what a clock's hands represented or how to interpret this representation in
order to determine the time; she could not distinguish between 'the boy chases the dog' and 'the dog chases the boy'; she
read and wrote from right to left; and she frequently swapped letters and numbers. After getting upset with her
circumstances and being inspired by the work of neuroscientists Luria and Rozenweig, she created a series of cognitive
exercises (flashcards with clock faces on them). She exercised for eight hours a day, almost to exhaustion [38].
   Additional neuroplastic treatments have been developed to address function loss associated with clinical themes for
instance stroke, depression, addiction, and other learning issues, as well as certain types of blindness and deafness.
Similarly, research continues to gather evidence that personality and intellectual characteristics are malleable and may
be influenced by our environment and experiences.


                                                                                                                     Page | 900

                                                                                           Emerging Science Journal | Vol. 6, No. 4

   This research demonstrates that humans are far more adaptable than previously assumed. With enough effort and
practice, leaders or educational leaders and also staff’s behaviors could be altered and adapted to new circumstances.
Notably, these changes do not occur automatically. Instead, they need repeated acts of will and self-discipline. This is
consistent with Angela Duckworth's study, which indicates that grit - or enthusiasm and persistence - rather than talent,
aptitude, or competence - is the key to success. Thus, educational leaders appear to be less restricted by capacity,
aptitude, and ability. They are more restricted in their effort and attention allocation judgments. In a frenetically busy
culture and replete with distractions, neuroplasticity provides opportunities for development and achievement.
   The findings of this study can be integrated with the notion of neuroscience in education on the one hand, and with
the concept of neuroscience and its contribution to management in terms of decision making and emotion and behavior
management in an educational setting on the other. Neuro-leadership is a critical factor in clarifying decision-making
processes. Increasing research on the learning process in relation to the biological parameters and personality
characteristics of educational leaders has resulted in data-driven solutions for educational leadership that improve its
effectiveness in facilitating learning, teaching, and behavior management processes. Applying neuroscience research to
education offers the potential to improve students' knowledge, interpersonal skills, motivation, and decision-making
processes. Further experimental research can be employed to bolster the study's findings in this regard. New discoveries
can assist schools in incorporating neuroscience-based teaching and leadership practices. School principals who are
aware of these viewpoints can help improve their students' grades. As a result, authorities should place a premium on
training educational leaders who grasp behavioral basics. With this information, schools may capitalize on
neuroscience's opportunities, find the most successful educational processes, and comprehend biological and
environmental aspects that influence the psychological condition of the populations they serve in order to optimize
academic operations. Neuroscience in education should not be viewed just as a means of implementing pertinent findings
in educational management. By teaching or informing pupils about the way the brain learns, they may adopt more
effective learning stages. These studies demonstrate that boosting students', educators', and students' knowledge of how
the brain develops and learns can greatly expedite learning or development. The acquisition of neuroscience information
by teachers has an effect on their pedagogical understanding and teaching abilities [39, 40]. One reason neuroscience
research is critical in education is to ascertain how a human being is impacted by his or her non-social, biological aspect.
Leadership behaviors are defined by the leaders' own attitudes and the environment in which they operate [41]. This
demonstrates that, in terms of educational leadership, an individual may be an excellent leader with appropriate training
and support from surroundings. However, the quality of a person's leadership is influenced by his genetic, hormonal,
physical, and mental growth and maturity.
    Because leadership development is interconnected with a person's disposition, genetics, and physical development,
neuroscience sheds light on this mostly opaque issue. Neuroscience-based knowledge can help advance both theory and
practice of leadership [42]. However, the fact that school decision-making processes rely excessively on data and that
all operations are assessed in light of data promotes instrumentation [41]. Additionally, school principals must recognize
that individuals possess emotions in addition to hereditary features and that individuals exhibit inconsistency. As a result,
judgments should be made using evidence-based procedures while simultaneously considering the human factor.
Additionally, neuroscience research makes several recommendations for teacher and leader development programs.
Leadership and teacher education programs should place a premium on persons who are capable of managing stressful
situations, possess a biological understanding of stress, and possess knowledge of skills such as collaboration,
acceptance of change, and active research [43, 44]. Top-notch training methods may entail supervisors that are
emotionally stable, cognizant of the factors that influence people's decision-making processes, and knowledgeable in
their domains. According to Pope (2019) [5], influential school leaders foster relationships via empathy, communication,
and cooperation. When leaders foster a feeling of community among teachers, they generate a higher level of trust and
empathy for their colleagues. Neuroleadership emphasizes the need of understanding both the management and physical
components of leadership, as well as the chemical development of the brain and the needs of the people a leader leads
[44].
   The study's fundamental implications for educational leaders are as follows: Given the neuroscience studies on
multitasking, school leaders as neuroleaders are supposed to avoid giving numerous tasks. They efficiently control their
emotions, are aware of the biological and sociocultural consequences of sleep, stress, motivation, reward, and threat,
and then respond appropriately. Institutional leaders who understand the biological underpinnings of behavior may use
this knowledge to transform their schools' projects. Neuroleaders may impart information about how the human brain
works to their students, so increasing their awareness. Policymakers should continue to analyze these fundamental
results and work to provide a diverse variety of developmental programs in educational settings that are all based on
neuroscience findings. For organizational effectiveness, 21st-century leaders must comprehend the underlying
architecture of the brain, human attitudes, and behavior. This study aimed to assist instructional leaders in understanding
the neurological foundation for employee engagement, motivation, and productivity. Building reliable connections,
synchronizing the purpose and vision into clear, concrete steps, and providing clarity and assurance for autonomy and
cooperation are all skills that a skilled school leader may use to link individuals across an organization [44]. The current
study's systematic review summarized the findings regarding the importance of integrating neuroscience into educational


                                                                                                                     Page | 901

                                                                                           Emerging Science Journal | Vol. 6, No. 4

environments and, more specifically, its contribution to critical areas of decision making and emotional management
through an analysis of the results of cognitive studies on staff functions and, more specifically, cognitive flexibility.
However, the current study has certain drawbacks. One of the limitations of this research is that in the current review,
data from neuroimaging studies that have been conducted were not utilized. The integration of neuroimaging studies
elucidates the benefits of neuroleadership in an educational context in greater detail and precision. However, it is
necessary to highlight some ethical concerns about the integration of neuroscience into education, specifically those
surrounding the preparation of brain research projects in an educational setting, which will be discussed in greater detail
in a future review paper on the ethics of neuroscience in neuroeducation.

5- Conclusions
   Neuroleadership is one of the most widely discussed topics in contemporary science. The findings of this study enable
the author to offer an integrated and improved strategy for work engagement treatments based on recent neuroleadership
discoveries. Recognizing the need for more study, we have highlighted other developing research issues and themes
proposed by the authors of the examined publications.
   To sum up, all social interaction and thinking starts in the brain. According to brain experts, social pain is processed
in the same region of the brain as physical pain. Thus, interpersonal attunement is a crucial trait of transformative
leadership. There are four dimensions of neuroleadership that address transformative leadership abilities, including
social and emotional intelligence, communication, and empathy. Teachers think a principal's social and emotional
abilities impact leadership effectiveness. For example, a successful school leader may establish connections and
influence people by controlling their perceptions of others by being fair and equal. Thus, school leadership development
needs profound self-reflection and social awareness to manage negative sentiments in the workplace. Schools need
leadership intelligence to make decisions to lead effectively in the 21st century; educators must have social and emotional
intelligence. For high levels of student performance and high-quality instructional practice, school leaders must
simultaneously control emotions, cooperate with others, promote change, and encourage and engage employees to
adhere to the organization's vision and goal.
   The brain is a social organ. Successful school leaders must set high expectations in order to reduce the threat of a
reaction. To develop a reflective culture for enhancing teaching and learning, successful school leaders must elevate
employees who demonstrate talent and strategic management abilities while promoting autonomy. The intelligent school
leader works with others to achieve organizational goals to encourage, engage, and inspire them. Lastly, the school
leader uses social and emotional intelligence to get people to work together for the success of the whole organization.

5-1- Future Research
   Neuroscience is one of the most widely discussed subjects in contemporary science. The findings of this study enable
the author to offer a comprehensive and improved strategy for work-dedication therapies based on recent neuroscience
breakthroughs. In recent years, neuroscience and leadership have formed a debate within organizations and businesses.
By investigating the structure and function of the brain, neuroscientific research provides scientifically-proven
knowledge that informs the execution of leadership. This partnership's current objective is to address the following
questions: How should leadership be exercised to a) raise and sustain the effectiveness of executives, b) increase and
maintain productivity, and c) activate and positively engage people in the pursuit of the goals of an educational institution
or business? The brain is the origin of all social interaction and thought. Social pain, according to brain specialists, is
processed in the same region of the brain as physical pain. Consequently, interpersonal coordination is an essential
characteristic of transformational leadership. By adjusting to the changing academic landscape of digital transformation,
leaders must build and improve a combination of digital and soft skills, particularly practical communication abilities,
in a new context. Maintaining coherence between geographically dispersed nodes requires initiative and the ability to
adapt to diverse and complicated challenges and functions.

6- Declarations
6-1- Author Contributions
    E.G., C.H. and H.A. contributed to the design and implementation of the research, to the analysis of the results and
to the writing of the manuscript. All authors have read and agreed to the published version of the manuscript.

6-2- Data Availability Statement
   The data presented in this study are available on request from the corresponding author.

6-3- Funding
   The authors received no financial support for the research, authorship, and/or publication of this article.




                                                                                                                     Page | 902

                                                                                                  Emerging Science Journal | Vol. 6, No. 4

6-4- Conflicts of Interest
   The authors declare that there is no conflict of interest regarding the publication of this manuscript. In addition, the
ethical issues, including plagiarism, informed consent, misconduct, data fabrication and/or falsification, double
publication and/or submission, and redundancies have been completely observed by the authors.

7- References
[1] Psychogios, A., & Dimitriadis, N. (2021). Brain-Adjusted Relational Leadership: A Social-Constructed Consciousness Approach
    to Leader-Follower Interaction. Frontiers in Psychology, 12. doi:10.3389/fpsyg.2021.672217.
[2] Antonopoulou, H., Halkiopoulos, C., Barlou, O., & Beligiannis, G. N. (2021). Associations between traditional and digital
    leadership in academic environment: During the COVID-19 pandemic. Emerging Science Journal, 5(4), 405–428.
    doi:10.28991/esj-2021-01286.
[3] Mayer, J. D., Salovey, P., & Caruso, D. (2000). Models of Emotional Intelligence. Handbook of Intelligence, 396–420, Cambridge
    University Press, Cambridge, United Kingdom. doi:10.1017/cbo9780511807947.019.
[4] Spawr, A. L. (2011). Drive: the surprising truth about what motivates us, Pink, D.H. (2009). New York, NY (pp. 1-242). Journal
    of Community & Applied Social Psychology, 22(1), 92–94. doi:10.1002/casp.1085.
[5] Pope, S. N. (2019). A systematic literature review of school leadership intelligences for the development of neuro-educational
    leadership. Ph.D. Thesis, University of New England, Armidale, Australia.
[6] Leithwood, K. (2007). What We Know About Educational Leadership. Studies in Educational Leadership, Springer, Dordekht,
    Netherlands, 41–66. doi:10.1007/978-1-4020-6022-9_4.
[7] Antonopoulou, H., Halkiopoulos, C., Barlou, O., & Beligiannis, G. N. (2019). Transition from educational leadership to e-
    leadership: A data analysis report from TEI of western Greece. International Journal of Learning, Teaching and Educational
    Research, 18(9), 238–255. doi:10.26803/ijlter.18.9.13.
[8] Lindebaum, D., & Raftopoulou, E. (2017). What Would John Stuart Mill Say? A Utilitarian Perspective on Contemporary
    Neuroscience Debates in Leadership. Journal of Business Ethics, 144(4), 813–822. doi:10.1007/s10551-014-2247-z.
[9] Ringleb, A. H., & Rock, D. (2008). The emerging field of NeuroLeadership. NeuroLeadership Journal, 1(1), 3-19..
[10] Antonopoulou, H., Halkiopoulos, C., Barlou, O., & Beligiannis, G. N. (2021). Transformational leadership and digital skills in
     higher education institutes: During the covid-19 pandemic. Emerging Science Journal, 5(1), 1–15. doi:10.28991/esj-2021-01252.
[11] Gkintoni, E., Pallis, E. G., Bitsios, P., & Giakoumaki, S. G. (2017). Neurocognitive performance, psychopathology and social
     functioning in individuals at high risk for schizophrenia or psychotic bipolar disorder. Journal of Affective Disorders, 208, 512–
     520. doi:10.1016/j.jad.2016.10.032.
[12] Damasio, A. R., Grabowski, T. J., Bechara, A., Damasio, H., Ponto, L. L. B., Parvizi, J., & Hichwa, R. D. (2000). Subcortical
     and cortical brain activity during the feeling of self-generated emotions. Nature Neuroscience, 3(10), 1049–1056.
     doi:10.1038/79871.
[13] Hannah, S. T., Balthazard, P. A., Waldman, D. A., Jennings, P. L., & Thatcher, R. W. (2013). The psychological and neurological
     bases of leader self-complexity and effects on adaptive decision-making. Journal of Applied Psychology, 98(3), 393–411.
     doi:10.1037/a0032257.
[14] Habib, R., Nyberg, L., & Tulving, E. (2003). Hemispheric asymmetries of memory: The HERA model revisited. Trends in
     Cognitive Sciences, 7(6), 241–245. doi:10.1016/S1364-6613(03)00110-4.
[15] Gkintoni, E., Meintani, P. M., & Dimakos, I. (2021). Neurocognitive and Emotional Parameters in Learning and Educational
     Process. ICERI2021 Proceedings. doi:10.21125/iceri.2021.0659.
[16] Antonopoulou, H., Katsibelis, A., & Halkiopoulos, C. (2021). Cognitive Parameters Detection via Gamification in Online
     Primary Education during Covid-19. INTED2021 Proceedings. doi:10.21125/inted.2021.2007.
[17] Antonopoulou, H., Halkiopoulos, C., Barlou, O., & Beligiannis, G. (2021). Digital leader and transformational leadership in
     higher education. INTED2021 Proceedings. doi:10.21125/inted.2021.2005.

[18] Gkintoni, E., Koutsopoulou, I., Antonopoulou, H., & Christopoulos, P. (2021). Consequences of the covid-19 pandemic on
     Greek students’ mental health: quality of life and trauma stressful events correlation. ICERI2021 Proceedings.
     doi:10.21125/iceri.2021.0663.

[19] Fox, M. D., & Raichle, M. E. (2007). Spontaneous fluctuations in brain activity observed with functional magnetic resonance
     imaging. Nature Reviews Neuroscience, 8(9), 700–711. doi:10.1038/nrn2201.

[20] Hyseni Duraku, Z., & Hoxha, L. (2021). Impact of Transformational and Transactional Attributes of School Principal Leadership
     on Teachers’ Motivation for Work. Frontiers in Education, 6. doi:10.3389/feduc.2021.659919.



                                                                                                                            Page | 903

                                                                                                    Emerging Science Journal | Vol. 6, No. 4

[21] Bezzina, C. (2000). Educational leadership for twenty-first century Malta: Breaking the bonds of dependency. International
     Journal of Educational Management, 14(7), 299–307. doi:10.1108/09513540010378950.
[22] Davies, B. (2002). Rethinking schools and school leadership for the twenty-first century: Changes and challenges. International
     Journal of Educational Management, 16(4), 196–206. doi:10.1108/09513540210432182.
[23] Wong, E. O. W. (2003). Leadership style for school-based management in Hong Kong. International Journal of Educational
     Management, 17(6), 243–247. doi:10.1108/09513540310487569.
[24] Antonopoulou, H., Halkiopoulos, C., Barlou, O., & Beligiannis, G. N. (2020). Leadership types and digital leadership in higher
     education: Behavioural data analysis from University of Patras in Greece. International Journal of Learning, Teaching and
     Educational Research, 19(4), 110–129. doi:10.26803/ijlter.19.4.8.
[25] Paulhus, D. L., & Martin, C. L. (1988). Functional Flexibility: A New Conception of Interpersonal Flexibility. Journal of
     Personality and Social Psychology, 55(1), 88–101. doi:10.1037/0022-3514.55.1.88.
[26] Klein, H. J., & Fein, E. C. (2005). Goal Propensity: Understanding and Predicting Individual Differences in Motivation. Research
     in Personnel and Human Resources Management, Emerald Publishing Limited, Bingley, United Kingdom, 215–263.
     doi:10.1016/s0742-7301(05)24006-9.
[27] Raichle, M. E., & Snyder, A. Z. (2007). A default mode of brain function: A brief history of an evolving idea. NeuroImage,
     37(4), 1083–1090. doi:10.1016/j.neuroimage.2007.02.041.
[28] Cacioppo, J. T., Berntson, G. G., Lorig, T. S., Norris, C. J., Rickett, E., & Nusbaum, H. (2003). Just because you're imaging the
     brain doesn't mean you can stop using your head: a primer and set of first principles. Journal of personality and social psychology,
     85(4), 650.. doi:10.1037/0022-3514.85.4.650.
[29] Waldman, D. A., Balthazard, P. A., & Peterson, S. J. (2011). Social cognitive neuroscience and leadership. Leadership Quarterly,
     22(6), 1092–1106. doi:10.1016/j.leaqua.2011.09.005.
[30] Butler, M. J. R., O’Broin, H. L. R., Lee, N., & Senior, C. (2016). How Organizational Cognitive Neuroscience Can Deepen
     Understanding of Managerial Decision-making: A Review of the Recent Literature and Future Directions. International Journal
     of Management Reviews, 18(4), 542–559. doi:10.1111/ijmr.12071.
[31] Balconi, M., & Venturella, I. (2017). Neuromanagement. What about emotion and communication. Neuropsychological Trends,
     21(1), 9–21. doi:10.7358/neur-2017-021-balc.
[32] May-Vollmar, K. (2017). Preparing Tomorrow's Administrators: A Quantitative Correlation Study of the Relationship between
     Emotional Intelligence and Effective Leadership Practices. PhD Thesis, Elementary Secondary Education, University of La
     Verne, CA 91750, United States.
[33] Saxe, D. (2011). The relationship between transformational leadership and the emotional and social competence of the school
     leader. PhD Thesis, School of Education, Loyola University Chicago, Chicago, United States.
[34] Rock, D. & Cox, C. (2012). SCARF in 2012: updating the social neuroscience of collaborating with others. Neuroleadership
     Journal, (4)4, 1-16.
[35] Becker, W. J., Cropanzano, R., & Sanfey, A. G. (2011). Organizational neuroscience: Taking organizational theory inside the
     neural black box. Journal of Management, 37(4), 933–961. doi:10.1177/0149206311398955.
[36] Mees, G. W. (2008). The relationship among principal leadership, school culture, and student achievement in Missouri middle
     schools. Ph.D. Thesis, Educational Leadership and Policy Analysis, University of Missouri-Columbia, Columbia City, United
     States, doi:10.32469/10355/5540.
[37] Tokuhama-Espinosa, T. (2019). The Learning Sciences Framework in Educational Leadership. Frontiers in Education, 4.
     doi:10.3389/feduc.2019.00136.
[38] Arrowsmith-Young, B. (2012). The woman who changed her brain: And other inspiring stories of pioneering brain
     transformation. Simon and Schuster, New York, United States.
[39] Kuhlmann, N., & Kadgien, C. A. (2018). Neuroleadership: Themes and limitations of an emerging interdisciplinary field.
     Healthcare Management Forum, 31(3), 103–107. doi:10.1177/0840470417747004.
[40] Dubinsky, J. M., Guzey, S. S., Schwartz, M. S., Roehrig, G., MacNabb, C., Schmied, A., Hinesley, V., Hoelscher, M., Michlin,
     M., Schmitt, L., Ellingson, C., Chang, Z., & Cooper, J. L. (2019). Contributions of Neuroscience Knowledge to Teachers and
     Their Practice. Neuroscientist, 25(5), 394–407. doi:10.1177/1073858419835447.
[41] Wang, Y. (2019). Pulling at Your Heartstrings: Examining Four Leadership Approaches from the Neuroscience Perspective.
     Educational Administration Quarterly, 55(2), 328–359. doi:10.1177/0013161X18799471.
[42] Pittman, A. (2020). Leadership Rebooted: Cultivating Trust with the Brain in Mind. Human Service Organizations Management,
     Leadership and Governance, 44(2), 127–143. doi:10.1080/23303131.2019.1696910.
[43] Schwartz, M. S., Hinesley, V., Chang, Z., & Dubinsky, J. M. (2019). Neuroscience knowledge enriches pedagogical choices.
     Teaching and Teacher Education, 83, 87–98. doi:10.1016/j.tate.2019.04.002.
[44] Gocen, A. (2021). Neuroleadership: A conceptual analysis and educational implications. International Journal of Education in
     Mathematics, Science and Technology, 9(1), 63–82. doi:10.46328/ijemst.1237.



                                                                                                                              Page | 904