Leadership for Learning as an Organization-Wide Practice: Evidence on Its Multilevel

          Structure and Implications for Educational Leadership Practice and Research

                                       Joonkil Ahn
                    Department of Educational Policy Studies and Practice
                                   College of Education
                                   University of Arizona
                          1430 E 2nd St, Tucson, AZ 85069-7100
                                     (520) 621-9043
                                    ahnj@arizona.edu

                                       Alex J. Bowers
                          Department of Organization and Leadership
                           Teachers College, Columbia University
                                 Box 67, 525 W 120th Street
                             New York, New York 10027-6696
                                       (212)-678-7466
                                      Bowers@tc.edu

                                     Anjalé D. Welton
                 Department Chair and Rupple-Bascom Professor of Education
                  Department of Educational Leadership and Policy Analysis
                             University of Wisconsin, Madison
                                    Adwelton@wisc.edu



                 Published in International Journal of Leadership in Education

SEE: Ahn, J., Bowers, A. J., & Welton, A. D. (2021). Leadership for learning as an organization-
      wide practice: Evidence on its multilevel structure and implications for educational
      leadership practice and research. International Journal of Leadership in Education. 1–53.
      https://doi.org/10.1080/13603124.2021.1972162




                                               1

Leadership for Learning as an Organization-Wide Practice: Evidence on Its Multilevel Structure

               and Implications for Educational Leadership Practice and Research

                                             Abstract

Leadership for learning has emerged as a framework that subsumes the core characteristics of

instructional leadership, transformational leadership, and distributed leadership. It acknowledges

that leadership responsibilities are shared across stakeholders, inviting wider sources of

leadership. If leadership for learning conceptualizes leadership as an organization-wide practice

beyond that of an individual (e.g., the school principal), its measurement must accordingly invite

perceptions and experiences of diverse stakeholders at multiple levels. Focusing solely on

principals’ or teachers’ leadership perceptions is problematic since it fails to capture the unique

lived realities teachers or principals experience concerning leadership enactment. It also limits

the capacity to examine whether and how these multiple perspectives exert same or divergent

impacts on staff development, school culture, and student learning. Thus, this study employed

leadership for learning as its theoretical framework and rigorous multilevel factor analysis

techniques to examine the extent to which individual teachers, teachers collectively, and

principals show distinct perceptions of leadership practices. Four-fold cross-validation multilevel

factor analysis revealed conceptual distinctions in how the three entities experience leadership

practices distributed across the school. We also present implications for educational leadership

research, practices, and policy.

Keywords: Leadership for learning, leadership perception gaps, multilevel factor analysis,

Teaching and Learning International Survey




                                                 2

Introduction

The purpose of this study is to provide empirical evidence on why it is crucial to include all three

perspectives (i.e., individual teachers, teachers collectively, principals) in measuring a school’s

leadership effectiveness. Leadership for learning has emerged as a framework that subsumes the

core characteristics of instructional leadership, transformational leadership, and distributed

leadership (Hallinger, 2011). Thus, leadership for learning acknowledges that leadership

responsibilities are shared across stakeholders, inviting wider sources of leadership. If one

conceptualizes leadership as an organization-wide practice beyond that of an individual (e.g., the

school principal), its measurement must accordingly invite perceptions and experiences of

diverse stakeholders at multiple levels. For example, qualitative researchers typically interview

both teachers and principals to capture leadership practices among multiple individuals.

However, quantitative research has primarily used only principals’ perspectives to describe an

organization’s leadership practices (e.g., Bellibas & Liu, 2017; García-Carmona et al., 2016;

Gumus, 2013; Liu, 2016). This is problematic since it fails to capture the unique lived

experiences teachers have across classrooms and departments within the school (Kelley &

Halverson, 2012). Focusing solely on the principal’s perceptions on leadership provides further

issues since research increasingly evidences that principals and teachers often diverge in their

perceptions about leadership and that these gaps are negatively associated with teacher

collaboration, self-efficacy, and job satisfaction (Ham et al., 2015a; Park & Ham, 2016; Agasisti

et al., 2019; Wang et al., 2019). Quantitative researchers also have commonly theorized that

individual teachers and their collective body possess a shared understanding on leadership (Chen

et al., 2005). This theorization is questionable because it implicitly assumes individual teachers

within a school have a shared understanding and perception of leadership, which recent




                                                  3

scholarship suggest this assertion ignores teachers’ unique leadership practices and experiences

(Boyce & Bowers, 2018a).

       In addition, a problem exists, in that the degree to which these three leadership

perceptions (i.e., individual teachers, collective teachers, principals) converge or diverge remains

largely unaddressed. Within the leadership for learning framework, no prior measurement studies

successfully have included all three perspectives simultaneously with adequate construct validity

as well as reliability. Therefore, this study aims to provide empirical evidence on leadership for

learning as practices existing at all three groups, via an exploration of its factor structure, through

the 2018 Teaching and Learning International Survey (TALIS). We draw on a multilevel

framework to more accurately decompose teacher-perceived leadership variance into the

individual and their collective levels while also including principal’s perspectives. Providing

evidence on leadership for learning as a multilevel construct is essential to achieve a more

complex understanding of its enactment within and across school organizations. It is also critical

for examining whether and how these multiple perspectives exert same or divergent impacts on

staff development, school culture, and student learning (Boyce & Bowers, 2018a; Brezicha et al.,

2019). A knowledge base of the divergent leadership perspectives multiple stakeholders hold

toward leadership practices also prompts school leaders to explore practical ways in which they

craft and communicate a shared goal and vision to achieve learning for all students. Therefore,

this study employs leadership for learning as its theoretical framework and rigorous multilevel

factor analysis techniques to address the following research question: What is the extent to which

individual teachers, teachers collectively, and principals show distinct perceptions of leadership

for learning?




                                                  4

Are Individual versus Collective Teacher Perspectives Isomorphic?

Researchers in educational leadership have long questioned whether individuals and their

collective (e.g., mean) perspectives indicate different factor structures and meanings at each level

(Dyer et al., 2005). Thus, researchers often implicitly assumed individual teacher perceptions

within school and the collective perceptions (i.e., mean) were equivalent.

       However, due to the advance in multilevel factor analytics, recent studies began to

provide evidence on the existence of valid collective-level leadership constructs (Dyer et al.,

2005; Muthén, 1991). For instance, Dyer et al. (2005) suggested that collective-level (e.g.,

between-school) leadership constructs can exist with different factor meanings and structures

from their individual-level (e.g., within-school) counterparts. Dyer et al. illustrated a typology of

three types of collective-level constructs. Compilation constructs represent the latent factors that

exist only at the collective level. They do not possess a relevant conceptual meaning at the

individual level (e.g., a school’s gender diversity, school SES). Composition constructs refer to

the shared beliefs of individuals that are identified at the collective level. Thus, composition

constructs operate isomorphically between the lower (e.g., within school) and the upper levels

(e.g., between schools). In contrast, fuzzy composition constructs are isomorphic only partially at

each level, and thus indicate a different factor structure at each level.

       Subsequent studies further substantiate Dyer et al.’s (2005) collective-level leadership

typology. For instance, using the 2008 TALIS, Urick and Bowers (2019) illustrated the

isomorphic perspectives between individual and collective teachers using an instructional

leadership framework. Further, employing the Schools and Staffing Survey (SASS), Boyce and

Bowers (2018a) evidenced the extent to which individual teachers and their collective body

diverge in how they perceive leadership for learning tasks. This body of literature on the




                                                   5

existence of valid collective-level (e.g., between school) leadership constructs provides

meaningful insights on how individuals at the lower level and their collective body at the upper

level perceive leadership tasks in the same or different ways ( Boyce & Bowers, 2018a; Dyer et

al., 2005). However, research that further includes the principal’s perspectives in addition to

individual and collective teacher perspectives is still rare.

The Emergence of the Leadership for Learning Concept

Multiple theories concerning school leadership to promote student learning have emerged from

the literature over the past decades to respond to complex reform demands. The four most

frequently researched leadership models are instructional leadership, transformational leadership,

distributed leadership, and integrated leadership (Bowers, 2020; Hallinger & Heck, 1996;

Hallinger, 2011; Hallinger & Murphy, 1985; Leithwood, 1994; Leithwood & Jantzi, 1999;

Leithwood & Sun, 2012; Marks & Printy, 2003; Mitchell & Sackney, 2011; Porter et al., 2010).

This section reviews how these leadership theories evolved and explores how the leadership for

learning concept emerged.

Instructional Leadership

Instructional leadership within the educational literature emerged in the 1980s, based on the prior

decade’s school effectiveness research (e.g., Edmonds, 1979). At the time, instructional

leadership was seen as the most feasible response to turning around disadvantaged, urban schools

in the 1970s and 1980s (Bossert et al., 1982). The instructional leadership literature highlighted

principals as the center of the educational expertise, who created academic press within the

school by monitoring teaching practices as well as student outcomes, and seeking violence-free

school circumstances (Bossert et al., 1982; Hallinger, 2003; Hallinger & Murphy, 1985). The

attention was focused on the principal ensuring effective instruction (Bossert et al., 1982).




                                                   6

Indeed, Robinson et al.'s (2008) meta-analysis of the effect sizes of leadership styles found that

the level of impact the principal’s instructional leadership behaviors had on student outcomes

was three to four times that of leaders’ transformational behaviors (i.e., charismatic influence,

individual consideration, intellectual stimulation). Notably, the principal’s active promotion of

and participation in teacher learning activities (e.g., professional development programs)

evidenced the largest effect size (Robinson et al.), followed by goal setting and coordinating

teaching and curriculum.

       The major critiques for instructional leadership are threefold. First, researchers point to

its excessive focus on the principal’s role as the single instructional leader and its failure to

incorporate others’ contributions to teaching and learning practices within the school

organization (Hallinger, 2003; Marks & Printy, 2003). Indeed, within much of the instructional

leadership literature, teachers and assistant principals are not highlighted as important partners

for principals to collaborate in instructional matters (Hallinger, 2005). Second, critics question

the viability of reform strategies that foreground a principal as the sole lever for change

(Hallinger, 2003). This heroic image of an instructional leader lacks feasibility in schools with a

large student body or in secondary schools characterized by a highly compartmentalized

structure (Hallinger, 2003). Third, research identifies the direct effect size of the principal’s

instructional leadership on student outcomes as negligible. For example, Witziers et al.'s (2003)

meta-analysis of 37 quantitative studies conclude that its averaged direct effect size on student

outcomes is extremely small overall and near zero in secondary schools.

Transformational Leadership

With the advent of the school restructuring movement in the 1990s, questions arose concerning

instructional leadership as a viable tool to address the restructuring requests aimed at higher-




                                                   7

order changes (i.e., changes in school’s normative structures beyond instruction; Leithwood,

1994). School leaders increasingly shared responsibilities with teachers in curriculum and

instruction as well as promoting coaching structures and professional learning communities

within schools (Hallinger, 2003). This new trend promoted ‘collaborative, human resource-

based, developmental, and transformational approaches’ to leadership (Blase & Blase, 1999, p.

351). Accordingly, research on transformational leadership focused on identifying leadership

practices that influenced teachers’ internal states (e.g., commitment) and the development of

organizational conditions, crucial to teacher performance (Leithwood & Sun, 2012). Studies

suggested that transformational leadership indirectly influenced student outcomes through school

culture and staff capacity building (Leithwood & Sun, 2012). For instance, Thoonen et al.'s

(2011) quantitative analysis of Dutch teachers found that principals’ transformational behaviors

first influenced the school’s social and organizational conditions (e.g., mutual trust), increasing

teacher motivational factors (e.g., internalizing school goals). Motivational factors, thus in turn,

positively influenced professional learning activities to directly enhance teaching practices.

       Transformational leadership responded to the changed reform agendas for achieving a

higher-order school change (e.g., staff motivation), while also facing critiques. Much like how

instructional leadership was questioned about its viability, critics similarly pointed out that

training people-developing leaders through leadership preparation and in-service was

challenging (Hallinger, 2003). Also, critics suggested transformational theory lacked empirical

distinctiveness. Specifically, the dimensions in the Multifactor Leadership Questionnaire (MLQ),

one of the most popular transformational leadership scales, faced critiques that its dimensions

often ended up forming one overall scale, shown by its high inter-factor correlations (Berkovich,

2016). Furthermore, its weak efficacy in affecting student learning outcomes is a common




                                                  8

critique (Robinson et al., 2008; Shatzer et al., 2013). In a meta-analytic review of 79 unpublished

theses and dissertations, Leithwood and Sun (2012) found only two out of nine transformational

leadership practices were directly associated with student learning, and their effect sizes were

negligible (0.17, 0.15, respectively). As noted earlier in the literature review, Robinson et al.’s

(2008) meta-analysis found that the instructional leadership effect on student outcomes was

significantly larger than that of transformational practices, which was replicated by prior and

subsequent research (Leithwood & Jantzi, 2006; Leithwood & Jantzi, 1999; Leithwood & Sun,

2012; Shatzer et al., 2013). However, we argue that one must be cautious when concluding

whether one leadership style is “superior” to another. This is because research increasingly

suggests that school leaders realistically enact a set of leadership behaviors rather than a single

style of leadership. That is, when transformational and instructional strategies are integrated into

school leader’s daily practices, teaching effectiveness and student outcomes are maximized (Day

et al., 2011; Day et al., 2016; Marks & Printy, 2003; Printy et al., 2009).

Distributed Leadership

Within a distributed perspective, leadership is framed as distributed across stakeholders and their

situation (e.g., tools, artifacts, and organizational routines; Spillane et al., 2004; Tian et al.,

2016). Within this lens, rather than being conceptualized as primarily residing as the actions of a

sole formally appointed leader (e.g., school principal), leadership is constituted through

interactions among leaders, followers, and their situations in particular contexts around specific

leadership tasks (Spillane, 2006). With the interactions among individuals and their situations as

the unit of analysis (Gronn, 2002), research has explored the range of variation in leadership

distribution. For example, studies examined who, in what leadership functions (e.g.,

administrative or instructional functions), and what subject area individuals led alone or co-led.




                                                    9

Research has also investigated how individuals without formal leadership designations engaged

in leadership practices (Spillane et al., 2008).

       Others explored how different sources of individual agency contribute to different forms

of leadership distribution. For example, Gronn (2002) categorized leadership practice into

spontaneous action, intuitive working relations, and institutional practices. A spontaneous action

may occur when colleagues with different expertise spontaneously engage in collaborative tasks

to solve a problem, after which these relationships may end. Intuitive working relations can

emerge among individuals who share a role space or maintain close working relationships.

Institutional practices refer to attempts to regularize formal structures to create distributed

actions. External policy mandates and internal dissatisfaction with the existing organizational

structure can stimulate the creation of a new organizational structure. Still others examined

whether and how leadership could be distributed with a purpose. They were inclined to identify

leadership distribution patterns that would positively influence school improvement (Tian et al.,

2015). Thus, studies in this paradigm suggest that distributed leadership does not always lead to

positive outcomes but depends on how it is distributed, and the purpose for which it is distributed

(Harris et al., 2007). Despite these gaps between the different foci of each body of distributed

leadership literature, one apparent commonality is that distributed leadership studies aim to

capture the organization-wide processes that lead to school improvement, rather than focusing on

the characteristics of an individual leader or their role as a solo manager.

       The first critique around distributed leadership research is the elusiveness of the

construct. Despite its prominence in recent leadership literature, there appears to exist little

agreement on the meaning of distributed leadership (Hairon & Goh, 2015; Lumby, 2019). Thus,

this construct may mean different things to different people (Harris et al., 2007). Hence, the




                                                   10

translation of a theoretical framework into an empirical measurement model is left as a

challenging task. The second criticism of distributed leadership is its practicability. Fitzgerald

and Gunter (2007) questioned the feasibility of leadership distribution when the school culture is

hierarchical. For example, in an in-depth case account of a school in the United Kingdom, Storey

(2004) illustrated how distributed leadership could lead to tensions between competing

leadership styles of formal and informal leaders. Specifically, the principal and the science

department chair were involved in tensions around priorities and targets of reform. The principal

distributed his leadership but also wanted to exert his positional power, whereas the department

chair assumed that he had more discretion than the principal intended. Thirdly, it is not clear how

the distributed leadership framework articulates gender, race, and class inequities (Lumby,

2019). Distributed leadership seems to remain silent on equity issues within leadership

distribution contexts (Brooks et al., 2007). Although the emergence of leaders and involvement

of the individuals without formal leadership designations are the common claims of the

distributed leadership framework, less is known of its stance on the issue of power, and equity in

gender, race and ethnicity (Lumby, 2013).

Integrated Leadership Perspectives

Although the past four decades witnessed the emergence of competing conceptualizations of

leadership theories, research increasingly acknowledged that no single leadership style might

adequately explain the complex mechanisms involved in leadership enactment (Blase & Blase,

1999; Bossert et al., 1982; Bowers et al., 2017; Day et al., 2016; Leithwood & Sun, 2012; Pietsch

et al., 2019; Silins & Mulford, 2004; Urick, 2016). As an earlier example of this line of research,

Blase and Blase (1999) found that, although teachers had been asked to describe one of the most

distinctive instructional leadership behaviors of their principals, they provided a set of leadership




                                                 11

strategies. Their responses implied that principals used a repertoire of strategies that covered not

only instructional foci (e.g., supervision of teaching) but also the developmental and

transformational aspects (e.g., teacher motivation) simultaneously. However, few early studies in

educational leadership included this integrated view as their primary research focus.

       One of the earliest attempts to illustrate an integrated perspective of leadership is Marks

and Printy’s (2003) study. Analyzing data from 24 restructured schools in the U.S., Marks and

Printy suggested that when principals integrated transformational and shared instructional

leadership approaches, leadership effects on the quality of pedagogy and student achievement

was higher than other schools where principals adopted either of the two. They also found that

no schools were located in the low transformational–high shared instructional leadership

quadrant where schools were plotted by their observed leadership practices. Based on this, they

concluded that transformational leadership was necessary, but an insufficient condition to enact

shared instructional leadership. Subsequent studies using larger sample sizes and conducted in

diverse school settings also suggested that principals adjusted their leadership styles by

responding to the school’s context, size, level, and developmental phase (Day et al., 2011;

Mulford & Silins, 2011; Murphy et al., 2007; Pietsch et al., 2019; Sammons et al., 2014). For

example, summarizing the findings from a longitudinal study, Day et al. (2011) found principals

drew on a range of leadership styles for building organizational trust, promoting high

expectations, and enhancing teaching quality. Aligned with Marks and Printy, although the effect

sizes of leadership strategies on student outcomes were small when separately investigated, the

combined effect was stronger.

       In more recent years, research on principals’ layering multiple leadership styles expanded

into attempts that employed recent advances in statistical techniques and larger samples in the




                                                 12

U.S. as well as international settings. For example, by analyzing the 1999–2000 SASS collected

from 7,000 schools across the U.S., Urick and Bower 's (2014) latent class analysis identified

that there exist three significantly different types of principals who simultaneously enact multiple

leadership styles, based on personal backgrounds and school contexts. Evidence on different

types of principals adopting multiple leadership styles was replicated in subsequent studies using

the Comprehensive Assessment of Leadership for Learning (CALL) (Bowers et al., 2017), in a

project conducted within an Italian context (Agasisti et al., 2019), and in a study that employed

the most recent TALIS (Bowers, 2020). This accumulated evidence on school leaders’ adoption

of multiple leadership styles to enhance student learning is conceptually aligned with leadership

for learning, which serves as the theoretical framework of this study (Hallinger, 2011).

Theoretical Framework

This study applies leadership for learning as the theoretical framework. It emerged as an

integrated framework that subsumes the core characteristics of instructional, transformational,

and distributed leadership (Bowers, 2020; Hallinger, 2011; MacBeath & Townsend, 2011). As its

label implies, while leadership for learning carries over the essential tenets of instructional

leadership, such as an explicit focus on student learning, it is further characterized by broader

sources of leadership, as well as its focus on ‘means or paths through which leadership achieves

improvement in teaching and learning’ (Hallinger & Heck, 2010, p. 657, italics added). That is,

beyond the principal’s initial leadership behaviors, the new framework encompasses the resulting

school culture and the subsequent changes in teacher capacity and student outcomes, and adapted

leadership practices, responding to the changes in school conditions over time.

       Now we turn to the specific ways in which leadership for learning subsumes the key

tenets of instructional, transformational, and distributed leadership. While sharing instructional




                                                 13

leadership’s school-wide focus on student learning, leadership for learning posits a more

comprehensive connotation of learning (MacBeath & Townsend, 2011). That is, in addition to

student learning, the new framework further underscores the importance of teacher, staff, and

leader’s learning for enhancing the school’s instructional capacity. Thus, moving beyond

previous decades’ competing foci either on accountability task (e.g., student outcomes) or people

(e.g., staff development), leadership for learning bridges task achievement and people

development by recognizing that ‘understanding who we are working with’ leads to richer

learning outcomes of students and adults (MacBeath & Townsend, 2011, p. 1247). Accordingly,

given how critical teachers are on student learning, school leaders must center teacher learning,

coherently connecting supervision, professional development, and teacher evaluation (Zepeda,

2011). This staff capacity-building domain of leadership for learning directly speaks to the tenets

of transformational leadership (Hallinger & Heck, 2010). Transformational leadership aims to

develop a school culture that promotes people’s capacity, commitment, and growth (Bass &

Avolio, 2007; Bogler, 2001; Leithwood & Sun, 2012; Leithwood & Jantzi, 2005).

       Additionally, leadership for learning posits that leadership tasks are shared by

stakeholders across the school organization. Despite recent advances in the knowledge base on

how leadership contributes to school improvement, one major limitation of recent scholarship in

educational leadership has been its ‘almost exclusive focus on leadership by the principal’

(Hallinger & Heck, 2011a, p. 480). Related to this limited focus, a leadership for learning

framework helps facilitate a shift from focusing on individuals (i.e., principals) and their

characteristics to multiple individuals (i.e., non-positional leaders) and organizational routines as

key components of leadership enactment (Halverson & Kelley, 2017). Thus, leadership is framed

as the function of an entire organization (Ogawa & Bossert, 1995) and as shaped through




                                                 14

interactions among leaders, followers, and their situations, such as tools, routines, and leadership

tasks (Spillane, 2006).

       Acknowledging broader sources of leadership also necessitates that leadership

measurement can no longer focus solely on the actions of the principal. Moreover, if leadership

for learning is conceptualized in such a way that highlights the means and paths through which

leadership behaviors interact with school climate, staff development, and student outcomes, a

static set of desired or evidenced principal behaviors may not adequately capture the type of

leadership enactment that leadership for learning conceptualizes (Hallinger, 2011). Thus, we

would argue that its measurement must also encompass leadership tasks carried out not only by

the principal but also by non-positional leaders (Kelley & Halverson, 2012). In sum, the

employment of an expanded connotation of learning, the invitation of wider sources of

leadership, and the focus on paths through which school improvement is achieved, comprise the

core dimensions of an integrated framework of leadership for learning (Bowers et al., 2017;

Boyce & Bowers, 2018b; Hallinger, 2011; Kelley & Halverson, 2012; Minor et al., 2017).

Comprehensive Assessment of Leadership for Learning (CALL)

This study used CALL as a scaffold to build a leadership for learning measurement model

(Kelley & Halverson, 2012). CALL is a leadership assessment scale developed as a formative

feedback system to facilitate an organization’s leadership improvement. A critical point of

distinction from most prior leadership assessments is that it focuses on organizational functions

beyond individual leaders’ actions. Thus, it captures leadership practices shared by stakeholders

across the school organization, beyond leadership practices of a principal (Kelley & Halverson,

2012). Its conceptualization of leadership as an organization-wide practice is aligned with the

core tenets of leadership for learning (Kelley & Halverson, 2012; MacBeath & Townsend, 2011).




                                                 15

It also values a collaborative school culture that emerges from reciprocal influences that formal,

informal leaders shape in their interactions (Mitchell & Sackney, 2011). While acknowledging

the principal’s critical leadership role, it appreciates that ‘the principal’s leadership works by

engaging and building leadership capacity throughout the school’ (Halverson & Kelley, 2017, p.

12). Accordingly, CALL measures collaborative school culture as well as leadership practices

shared across the diverse staff. CALL adopts five domains related to broader leadership

functions and 21 subdomains relevant to the specific leadership tasks.

       Articulating domains and their subdomains of a leadership framework is important as

they provide leaders with concrete measures to decide the extent to which their leadership

practices are enacted (Halverson & Kelley, 2017). Defining these (sub)domains is also crucial as

they enable leaders to coordinate specific actions to improve conditions and cultures for

enhancing teaching and learning within their schools (Halverson & Kelley, 2017). In all, CALL’s

usefulness to inform principal and teacher leadership comes from its ability to provide a tool to

measure concrete practices, instead of describing leaders’ traits or leadership styles.

       Tables 1 and 2 present CALL’s five domains and 21 subdomains. Each of the five

domains present broader areas of leadership enactment and the 21 subdomains include specific

practices. The first domain is ‘Focus on learning,’ including five subdomains. This domain

reflects such leadership practices as leaders’ engaging with stakesholders in conversations to

establish the school’s vision for learning (Subdomain 1. Maintaining a schoolwide focus on

learning) and the importance of the principal to set an example of an instructional leader (e.g.,

learning walks; Subdomain 2. Recognition of formal leaders as instructional leaders). This

domain also measures the extent to which the school’s vision for learning is translated into

collectively developed learning plan (Subdomain 3. Collaborative design of integrated learning




                                                  16

plan) and quality educational services are provided to all students via collaborations among staff

members (Subdomain 4. Providing appropriate services for students who traditionally struggle).

       The second CALL domain refers to leadership practices pertaining to ‘Monitoring

teaching and learning.’ The first two subdomains describe the schoolwide information system

where teachers’ formative and summative feedback on student learning is shared (Subdomain 1.

Formative evaluation of student learning; Subdomain 2. Summative evaluation of student

learning). The following two subdomains measure the extent to which monitoring student

learning is complemented by teaching practices, such as walkthrough, classroom observations,

and formal teacher evaluations (Suddomain 3. Formative evaluation of teaching; Subdomain 4.

Summative evaluation of teaching).

       The third CALL domain is ‘Building professional community,’ which denotes whether

and how much a school sustains a professional community among its teachers. Leaders must

establish a strong professional community where teachers collaborate to improve teaching and

learning, sharing challenges as well as successes (Subdomain 1. Collaborative schoolwide focus

on problems of teaching and learning). Leaders in a strong professional community also ensure

that staff learning programs are aligned with the school’s shared learning goals (Subdomain 2.

Professional learning). Teachers in a robust professional community further assume leadership

roles regardless of whether they hold leadership designations or not (Subdomain 3. Socially

distributed leadership) and create a strong mentor-mentee relationships with one another

(Subdomain 4. Coaching and mentoring).

       The fourth domain concerns ‘Acquiring and allocating resources’ and measures how

effectively school resources (i.e., time, personnel, budget, expertise) are acquired and used to

support the shared school goal. This domain reflects leadership practices such as hiring teachers




                                                17

with necessary skills and supporting them through peer networks (Subdomain 1. Personnel

practices). It also measures how effectively leaders allocate time for teacher collaboration for

instructional improvement (Subdomain 2. Structuring and maintaining time) and how much

students benefit from instructional resources (Subdomain 3. School resources are focused on

student learning). The fourth domain additionally assesses the extent to which schools use

external expertise for staff development (Subdomain 4. Integrating external expertise into the

school instructional program) and schools invite families into school community (Subdomain 5.

Coordinating and supervising relations with families and external communities).

       The fifth domain evaluates the extent to which school leaders ‘Establish(ing) a safe and

effective learning environment.’ Leaders are assessed how effectively they communicate clear

expectations for student behavior (Subdomain 1. Clear, consistent, and enforced expectations of

student behavior; Subdomain 2. Clean and safe learning environment), identify and support

students with special needs and behavior concerns (Subdomain 3. Support services for students

who traditionally struggle), and assist teachers in addressing parent concerns and filter district

resources to teachers (Subdomain 4. Buffering the teaching environment).

       A detailed description of the procedure and the theoretical rationale by which we

connected each of the CALL’s domains and subdomains to TALIS indicators is presented in the

methods.

                                       [Table 1 about here]

                                       [Table 2 about here]




                                                 18

Methods

Data

Description of dataset

This study is a secondary analysis of the 2018 TALIS administered by the Organization for

Economic Co-operation and Development (OECD). TALIS is the first international education

survey that focuses on the teaching and learning environments of schools (OECD, 2019). It

consists of two types of questionnaire: one for teachers and the other for principals. Since the

first data collection cycle in 2008, TALIS has collected the data every five years. Twenty-four

countries and economies participated in the first cycle, while 34 countries did so in the 2013

cycle, and 49 countries and economies participated in its 2018 data collection. Each participating

country collected data from 200 schools, with 20 teachers and one principal responding to the

survey. TALIS was administered in elementary schools (ISCED 1 level), lower secondary

schools (ISCED 2 level), and upper secondary schools (ISCED 3), with ISCED level 2 schools

as its primary interest. This study adopted ISCED level 2 data (i.e., grades 7-9) as the analytic

dataset. The primary purpose of TALIS is to provide each participating country with teacher- and

school-level data on the school conditions that are required for effective teaching and learning

(OECD, 2019). Specifically, it collects teachers’ and principals’ perspectives of their school

contexts as well as instructional and leadership practices, providing a useful dataset for

researchers, especially in the fields of education policy and leadership as it contains variables

related to the extent to which school context, leadership practices, organizational structures

influence school culture and teaching practice.

       This study used TALIS’s full analytic sample from across 47 countries from 153,682

teachers and 9,247 principals collected between September 2017 and May 2018. Table 3 shows




                                                  19

the participating countries and the number of participating teachers and principals. Although not

developed to specifically measure leadership for learning concepts, TALIS includes numerous

sets of variables that mesh with leadership for learning task (sub)domains specified in CALL.

Therefore, combining CALL’s validated leadership domains and TALIS’s teacher and principal

survey items affords a useful tool to build a leadership for learning measurement model.

                                       [Table 3 about here]

Indicators used in analysis

To create 21 teacher items (T1-T21) and 20 principal indicators (P1-P20) to be analyzed, We

first mapped 39 teacher items and 40 principal items from TALIS to CALL’s subdomains.

Tables 4 and 5 show how this conceptual mapping was conducted with relevant theoretical

rationle behind selecting each of the TALIS indicators. After the mapping, each CALL

subdomain includes one to three TALIS indicators that are conceptually aligned with it.

                                       [Table 4 about here]

                                       [Table 5 about here]

We computed a subdomain mean score when items within a subdomain consisted of Likert scale

items (e.g., 1=Strongly Disagree, 2=Disagree, 3=Agree, 4=Strongly Agree). In case items were

binary (i.e., 0, 1), we calculated a sum of the items. We used SAS 9.4 for this calculation. The

final dataset combining teacher and principal responses was then incorporated into Mplus 8.4

(Muthén & Muthén, 1998–2017) for subsequent analyses.

Research design

To answer the research question and build a leadership for learning measurement model, we

adopted four-fold cross-validation multilevel factor analysis. We first introduce the factor




                                                20

analysis concept and present the procedures for cross-validation, model estimation, and fit

evaluation, as well as the five steps to conduct multilevel factor analyses.

Factor analysis

Factor analysis determines how unobservable constructs (i.e., latent factors) predict the

covariation among multiple observed survey items. As the label, latent implies, since a latent

factor is not directly observable and lacks a measurement, factor analysis uses survey responses

and calculates a score for each item (i.e., factor loading) that indicates the degree to which each

item is predicted by underlying latent factors (Sablan, 2019). In addition, due to the hierarchical

structure of TALIS (i.e., teachers are nested within school), using a multilevel approach is

required. Since multilevel factor analysis simultaneously considers within- and between-school

level covariance matrices and decomposes dependent variables’ variance into each level, it is

statistically more accurate than using only the total covariance matrix used in single-level

approaches (Dyer et al., 2005).

Cross-validation

To avoid the risk of overfitting, we employed V-fold cross-validation (Arlot & Celisse, 2010;

Curcuruto et al., 2018; Dunn et al., 2015). Overfitting refers to a statistical inference made by

noises instead of a true pattern within the dataset. According to previous literature (Arlot &

Celisse, 2010; Dunn et al., 2015; Hoyle, 2012) and considering our cluster-level sample size, we

implemented a four-fold cross-validation. We first randomly split the full 2018 TALIS into four

initial subsamples, so that each of the four samples represents all 47 countries, respectively.

Consequently, each of the four initial subsamples included about 38,000 teachers and 9,000

principals. As presented in Figure 1, we then created four exploratory subsamples by merging

three of the four initial subsamples. Thus, each of the four exploratory subsamples represented




                                                 21

75% of the entire 2018 TALIS, representing all 47 countries, respectively. The four initial

subsamples served as the four confirmatory subsamples, each representing 25% of the entire

2018 TALIS, respectively. We fitted the multilevel exploratory factor analysis (MEFA) models

to each of the four exploratory subsamples and then tested their performance by multilevel

confirmatory factor analysis (MCFA) fitted to the four confirmatory subsample. Table 6 presents

the descriptive statistics of the entire 2018 TALIS and Table 7 shows the descriptive statistics of

MCFA subsample 3, which we reported as the final CFA solution in results.

                                      [Figure 1 about here]

                                       [Table 6 about here]

                                       [Table 7 about here]

Model fit evaluation

We used model fit indices to evaluate the quality of factor solutions. A common tool to assess a

model fit is the chi-square goodness-of-fit statistic (Marsh et al., 2004). However, with large

samples, it often rejects models with adequate fit (Hox, 2010). Thus, we employed four

additional indices to make a more informed decision about model fit adequacy: The root mean

square error of approximation (RMSEA), the standardized root mean square residual (SRMR),

the comparative fit index (CFI), and the Tucker-Lewis index (TLI), while adopting RMSEA

< .06, CFI > .90, TLI > .90, and SRMR < .08 as an indication of an acceptable fit, respectively

(Hu & Bentler, 1999).

Missing data handling, sampling weights, estimation method

We adopted the Full Information Maximum Likelihood (FIML) to manage missing data

(Graham, 2003). Unlike multiple imputation, FIML does not recover missing cells with predicted

values, but uses all available information that individual observations provide and uses case-wise




                                                22

log-likelihood to incorporate incomplete observations to refine parameter estimates. Simulation

studies suggested that FIML outperforms multiple imputation or listwise deletion since it

estimates standard errors more correctly (Larsen, 2011; Savalei & Rhemtulla, 2012). We used

teacher- and school-level final weights (TCHWGT, SCHWGT, respectively) provided by TALIS

throughout the analysis. The use of sampling weights is required for generalization of findings to

the population. In addition, failing to consider weights may lead to biased parameter estimates

due to disproportional sampling probabilities among schools and teachers (Asparouhov &

Muthén, 2006; OECD, 2019). Concerning the model estimation method, we employed maximum

likelihood estimation with robust standard errors (MLR).

Five Steps for Multilevel Factor Analyses

To build a measurement model with adequate item reliability, we conducted a series of

multilevel factor analyses in five steps. Steps one through four used the four exploratory

subsamples as these were conducted for exploratory purposes, whereas step five used the four

confirmatory subsamples because this step aimed to confirm the factor structure identified by the

previous steps. Step one tested the Intraclass Correlation Coefficient (ICC) as the indicator of the

proportion of between-school variation out of total variance of each within-school indicator (i.e.,

individual teacher responses) using the four exploratory subsamples. An ICC smaller than 0.05

implies few benefits of employing a multilevel approach (Geldhof et al., 2014).

       Step two performed a parallel analysis to make an informed decision concerning the ideal

number of latent factors to be extracted by MEFA in steps three and four (Hayton et al., 2004). It

creates multiple random samples from the original dataset to compute eigenvalues. Then the

eigenvalues from the random samples and those from the original data are compared. The




                                                23

number of factors to be extracted is determined by the number of eigenvalues of the original data

that are greater than those from the random sample (Hayton et al., 2004).

       Step three separately estimated the number of leadership for learning latent factors at the

within- and between-school levels (Dyer et al., 2005) at each of the four exploratory subsamples.

We first created pooled-within and pooled-between correlation matrices in Mplus. The pooled-

within matrix included the summary data from teacher responses, whereas the pooled-between

matrix contained the summary data from principal responses as well as the mean teacher

responses. Using these two separate matrices, we ran separate MEFA models for each level using

each of the four exploratory subsamples. We applied a geomin oblique rotation, hypothesizing

inter-factor correlations (Heck & Thomas, 2015; Hoyle, 2012). The primary goal of step three

was to estimate the number of latent factors at each level before building a full MEFA.

        Using each of the four exploratory subsamples, step four built a full MEFA model by

simultaneously including individual teachers within school as well as teachers collectively and

principals between schools. The goal of a full MEFA was to determine a multilevel factor

structure at each level with an adequate model fit. An additional goal of MEFA was to determine

a final set of indicators to be used in the subsequent MCFA. Based on the recommendations from

previous literature (Arlot & Celisse, 2010; Boyce & Bowers, 2018b; Dunn et al., 2015), we

pruned survey indicators using two criteria. The first criterion was to remove an indicator if it

does not have a strong rotated (0.50) loading to any factor and does not have two or more

significant (0.40) loadings. The second criterion was to remove an indicator if it does not

indicate a consistent loading pattern across the four exploratory subsamples.

       Following recommendations from cross-validation literature (Arlot & Celisse, 2010;

Curcuruto et al., 2018; Dunn et al., 2015), step five used the four confirmatory subsamples and




                                                 24

tested MCFA models to confirm the factor structure identified in MEFA. According to the

literature (Boyce & Bowers, 2018a; Dunn et al., 2015), we implemented MCFA in four different

rounds to achieve an adequate model fit. In the first round, we only retained the items from

MEFA with goemin-rotated factor loadings equal to or greater than 0.40 in all four exploratory

subsamples (Ford et al., 2018). In the second round, we added the indicators that indicated

significant (0.40) factor loadings in three exploratory subsamples. In the third round round, we

added the indicators that indicated significant (0.40) factor loadings in two exploratory

subsamples, while the fourth round of MCFA retained the indicators that possessed a significant

loading in any of the exploratory subsamples.

       Concerning item reliability, we used standardized factor loading 0.50 as the cutoff to

consider an item as strong or reliable. We used 0.40 as a cutoff to consider an item as

interpretable and used it as the criterion to use in the factor interpretation and define cross-

loadings (Forer & Zumbo, 2011). Thus, an item loaded on two or more factors at 0.40 or higher

was defined as cross-loaded. To assess the extent to which each latent factor represents distinct

leadership task, we tested discriminant validity. According to the literature, we defined a latent

construct possessed discriminant validity when its inter-factor correlation was lower than

moderate level (0.60-0.80) (Voorhees et al., 2016).

Results

The purpose of this study is to suggest the importance of considering multiple perspectives (i.e.,

individual teachers, teachers collectively, principals) in measuring an organization’s leadership.

Four-fold cross-validation multilevel factor analysis revealed individual teachers and principals

diverged in prioritizing specific leadership tasks in four out of five leadership for learning

constructs. Individual teachers and their collective body also differed in perceiving leadership for




                                                  25

learning. These results provide strong empirical evidence regarding the need to consider all three

perspectives in measuring an organization’s leadership practices. We first report MEFA and

MCFA results, followed by the rationale behind labeling each leadership construct.

Step one results: estimation of the systematic between-school level variance

Step one calculated the ICC’s of the 21 individual teacher indicators using each of the four

exploratory subsamples. All 21 items indicated ICC values greater than 0.05. For instance, the

ICC’s in exploratory subsample 1 ranged from 0.121 to 0.313, with a mean of 0.186. This

suggested that, on average, about 19% of item variance resided between schools, whereas 81%

of variance existed within school. Since all 21 indicators’ ICC’s were above 0.05, we concluded

that there was a statistically significant amount of between-school differences, warranting a

multilevel approach. Additionally, the wide variation of ICC’s implied that some leadership for

learning practices were more strongly influenced by contextual forces between schools than

other practices with lower ICC’s (Hox, 2010). The observed variables at the within-school level

are the function of both within- and between-school constructs (Dyer et al., 2005; Muthén, 1991;

Muthén, 1994). Therefore, larger ICC values reflect larger school-level influence on the

individual teacher perceptions of leadership. For instance, T7 (Formative feedback on teaching)

and T8 (Summative feedback on teaching) indicated the highest ICC’s among tasks, suggesting

that globally, leadership practice to share instructional feedback indicated the largest amount of

variation between schools. Additionally, varied ICC’s suggested that indicator covariations at the

within- and between-school levels might differ (Boyce & Bowers, 2018a). Thus, different factor

structures were expected between individual teachers within school and teachers collectively

between schools (Dunn et al., 2015).




                                                26

Step two results: preliminary factor retention estimation

Step two ran a parallel analysis to estimate the number of factors to be retained in each level,

using each of the four exploratory subsamples. At the within-school level, parallel analyses in all

four exploratory subsamples suggested maximum six factors to be retained, whereas it implied

maximum 10 factors at the between-school level.

Step three results: separate within- and between-school MEFA

Step three estimated the optimal number of factors at each level by running separate MEFA’s for

the within- and between-school levels, using the four exploratory subsamples. Step three analysis

provided the number of factors for teachers collectively and principals at the between-school

level, whereas step two only provided an overall number of factors in this level.

Within-school level MEFA results

       Following the parallel analysis result, we examined one- up to six-factor MEFA solutions

using the pooled-within correlation matrix. The model fit indices for one- through six-factor

solutions of exploratory subsample 1 is presented in Table 8. We determined that the five-factor

solution is the best model for the within-school analysis. That is, we first eliminated one- through

four-factor models from consideration as none of the solutions reached adequate model fit in any

of the four exploratory subsamples. We further removed the six-factor solution because it did not

converge in three out of four exploratory subsamples.

                                       [Table 8 about here]

Between-school MEFA results

According to the parallel analysis result at the between-school level, we built between one- and

10-factor MEFA models using the pooled-between correlation matrix from each of the four

exploratory subsamples. Table 9 presents the model fit indices of subsample 1. In choosing the




                                                 27

final factor solution among the 10 models, we considered model fit statistics and preferred the

smaller number of cross-loaded items (i.e., items loaded on two or more factors at 0.40 or above)

and the greater number of items that showed the goemin-rotated loadings | >. 40|. Based

on these criteria, we selected the nine-factor solution as the best-fitting model. Although the 10-

factor model indicated a slightly better fit over the nine-factor solution in all four exploratory

subsamples, this solution did not improve interpretability. That is, the 10-factor solutions had a

10th latent factor consisting solely of cross-loaded items in three out of four exploratory

subsamples, whereas the 9-factor solution had this only-crossed loaded factor only in two

subsamples. Additionally, the 10-factor solution had a factor consisting of only one item in three

out of four exploratory subsamples, which cannot be modeled in CFA, as each factor must

include at least two items. The 9-factor solution had this factor in only one out of four

exploratory subsample. In the final nine-factor solution, teachers collectively perceived four

latent factors, and principals accounted for five factors.

                                        [Table 9 about here]

Step four results: a full multilevel exploratory factor analysis (MEFA)

The full MEFA in step four estimated the factor structure of leadership for learning by

incorporating both within- and between-school data simultaneously. The separate MEFA’s in

step three suggested five factors within schools and nine factors between schools. Thus, we

tested whether this 5-within, 9-between solution fits the each of the four exploratory subsamples

(Dunn et al., 2015). A close examination of MEFA results of the four exploratory subsamples

revealed that five-within, nine-between solution fits well in all subsamples but subsample 2.

Subsample 2 indicated unusually low CFI and TLI (CFI = 0.111, TLI = 0.048). CFI and TLI in

subsamples 3 and 4 were also slightly lower than the desired cutoff.




                                                 28

       With this partially unsatisfactory model fit in each of the subsamples, we further

reviewed the factor loadings to prune indicators to see if the pruning would improve the model

fit. Based on the pruning criteria detailed in methods, we removed one teacher item (T19) and

three principal indicators from the model. T19 did not possess any significant (0.40) loadings at

either within- or between-school level and did not have any significant cross-loadings in any of

the four exploratory subsamples. Similarly, we removed three principal indicators (P4, P13, P17)

as they did not have any significant loadings in any of the four subsamples. We reran the MEFA

models using each of the four exploratory subsamples. Results indicated that the pruning step

remarkably improved model fit indices in all four exploratory subsamples. Table 10 shows the

model fit changes resulting from the pruning process. Especially, the fit indices of subsample 2

improved considerably, now reaching an adequate level. This provides strong evidence that the

pruning step contributed to the enhanced fit and the parsimony of the model.

       We further reviewed the factor loadings to determine whether additional indicators had to

be pruned. In this second pruning, we used the criterion that an indicator should be removed if it

did not have any consistent strong loading patterns across the four subsamples; and it had at least

three distinct factors across the four different models (Boyce & Bowers, 2018b; Dunn et al.,

2015). No teacher or principal indicators satisfied this second pruning criteria; therefore, we

retained all indicators resulting from the first pruning step.

                                       [Table 10 about here]

       Table 11 presents factor loadings as well as inter-factor correlations of the final MEFA

with five within-school and nine between-school factors. As the conclusion of step four, the full

MEFA confirmed five individual teacher factors, four collective teacher factors, and five

principal factors. The final MEFA implied that all 14 leadership for learning constructs




                                                  29

evidenced a satisfactory discriminant construct validity (Modeste & Kelley, 2020) as the inter-

factor correlation coefficients reported in the lower half of Table 11 show that each factor is

correlated at only weak to moderate levels (–0.006 < r < 0.396).

                                       [Table 11 about here]

Step five results: a full MCFA with four CFA subsamples

Step five aimed to cross-validate the performance of the final MEFA models by fitting full

MCFAs to the four CFA subsamples (Dunn et al., 2015). MCFA was implemented in four steps,

followed by additional MCFA models, adding suggestions from model modification index (MI)

(Tiffany, 2012). MI added all the paths that had initially been fixed at zero back to the model and

evaluated the potential decrease in the overall chi-square goodness-of-fit statistic.

       The initial round MCFA included only those indicators that showed significant factor

loadings in all four exploratory subsamples, while fixing the loadings of other indicators at zero.

Table 12 shows that none of the four MCFA subsamples in the initial round satisfied the desired

model fit. In the second round, we added the indicators that showed significant loadings in three

out of the four exploratory subsamples, with three individual teacher items (T6, T12, T17) being

added at the between-school level. Model fit slightly improved, with averaged RMSEA = 0.011,

CFI = 0.884, TLI = 0.869, and SRMRwithin = 0.055, SRMRbetween = 0.124.

                                       [Table 12 about here]

       The third round further included indicators that showed significant loadings in two

exploratory subsamples, adding two additional teacher indicators (T5, T15) to the between-

school level. Again, model fit slightly improved, with averaged RMSEA = 0.011, CFI = 0.889,

TLI = 0.875, and SRMRwithin = 0.054, SRMRbetween = 0.119. The fourth round MCFA further

incorporated the indicators that showed significant factor loadings in any of the four exploratory




                                                 30

subsamples, with seven teacher items (T4, T6, T9, T10, T14, T17, T20) being added to the

between-school level. Again, model fit slightly improved, with averaged RMSEA = 0.010, CFI =

0.887, TLI = 0.876, and SRMRwithin = 0.054, SRMRbetween = 0.105. As the final MCFA step, we

reran the MCFA models four additional times at each of the four CFA subsamples, adding a

residual covariance term at each time, based on the MI recommendations. Again, model fit

improved, with averaged RMSEA = 0.009, CFI = 0.910, TLI = 0.896, and SRMRwithin = 0.053,

SRMRbetween = 0.104.

       Table 13 reports the standardized factor loadings for the final MCFA model after

applying the MI’s, confirming five individual teacher factors within school as well as four

collective teacher factors and five principal factors between schools. We reported the MCFA

results from the subsample 3 as this model indicated the best model fit among the four CFA

subsamples. Figures 2 presents the factor structures at each level as well as the inter-factor

correlations in the final MCFA model. MCFA confirmed the factor structures as well as the

construct discriminant validity and item reliability identified in MEFA.

                                       [Table 13 about here]

Factor naming

Within school: individual teacher factors

It is a crucial step to assign names to each latent factor that best represent the meanings of

observed items within each leadership construct (Porter et al., 2010; Yong & Pearce, 2013).

Working from WT1 to WT5 in Figure 2, we named the first factor as ‘Collaborative focus on

learning.’ The covariance of the five items (T1–T4, T11; See Table 1 for item wordings) onto

this factor represents the extent to which individual teachers perceive their school has a culture

of shared responsibility for student learning. We labeled the second within-school factor (WT2)




                                                 31

as ‘Feedback on teaching and learning.’ The inspection of item wordings suggests that this factor

represents the extent to which individual teachers prioritize different types of feedback

information used to promote teaching and learning. We named the third factor (WT3) as

‘Collaboration for learning.’ This factor refers to the extent to which individual teachers engage

in collaborative staff learning as well as discussions about student learning and common

standards. We further labeled the fourth factor (WT4) as ‘Time use for common data standards’

to represent the degree to which teachers purposefully allocate time for addressing data standards

with colleagues and parents. We named the fifth factor (WT5) as ‘Creating equitable learning

space.’ This factor represents the degree to which individual teachers perceive their schools

ensure equitable and safe learning environment concerning student behavior, community

cooperation, and success of disadvantaged students.

                                      [Figure 2 about here]

Between school: collective teacher factors

Working from BT1 to BT4 in Figure 2, the first collective teacher factor (BT1) shared identical

items (T1-T4, T11) with the first within-school factor. Thus, we assigned the same label as WT1:

‘Collaborative focus on learning.’ This factor represents the extent to which a school’s collective

faculty perceive their school has a culture of shared responsibility for and collective focus on

student learning. BT2 shared identical items (T5-T8) with WT2. Thus, we assigned the same

label as its within-school counterpart: ‘Feedback on teaching and learning.’

       BT3 was labeled as ‘Collective data analysis,’ as it subsumed two within-school factors,

‘Feedback on teaching and learning’ and ‘Collaboration for learning,’ representing the degree to

which teachers collectively value school-wide collective analysis of student data. BT4 subsumed

two within-school factors, ‘Time use for common data standards’ and ‘Creating equitable




                                                 32

learning space,’ highlighting the indicators about inviting external expertise for staff

development (T16, T13) and cooperating with parents (T17, T21). The strong convergence of

these items suggests that BT4 represents the extent to which the collective teaching body of a

school perceives their school culture of inviting insights and expertise from outside the school

for staff and student development. Thus, we named BT4 as ‘Organizational listening culture.’

Between school: principal factors

Working from BP1 to BP5 in Figure 2, the first and second principal factors (BP1, BP2) shared

the identical item wordings with WT1, BT1 and WT2, BT2, respectively. Thus, we assigned the

same labels as its teacher factor counterparts: ‘Collaborative focus on learning’ and ‘Feedback

on teaching and learning.’ These factors represent the degree to which principals perceive that

their school has a culture of shared responsibility for and collective focus on student learning

(BP1) and they prioritize different types of feedback information to promote teaching and

learning (BP2).

        We further labeled BP3 as ‘Coordination of learning communities.’ This corresponds to

principal responses concerning their initiatives to proactively work with teachers for improving

teaching and learning. The items associated with BP4 measured the extent to which principals

shared leadership concerning budget allocation, personnel services, learning material selection,

course offering, and establishing discipline policies. Thus, we labeled BP4 as ‘Resource

management for learning.’ We named BP5 as ‘Establishment of learning environment.’ This

factor represents the extent to which principals ensure adequate school physical infrastructure

(e.g., instructional facilities) and staffing. In discussion, we interpret the leadership for learning

measurement model and discuss implications for research and practice in educational leadership.




                                                  33

Discussion

This study provides empirical evidence on educators’ divergent understandings of leadership

enactments, requiring a more complex understanding of organization-wide leadership practice.

Thus, discussion presents how individual and collective teachers as well as principals

specifically differ in perceiving leadership for learning tasks and how these findings advance

leadership theories, research methods, and educational leadership practices.

How educators diverge in perceiving leadership for learning?

Collective faculty vs. principals

We examined the inter-factor correlations of principal and collective teacher factors to identify

the degree to which principals and collective faculty agree in perceiving leadership for learning.

Table 14 embedded in Figure 2 shows that 10 out of 20 correlation coefficients were non-

significant, while the remaining 10 correlations were only small to medium (0.129-0.340). These

results suggest that globally, leadership for learning perspectives of the collective faculty are not

aligned with principals. This confirms past literature that the leadership perspectives of

principals and collective faculty are only minimally correlated and thus refer to distinct

constructs (Goff et al., 2014; Urick & Bowers, 2019). This incongruence between collective

faculty and principals is concerning as a core tenet of leadership for learning is to ensure schools

operate as a collective body to promote the success of students and teachers. We will further

discuss this issue in the subsequent section, ‘Implications for Leadership Practice.’

       This finding also resonates with recent conversations in the field regarding who to draw

evidence from for assessing organizational leadership. Recent studies have increasingly

addressed the predictive validity of leadership constructs. Predictive validity refers to a

psychometric concept pertinent to whether a given measure ‘predict[s] meaningful change in




                                                 34

outcomes of relevance’ (Goff et al., 2015, p. 4). Studies report that collective teacher perceptions

of leadership are more relevant to predicting educational outcomes such as stakeholder

involvement in decision making and teacher job satisfaction (K. Wang et al., 2019) and their

participation in professional collaboration (Park & Ham, 2016). Upon reflecting on this recent

evidence that prioritizes collective teacher perspectives over those of principals, this study

suggests that, in evaluating organization-wide leadership, researchers and policymakers may

need to draw evidence from multiple data sources, such as collective teachers and other

instructional staff (e.g., coaches) in addition to that of principals.

        Critically, collective teacher leadership constructs afford insights on theorizing leadership

as an organizational quality. Recall that leadership for learning conceptualizes leadership

practices as inherently distributed across stakeholders and embedded in organizations’ structure

(Goff et al., 2015; Halverson & Kelley, 2017; Mitchell & Sackney, 2011). One benefit of

considering collective teacher leadership constructs as organization-wide leadership might be

that principals and teacher leaders can frame the explanation for low survey ratings on these

constructs as justification for organizational change rather than a deficit in their personal

practice. Indeed, a CALL validation study found that, when the survey results were presented as

feedback on the school organization’s performance, the participating principals regarded low

ratings as ‘a cause for action,’ instead of as ‘an attack’ on themselves as individuals (Kelley &

Dikkers, 2016, p. 407).

        Although collective teacher perspectives are important, the critical roles principals play in

guiding organizational changes should not be underestimated. Their formal authority empowers

principals to play both substantive and symbolic roles in shaping policies and allocating human,

material resources to create learning environments conducive to learning for all (Mohr &




                                                   35

Dichter, 2002). Indeed, Tan et al.'s (2020) second-order meta-analysis suggests that leadership

impact of the principal is greater than those of other leaders even in the currently prevalent

distributed leadership context. Therefore, the five principal task domains (BP1-BP5) identified in

this study should also inform principals of actionable changes in their leadership practice. For

instance, given the public nature of TALIS survey, district leaders may use the principal survey

indicators to provide constructive feedback information on how each principal is performing

across the district (i.e., compared to other principals within the district) or across time (i.e., by

monitoring principals’ performance across multiple time points).

Individual teachers vs. collective faculty

The lower half of Figure 2 shows that individual and collective teachers diverge in the number of

perceived leadership domains (four domains for collective faculty, five for individual teachers).

With overall divergent factor structure between the two groups, Figure 2 also indicates partially

isomorphic perceptions between the two. That is, working from left to right, the first two

domains (Collaborative Focus on Learning, Feedback on Teaching and Learning) indicate

exactly the same constituent items at both levels. According to Dyer et al.’s (2005) typology

explained in the literature review, this result is aligned with composition factors as the two

collective teacher factors (BT1, BT2) emerge from individual teacher factors (WT1, WT2),

replicating the same property (i.e., constituent items). Therefore, in terms of the leadership tasks

of a setting school-wide vision for learning (WT1, BT1) and sharing feedback on teaching and

learning (WT2, BT2), one may use data from either individual teachers or their aggregated

measure and either of them will possess the same predictive power in inferential analyses.

        On the other hand, BT3 and BT4 indicate a different factor structure from their individual

teacher counterparts, while BT3 subsumes WT2 and WT3, and BT4 includes WT4 and WT5. In




                                                   36

Dyer et al.'s (2005) typology, BT3 and BT4 illustrate fuzzy composition factors as leadership

constructs are meaningful at both levels but possess distinct factor structures and meanings. This

result suggests that collective faculty perceive two broader leadership tasks (i.e., Collective data

analysis, Organizational listening culture) as relevant properties that separate their schools from

elsewhere, whereas individual teachers perceived more specific three tasks (Collaboration for

learning, Time use for common data standards, Creating equitable learning space) as the tasks

that differentiate their performance from other colleagues.

       These results that individual versus collective teachers do not agree in how they perceive

leadership tasks afford strong counter evidence against the prevalent assumption in the field that

leadership constructs have isomorphic structures and meanings at the individual (e.g., within

school) and collective levels (e.g. between schools) (Dyer et al., 2005). This incongruent factor

structure between the two groups suggests that organizational leadership behaviors must be

measured separately at the individual and collective levels (Kozlowski & Klein, 2000).

       In terms of construct meanings, collective faculty constructs capture teachers’ mean

responses across schools, reflecting school-wide common beliefs of the collective faculty (Chen

et al., 2005; Kozlowski & Klein, 2000). The essential characteristics of leadership for learning as

an organization-wide quality is ‘to ensure that schools are collectively focused on what is

necessary to ensure the success of their students’ (Boyce & Bowers, 2018a, p. 2). Thus, these

collective faculty leadership domains should inform crafting organization-wide visions for

school improvement, and thus guiding reflective conversations among collective faculty within

professional learning communities or staff meetings. It is important to note that the four

collective teacher leadership domains (BT1-BT4) measure actionable tasks (e.g., ‘Hours I spent

on teamwork and dialogue with colleagues’) instead of generic traits of an individual (e.g., ‘How




                                                 37

much do you agree your principal is an effective leader?’). Therefore, the articulated four task

domains should afford a common language among collective faculty and tangible paths for

organizational change (Kelley & Dikkers, 2016). In contrast to collective teacher perspectives,

individual-level constructs capture the variation in leadership enactment individual teachers

experience across classrooms and departments. Thus, the five leadership domains (WT1-WT5)

should act as ‘an outline of research-based effective practices’ (Kelley & Dikkers, 2016, p. 406),

guiding the steps for individual teachers to improve their practices. Thus, principals could also

use survey results from this measurement model to provide constructive feedback on individual

teacher’s practice.

Individual teachers vs. principals

By definition, it is not allowed to examine factor correlations across within- and between-school

levels. Therefore, we examined the order of factor loading strengths within each leadership

domain to see the extent to which individual teachers and principals agree in perceiving

leadership. Table 13 shows that factor loading patterns of individual teachers and principals do

not agree in four out of five domains. The table illustrates that individual teachers and principals

agreed only in the 1st domain (Focus on Learning), whereas they prioritize divergent leadership

tasks in the remaining domains.

       A close examination of Table 13 and the item wordings in Tables 1 and 2 signals that

both individual teachers and principals perceive crafting and communicating a shared vision for

learning (T1, P1) as the key leadership task among other tasks included in the 1st domain (WT1,

BP1). In addition, individual teachers and principals share an identical order of prioritizing the

three leadership tasks within this domain (i.e., T1, T3, T2 in order of loading strength for

teachers; P1, P3, P2 for principals). However, they diverge in prioritizing leadership tasks within




                                                 38

the 2nd domain (Feedback on teaching and learning). For teachers, the highest loading is assigned

to T7, which measures the collective use of information on formative teaching evaluation. The

strongest loading for principals is assigned to P8, which assesses the summative evaluation of

teaching. This suggests that individual teachers perceive the informal, formative aspect of

feedback activities as the key leadership task in improving teaching and learning, whereas

principals prioritize the formal, summative assessment of teaching over other tasks.

       Table 13 further shows that principals and individual teachers prioritize leadership tasks

in the completely opposite orders in the 3rd leadership domain (Learning Community). Although

principals perceived professional development (P10) as the highest importance, followed by

discussing learning (P9) and mentoring teachers (P12), teachers prioritized these tasks in the

exact opposite order. In the 4th and 5th domains, constituent indicators loaded on to different

factors in teacher’s and principals’ factors, meaning the two groups indicate even more

substantial disagreement in leadership perceptions in the 4th and 5th domains.

Contribution to theory and methods

District and state leaders as well as policymakers consistently promote the assessment of

leadership due to its research-evidenced effect on staff development and student learning (Goff

et al., 2015). Relatedly, this study directly speaks to the current literature on what to measure:

styles vs. practice for assessing leadership. After the evolution of multiple leadership models

over the past decades, a comprehensive framework of leadership for learning emerged,

subsuming instructional, transformational, and distributed of leadership (Hallinger, 2011).

Indeed, the leadership domains of this study’s measurement model does represent a clear

alignment with these leadership styles. For example, leadership domains, ‘Collaborative Focus

on Learning’ (WT1, BT1, BP1) and ‘Feedback on Teaching and Learning’ (WT2, BT2, BP2) are




                                                 39

aligned with instructional leadership practices. Leadership tasks centering around ‘Collaboration

for Learning’ (WT3) and ‘Coordination of Learning Communities’ (BP3) speak to

transformational approach to leadership. Further, this study’s leadership measurement model

reflects a distributed view of leadership as the survey items assess leadership tasks distributed

throughout the school organization instead of focusing on the actions of the principal (Halverson

& Kelley, 2017; Kelley & Dikkers, 2016).

       However, it is important to note that this study’s measurement model assesses specific

tasks, rather than styles of leadership. This study’s focus on tasks directly speaks to recent

literature’s pivot toward practices (Day et al., 2016; Goff et al., 2015; Kelley & Dikkers, 2016;

Tan et al., 2020). For instance, one critical issue around measuring styles of leadership is its

limited actionability (Halverson & Kelley, 2017; Kelley & Dikkers, 2016). Actionability refers

to the extent to which the feedback information on leadership enactment provided to school

organizations can actually drive future organizational actions or change (Goff et al., 2015;

Halverson & Kelley, 2017). Only when schools and districts have relevant information on

measurable tasks and practice (not styles), organizational leaders can take concrete steps to

improve leadership actions (Halverson & Kelley, 2017). In all, when viewed through CALL’s

practice-focused lens, this study suggests that TALIS affords a strong opportunity to see

leadership assessment survey as an indicator of practice instead of assessing style of leadership

(Kelley & Dikkers, 2016; Tan et al., 2020). In addition, while using CALL as a scaffold to build

the leadership for learning measurement model, this study also expands it. Although it is a multi-

source survey, CALL provides feedback information on organization not on individuals. Thus, a

principal may find the returned feedback incongruent with their practice (Goff et al., 2014). In

contrast, by separately measuring perspectives of individual teachers and principals as well as




                                                 40

collective teachers, this study provides discrete feedback information for each of the three groups

to improve actions.

        In the field of educational leadership, there have been multiple efforts to illustrate the

evolution of instructional leadership theory into a broader conceptualization of leadership for

learning (Bowers, 2020; Boyce & Bowers, 2018a, 2018b; Hallinger, 2011; Hallinger & Heck,

2010; MacBeath & Townsend, 2011; Pietsch et al., 2019). For instance, Hallinger's (2011)

conceptual study proposed the conception of leadership for learning that subsumes previous

theories of instructional, transformational, and distributed leadership. Additionally, using 109

instructional leadership research studies, Boyce & Bowers 's (2018b) literature review illustrated

how instructional leadership conceptually evolved into a more comprehensive framework of

leadership for learning, encompassing staff development, school culture, and human resource

management. Using the most recent TALIS, Bowers (2020) further suggested eight task domains

of leadership for learning, although its factor structure was not empirically tested. In line with

this body of research, this study adds to the literature by, for the first time, empirically testing the

factor structure of the emergent leadership framework, using generalizable 2018 TALIS survey.

        Relatedly, this study also contributes to a methodological advance in the field. Boyce and

Bowers (2018a) suggested six individual- and three collective-teacher constructs of leadership

for learning, but their model did not include principal factors. More recently, Modeste and

Kelley (2020) included both teacher and principal data into their measurement model; however,

their leadership constructs indicated high inter-factor correlations (i.e., > 0.90), resulting in a lack

of discriminant construct validity. For the first time, this study successfully produces the separate

factor structure of leadership for learning pertaining to individual and collective teachers as well

as principals’ perspectives, also demonstrating sufficient construct discriminant validity.




                                                  41

Implications for leadership practice

This study finds that globally, collective teachers’ and principals’ leadership perspectives are not

correlated at all in 50% of tasks and the remaining half of the domains are also correlated in only

small to medium range. This result is especially concerning as the essential goal of leadership for

learning is to ensure that schools operate as a collective body to improve teaching and learning

(Boyce & Bowers, 2018a; Mitchell & Sackney, 2011). The gap is also troublesome as research

supports that school leaders in high-performing schools place an extensive effort to articulate a

vision for learning that is shared and supported by teachers, students, and the community

(Bellibas & Liu, 2017; Blase & Blase, 1999; Boyce & Bowers, 2018b; Hallinger, 2011;

Hallinger & Murphy, 1985; Murphy et al., 2007). Related, Bowers et al. (2017) suggest that

there exist three types of schools in the U.S., depending on the extent to which principals and

teachers agree in evaluating the prevalence of leadership practice. Based on their finding that in

one out of three school types, there is a strong alignment in the high leadership perceptions of

both principals and teachers, they suggest schools may develop from low teacher-low principal

leadership perception phase (i.e., both teachers and principals rate leadership prevalence as low),

to the low teacher-high principals, and ultimately to high-teacher, high-principal phase (Bowers

et al., 2017).

        Thus, for the principal’s vision to be translated into measurable outcomes (Murphy et al.,

2007), it is imperative to narrow these leadership perception gaps (Brezicha et al., 2019;

Hallinger & Murphy, 1985; Ham & Kim, 2015; Mulford & Silins, 2011; Urick & Bowers, 2019).

Leadership perception gaps between teachers and principals are negatively associated with

teacher self-efficacy (Ham et al., 2015) and their participation in collaborative activities (Park &

Ham, 2016). Others suggest teacher perceptions of leadership significantly predict different




                                                 42

outcomes (Park & Ham, 2016; K. Wang et al., 2019), whereas the principal’s perspectives do

not. It is a reminder that the effect of principals’ leadership is indirect and mediated through what

teachers do (Bosker et al., 2000; Day et al., 2016; Hallinger & Heck, 2011; Leithwood et al.,

2010; Leithwood & Sun, 2012; Murphy et al., 2007; Pietsch et al., 2019; Robinson et al., 2008;

Sammons et al., 2011; Silins & Mulford, 2011; Witziers et al., 2003). Therefore, we argue that

the school organization’s vision for learning must be crafted and implemented by inviting

teachers as equal partners.

       It is worthwhile to note that there is a discrepancy between what principals believe to be a

priority and what their position demands (Whitaker & Turner, 2000). In an analysis of 1,801 U.S.

principal responses, principals’ perceived and actual priorities aligned in only three out of 31

questions, with several items varying considerably between what they feel they should prioritize

and what they actually prioritize (Whitaker & Turner, 2000). Principals put lower actual

priorities than perceived importance in instructional leadership tasks, placing higher actual

priorities than perceived importance in managerial tasks. This implies that, although principals

perceive providing instructional leadership as a priority, this intent is often dominated by the

managerial demands that are imposed by external authorities and regulations (Muse & Abrams,

2011). However, it is a promising finding of this study that individual and collective teachers as

well as principals agreed that sustaining a shared belief on student learning (WT1, BT1, BP1) is

the key leadership tasks among others (In Table 13, T1 and P1 possess the highest factor

loadings in WT1, BT1, BP1). This shared focus on the vision for learning will enable teachers

and principals to determine whether they are being diverted away from the agreed-upon goal and

to define actionable next steps to refocus on the shared vision (Robinson et al., 2008). Therefore,

via multiple venues (e.g., whole staff meeting, professional learning communities, staff




                                                 43

professional development), principals must engage in continued discussions with teachers on

how they can narrow the leadership perception gaps and maintain the shared goal for teaching

and learning. These continued collective conversation is critical because leadership for learning

is concerned more with ‘persistent focus on improving the conditions for learning’ and less with

‘grand announcement of a new innovation’ (Hallinger, 2011, p. 137; italics added).

Implications for research

This study poses a fundamental question to researchers regarding the source of data for

measuring leadership. 360-degree or multi-source leadership assessments have been touted as a

sign of “robustness” of the evaluation (Goff et. al., 2015, p. 8). Yet research on whose data (e.g.,

individual teacher, principal) and whose leadership task (e.g., principal, teacher) is sparse.

Combining previous literature and this study’s results, Table 15 provides a typology of

leadership perception congruence contingent on data source and unit of analysis (i.e., who’s

practice to measure). Specifically, Urick and Bowers (2019) suggested that when measuring

principals’ leadership practice, individual and collective teachers indicate an isomorphic factor

structure. This means that one may use either data source for measuring leadership, and both will

lead to equivalent results in subsequent inferential analysis (e.g., regression). Boyce and Bowers

(2018b), on the other hand, proposed that when measuring teachers’ practice, individual and

collective teachers indicated divergent perspectives, and thus different factor structures.

Expanding this prior body of literature, this study adds more complex understanding to the

congruence typology. It further suggests that when measuring school climate, all three

perspectives from individual and collective teachers and principals produce equivalent factor

structure, thus allowing the use of any one of them for further analysis. Additionally, this study




                                                 44

proposes that when measuring individual teachers’ tasks, none of the three groups agreed on

how they perceived leadership for learning.

       These findings require researchers to articulate their measurement intention. For example,

if one aims to assess individual teachers’ leadership tasks, their survey indicators must refer to

individual educators’ practices. And they should expect that individual teacher perspectives and

those of collective faculty should be different, and the aggregation (e.g., mean) of individual

perspectives will produce different outcomes than that of individuals, requiring a multilevel

approach such as hierarchical linear modeling. However, if one aims to measure the school’s

shared climate, their survey must refer to it (e.g., “School provides…) and they may expect

equivalent factor structures across individual and collective teachers as well as principals, and

thus equivalent inferential analysis results, regardless of data source.

       In all, research aiming to measure leadership practices must consider including all three

perspectives. Most prior studies used either the individual teacher’s or principal’s perspectives or

teachers’ aggregated perceptions. More importantly, researchers should articulate whose practice

they intend to measure (i.e., principal, teacher, school climate) and whose data they will use. In

this decision making, we hope that Table 15 may play a role as a decision-making matrix for

researchers aiming to measure organization-wide leadership practice.

                                       [Table 15 about here]

Significance

Using generalizable 2018 TALIS and rigorous multilevel factor analysis, this study provides

evidence that individual and collective teachers as well as principals distinctively perceive

leadership tasks. This result necessitates that these distinct perceptions should be separately

measured using multilevel framework wherever possible. Evaluating principals’ views in




                                                 45

addition to individual and collective teacher perceptions adds to the literature as few prior

attempts successfully included all three groups in a single model with adequate discriminant

validity. Incorporating the three perspectives within a single model provides novel opportunities

to examine whether predicting powers of the three groups would diverge in effecting school

improvement (Ham et al., 2015a; Park & Ham, 2016; Urick & Bowers, 2019; Wang et al., 2019).

Limitations

By employing the full 2018 TALIS from 47 countries, the major limitation of this study is

measurement invariance (Kim et al., 2016; Masyn, 2017). Measurement invariance concerns

whether measured constructs possess the same meanings in different populations (Kline, 2016).

A test of measurement invariance includes four steps (Hoyle, 2012). The hypothesis of

configural invariance tests the equality of factor structure in each demographic group. Metric (or

weak) invariance examines whether factor loadings of each construct holds across groups. Scalar

(or strong) invariance tests the equality of indicator intercepts. Strict invariance tests the equality

of indicator residual variances. Related, further testing the dimensionality and distinctiveness of

the latent leadership constructs using demographic information is warranted in future studies.

Although this more comprehensive structural equation modeling analysis that incorporates

demographic variables (e.g., country, school location, educator gender) is beyond the immediate

scope of this study, we strongly recommend that future studies examine the factor structure this

study suggested while incorporating these demographic variables. Additionally, a common

question often posed regarding factor analysis results is common method bias (CMB) (Doty &

Glick, 1998). CMB concerns the extent to which the variation in participants’ responses are

affected by instrumental design (Reio Jr., 2010). To test the potential CMB effect, we adopted

Harman’s single factor score approach, where we included all items into one common latent




                                                  46

factor at each level (Aguirre-Urreta & Hu, 2019). When the result indicates greater than 50% of

variance is explained by a common latent factor, it is concluded that the factor analysis result has

been affected by CMB. The CMB test result indicated that the common latent factors explained

only 16.8% and 14.7% of variance at the within- and between-school level, respectively,

suggesting that CMB does not significantly affect the results.

Conclusion

This study suggests there are conceptual distinctions in how individual teachers, their collective

body, and principals experience leadership enactment. Related, it provides strong implications

for research, practice, and policy. For research, it highlights the need to consider all three

perspectives (individual teachers, the collective body, and principals) in measuring an

organization’s leadership by employing a multilevel framework. Omitting any part of the three

perspectives may be a missed opportunity to capture particular ways individuals or groups of

individuals experience leadership realities. Qualitative and quantitative studies that examine

whether and how these distinct leadership perspectives influence dynamics in school culture or

educator capacity may provide an intriguing line of future inquiry. For example, quantitative

studies that use this study’s measurement model and employ a structural equation modeling

framework to examine the effects of each of the leadership for learning task domains are strongly

recommended. For leadership practice, this study issues a call to school leaders that collective

faculty do not necessarily agree with principals in perceiving leadership tasks. Therefore,

principals must engage in discussions with teachers to narrow these perception gaps since it is a

critical responsibility of formal school leaders to craft and communicate a shared vision to effect

meaningful school changes (Hallinger, 2011). Given the publicly available TALIS survey, this

study’s leadership for learning measurement model may also provide a useful measure for




                                                  47

schools and districts to evaluate the extent to which their leaders enact effective leadership tasks

in daily practices. For education policy, the distinctive perspectives among educators reflect the

complexity embedded in implementing school reform policies. Policymakers at all levels must

reflect on the ways in which they can craft policy initiatives that best represent the divergent

perceptions among school stakeholders. Future studies are warranted to examine whether district,

state, and federal policymakers may expect improved implementation fidelity of policy

initiatives once they invite diverse inputs from individual teachers, as well as principals.




                                                 48

                                          References

Agasisti, T., Bowers, A. J., & Soncin, M. (2019). School principals’ leadership types and student
        achievement in the Italian context: Empirical results from a three-step latent class
        analysis. Educational Management Administration & Leadership, 47(6), 860–886.
        https://doi.org/10. 1177/1741143218768577
Bowers, A. J. (2020). Examining a congruency-typology model of leadership for learning using
        two- level latent class analysis with TALIS2018. https://www.oecd-
        ilibrary.org/content/paper/ c963073b-en
Bowers, A. J., Blitz, M., Modeste, M. E., Salisbury, J., & Halverson, R. (2017). Is there a
        typology of teacher and leader responders to CALL, and do they cluster in different types
        of schools? A two- level latent class analysis of call survey data. Teachers College
        Record, 119(4), 1–66.
Boyce, J., & Bowers, A. J. (2018a). Different levels of leadership for learning: Investigating
        differences between teachers individually and collectively using multilevel factor
        analysis of the 2011-2012 schools and staffing survey. International Journal of
        Leadership in Education, 21 (2), 197–225.
        https://doi.org/10.1080/13603124.2016.1139187 Boyce, J., & Bowers, A. J. (2018b).
        Toward an evolving conceptualization of instructional leadership as leadership for
        learning: Meta-narrative review of 109 quantitative studies across 25 Years. Journal of
        Educational Administration, 56(2), 161–182. https://doi.org/10.1108/JEA-06- 2016-0064
Aguirre-Urreta, M. I., & Hu, J. (2019). Detecting common method bias: Performance of the
        Harman’s single-factor test. Data Base for Advances in Information Systems, 50(2), 45–
        70. https://doi.org/10.1145/3330472.3330477
Arlot, S., & Celisse, A. (2010). A survey of cross-validation procedures for model selection.
        Statistics Surveys, 4, 40–79. https://doi.org/10.1214/09-SS054
Asparouhov, T., & Muthén, B. (2006). Multilevel modeling of complex survey data. 2718–2726.
Bass, B. M., & Avolio, B. J. (2007). Transformational leadership and organizational culture.
        International Journal of Public Administration, 17(3–4), 541–554.
        https://doi.org/10.1080/01900699408524907
Bellibas, M. S., & Liu, Y. (2017). Multilevel analysis of the relationship between principals’
        perceived practices of instructional leadership and teachers’ Self-efficacy perceptions.
        Journal of Educational Administration, 55(1), 49–69. https://doi.org/10.1108/JEA-12-
        2015-0116
Berkovich, I. (2016). School leaders and transformational leadership theory: Time to part ways?
        Journal of Educational Administration, 54(5), 609–622. https://doi.org/10.1108/JEA-11-
        2015-0100
Blase, J., & Blase, J. (1999). Principals’ instructional leadership and teacher development:
        Teachers’ perspectives. Educational Administration Quarterly, 35(3), 349–378.
Bogler, R. (2001). The influence of leadership style on teacher job satisfaction. Educational
        Administration Quarterly, 37(5), 662–683.
Bosker, R., de Vos, H., & Witziers, B. (2000). Theories and models of educational effectiveness.
        American Educational Research Association Annual Meeting, New Orleans.
Bossert, S. T., Dwyer, D. C., Rowan, B., & Lee, G. V. (1982). The instructional management
        role of the principal. Educational Administration Quarterly, 18(3), 34–64.
        https://doi.org/10.1177/0013161X82018003004



                                               49

Brezicha, K. F., Ikoma, S., Park, H., & LeTendre, G. K. (2019). The ownership perception gap:
       Exploring teacher job satisfaction and its relationship to teachers’ and principals’
       perception of decision-making opportunities. International Journal of Leadership in
       Education. https://doi.org/10.1080/13603124.2018.1562098
Brooks, J. S., Jean-Marie, G., Normore, A. H., & Hodgins, D. W. (2007). Distributed leadership
       for social justice: Exploring how influence and equity are stretched over an urban high
       school. Journal of School Leadership, 17(4), 378–408.
Buysse, V., Sparkman, K. L., & Wesley, P. W. (2003). Communities of practice: Connecting
       what we know with what we do. Exceptional Children, 69(3), 263–277.
       https://doi.org/10.1177/001440290306900301
Cawelti, G., & Protheroe, N. (2001). High student acheivement: How six school districts
       changed into high-performance systems. Educational Research Service.
Chen, G., Bliese, P., & Mathieu, J. (2005). Conceptual framework and statistical procedures for
       delineating and testing multilevel theories of homology. Organizational Research
       Methods, 8(4), 375–409. https://doi.org/10.1177/1094428105280056
Curcuruto, M., Kandola, R., Morgan, J. I., & Griffin, M. A. (2018). Multilevel safety climate in
       the UK rail industry: A cross validation of the Zohar and Luria MSC scale. Safety
       Science, 110, 183–194. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ssci.2018.02.008
Day, C., Gu, Q., & Sammons, P. (2016). The impact of leadership on student outcomes: How
       successful school leaders use transformational and instructional strategies to make a
       difference. Educational Administration Quarterly, 52(2), 221–258.
       https://doi.org/10.1177/0013161X15616863
Day, C., Sammons, P., Leithwood, K., Hopkins, D., Gu, Q., & Brown, E. (2011). Successful
       school leadership: Linking with learning and achievement. McGraw Hill Open
       University Press.
Diamond, J. B., & Spillane, J. P. (2016). School leadership and management from a distributed
       perspective: A 2016 retrospective and prospective. Management in Education, 30(4),
       147–154. https://doi.org/10.1177/0892020616665938
Doty, D. H., & Glick, W. H. (1998). Common methods bias: Does common methods variance
       really bias results? Organizational Research Methods, 1(4), 374–406.
       https://doi.org/10.1177/109442819814002
Dunn, E. C., Masyn, K. E., Jones, S. M., Subramanian, S. V., & Koenen, K. C. (2015).
       Measuring psychosocial environments using individual responses: An application of
       multilevel factor analysis to examining students in schools. Prevention Science, 16(5),
       718–733. https://doi.org/10.1007/s11121-014-0523-x
Dyer, N. G., Hanges, P. J., & Hall, R. J. (2005). Applying multilevel confirmatory factor analysis
       techniques to the study of leadership. Leadership Quarterly, 16(1), 149–167.
       https://doi.org/10.1016/j.leaqua.2004.09.009
Edmonds, R. (1979). Effective schools for the urban poor. Educational Leadership, 37(1), 15–
       18.
Fitzgerald, T., & Gunter, M. (2007, March). Teacher leadership: A new myth for our time? the
       Annual Meeting of American Educational Research Association, Chicago, IL.
Ford, T. G., Urick, A., & Wilson, A. S. P. (2018). Exploring the effect of supportive teacher
       evaluation experiences on U.S. teachers’ job satisfaction. Education Policy Analysis
       Archives, 26(59). https://doi.org/10.14507/epaa.26.3559




                                               50

Forer, B., & Zumbo, B. D. (2011). Validation of multilevel constructs: Validation methods and
       empirical findings for the EDI. Social Indicators Research, 103(2), 231.
       https://doi.org/10.1007/s11205-011-9844-3
García-Carmona, M., Fernández-de-Álava, M., & Pallares, Q. C. (2016). Leadership in Brazilian,
       Singaporean, and Spanish secondary schools: An in-depth analysis based on the 2013
       TALIS. In P. Miller (Ed.), Cultures of leadership: Exploring educational leadership
       practice across cultures. (pp. 121–148). Palgrave Macmillan.
Geldhof, G. J., Preacher, K. J., & Zyphur, M. J. (2014). Reliability estimation in a multilevel
       confirmatory factor analysis framework. Psychological Methods, 19(1), 72–91.
       https://doi.org/10.1037/a0032138
Goff, P., Salisbury, J., Blitz, M., & Wisconsin Center for Education Research. (2015).
       Comparing CALL and VAL-ED: An illustrative application of a decision matrix for
       selecting among leadership feedback instruments. WCER Working Paper No. 2015-5. In
       Wisconsin Center for Education Research. Wisconsin Center for Education Research.
       http://www.library.illinois.edu/proxy/go.php?url=http://search.ebscohost.com/login.aspx?
       direct=true&db=eric&AN=ED577055&site=eds-live&scope=site
Goff, P. T., Goldring, E., & Bickman, L. (2014). Predicting the Gap: Perceptual Congruence
       between American Principals and Their Teachers’ Ratings of Leadership Effectiveness.
       Educational Assessment, Evaluation and Accountability, 26(4), 333–359.
Graham, J. W. (2003). Adding missing-data-relevant variables to FIML-based structural equation
       models. Structural Equation Modeling: A Multidisciplinary Journal, 10(1), 80–100.
       https://doi.org/10.1207/S15328007SEM1001_4
Gronn, P. (2002). Distributed leadership as a unit of analysis. Leadership Quarterly, 13(4), 423.
       https://doi.org/10.1016/S1048-9843(02)00120-0
Gumus, S. (2013). The effects of teacher- and school-level factors on teachers’ participation in
       professional development activities: The role of principal leadership. Journal of
       International Education Research, 9(4), 371–380.
Hairon, S., & Goh, J. W. P. (2015). Pursuing the elusive construct of distributed leadership: Is
       the search over? Educational Management Administration & Leadership, 43(5), 693–
       718. https://doi.org/10.1177/1741143214535745
Hallinger, P. (2003). Leading educational change: Reflections on the practice of instructional and
       transformational Leadership. Cambridge Journal of Education, 33(3), 329–351.
Hallinger, P. (2005). Instructional leadership and the school principal: A passing fancy that
       refuses to fade away. Leadership and Policy in Schools, 4(3), 221–239.
       https://doi.org/10.1080/15700760500244793
Hallinger, P. (2011). Leadership for learning: Lessons from 40 years of empirical research.
       Journal of Educational Administration, 49(2), 125–142.
       https://doi.org/10.1108/09578231111116699
Hallinger, P., & Heck, R. H. (1996). Reassessing the principal’s role in school effectiveness: A
       review of empirical research, 1980-1995. Educational Administration Quarterly, 32(1),
       5–44. https://doi.org/10.1177/0013161X96032001002
Hallinger, P., & Heck, R. H. (2010). Leadership for learning: Does collaborative leadership make
       a difference in school improvement? Educational Management Administration &
       Leadership, 38(6), 654–678. https://doi.org/10.1177/1741143210379060




                                               51

Hallinger, P., & Heck, R. H. (2011a). Collaborative leadership and school improvement:
        Understanding the impact on school capacity and student learning (T. Townsend & R. H.
        MacBeath, Eds.; pp. 469–485). Springer.
Hallinger, P., & Heck, R. H. (2011b). Conceptual and methodological issues in studying school
        leadership effects as a reciprocal process. School Effectiveness and School Improvement,
        22(2), 149–173. https://doi.org/10.1080/09243453.2011.565777
Hallinger, P., & Murphy, J. F. (1985). Assessing the instructional management behavior of
        principals. Elementary School Journal, 86, 217–247.
Halverson, R., & Dikkers, S. (2011). Comprehensive Assessment of Leadership for Learning
        (CALL): Development and Design of an Online, Formative Assessment and Feedback
        System for Middle and High School Leadership. Annual Meeting of the American
        Educational Research Association, New Orleans, LA.
Halverson, R., & Kelley, C. (2017). Mapping leadership: The tasks that matter for improving
        teaching and learning in schools. Jossey-Bass.
Ham, S.-H., Duyar, I., & Gumus, S. (2015a). Agreement of self-other perceptions matters:
        Analyzing the effectiveness of principal leadership through multi-source assessment.
        Australian Journal of Education, 59(3), 225–246.
        https://doi.org/10.1177/0004944115603373
Ham, S.-H., Duyar, I., & Gumus, S. (2015b). Agreement of self-other perceptions matters:
        Analyzing the effectiveness of principal leadership through multi-source assessment.
        Australian Journal of Education, 59(3), 225–246.
        https://doi.org/10.1177/0004944115603373
Ham, S.-H., & Kim, R. Y. (2015). The influence of principals’ instructional leadership on
        teachers’ use of autonomy-supportive instruction: An analysis of three Asia-Pacific
        countries. Asia-Pacific Education Researcher, 24(1), 57–65.
        https://doi.org/10.1007/s40299-013-0158-x
Harris, A., Leithwood, K., Day, C., Sammons, P., & Hopkins, D. (2007). Distributed leadership
        and organizational change: Reviewing the evidence. Journal of Educational Change,
        8(4), 337. https://doi.org/10.1007/s10833-007-9048-4
Hayton, J. C., Allen, D. G., & Scarpello, V. (2004). Factor Retention Decisions in Exploratory
        Factor Analysis: A Tutorial on Parallel Analysis. Organizational Research Methods,
        7(2), 191–205.
Heck, R. H., & Thomas, S. L. (2015). An introduction to multilevel modeling techniques (Third
        Edition). Routledge.
Hox, J. J. (2010). Multilevel analysis: Techniques and applications (Second Edition). Routledge.
Hoyle, R. H. (2012). Handbook of structural equation modeling. Guilford Press.
Hu, L., & Bentler, P. M. (1999). Cutoff criteria for fit indexes in covariance structure analysis:
        Conventional criteria versus new alternatives. Structural Equation Modeling: A
        Multidisciplinary Journal, 6(1), 1–55. https://doi.org/10.1080/10705519909540118
Kelley, C., & Dikkers, S. (2016). Framing feedback for school improvement around distributed
        leadership. Educational Administration Quarterly, 52(3), 392–422.
        https://doi.org/10.1177/0013161X16638416
Kelley, C., & Halverson, R. (2012). The Comprehensive Assessment of Leadership for Learning:
        A next generation formative evaluation and feedback system. Journal of Applied
        Research on Children, 3(2), 1–22.




                                               52

Kim, E. S., Joo, S., Lee, P., Wang, Y., & Stark, S. (2016). Measurement invariance testing across
        between-level latent classes using multilevel factor mixture modeling. Structural
        Equation Modeling, 23(6), 870–887. https://doi.org/10.1080/10705511.2016.1196108
Kline, R. B. (2016). Principles and practice of structural equation modeling. The Guilford Press.
Kozlowski, S. W., & Klein, K. J. (2000). A multilevel approach to theory and research in
        organizations: Contextual, temporal, and emergent processes. In K. J. Klein & S. W. J.
        Kozlowski (Eds.), Multilevel theory, research and methods in organizations:
        Foundations, extensions, and new directions (pp. 3–39). Jossey-Bass.
Larsen, R. (2011). Missing data imputation versus full information maximum likelihood with
        second-level dependencies. Structural Equation Modeling: A Multidisciplinary Journal,
        18(4), 649–662. https://doi.org/10.1080/10705511.2011.607721
Leithwood, K. (1994). Leadership for school restructuring. Educational Administration
        Quarterly, 30(4), 498–518. https://doi.org/10.1177/0013161X94030004006
Leithwood, K., Anderson, S., Mascall, B., & Strauss, T. (2010). School leaders’ influences on
        student learning: The four paths. In T. Bush, L. Bell, & D. Middlewood (Eds.), The
        principles of educational leadership and management (pp. 13–30). SAGE.
Leithwood, K., & Jantzi, D. (1999). (pp. 3–33). ERIC.
        http://search.ebscohost.com/login.aspx?direct=true&db=eric&AN=ED432035
Leithwood, K., & Jantzi, D. (2005). A Review of transformational school leadership research
        1996–2005. Leadership & Policy in Schools, 4(3), 177.
Leithwood, K., & Jantzi, D. (2006). Transformational school leadership for large-scale reform:
        Effects on students, teachers, and their classroom practices. School Effectiveness and
        School Improvement, 17(2), 201–227. https://doi.org/10.1080/09243450600565829
Leithwood, K., & Sun, J. (2012). The nature and effects of transformational school leadership: A
        meta-analytic review of unpublished research. Educational Administration Quarterly,
        48(3), 387–423. https://doi.org/10.1177/0013161X11436268
Liu, Y. (2016). How leadership is distributed and how it is associated with teaching quality? A
        cross-country study with the talis 2013 [Ph.D., Michigan State University]. In ProQuest
        Dissertations and Theses (1826827778).
        https://search.proquest.com/docview/1826827778?accountid=14553
Lumby, J. (2013). Distributed leadership: The uses and abuses of power. Educational
        Management Administration and Leadership, 41(5), 581–597.
        https://doi.org/10.1177/1741143213489288
Lumby, J. (2019). Distributed leadership and bureaucracy. Educational Management
        Administration & Leadership, 47(1), 5. https://doi.org/10.1177/1741143217711190
MacBeath, J., & Townsend, T. (2011). Thinking and acting both locally and globally: What do
        we know now and how do we continue to improve? In T. Townsend & J. MacBeath
        (Eds.), International Handbook of Leadership for Learning: Part 1 (pp. 1237–1254).
        Springer.
Marks, H. M., & Printy, S. M. (2003). Principal leadership and school performance: An
        integration of transformational and instructional leadership. Educational Administration
        Quarterly, 39(3), 370–397. https://doi.org/10.1177/0013161X03253412
Marsh, H. W., Hau, K.-T., & Wen, Z. (2004). In search of golden rules: Comment on hypothesis-
        testing approaches to setting cutoff values for fit indexes and dangers in overgeneralizing
        Hu and Bentler’s (1999) findings. Structural Equation Modeling, 11(3), 320–341.
        https://doi.org/10.1207/s15328007sem1103_2



                                                53

Marzano, R. J., Waters, T., & MucNulty, B. A. (2005). School leadership that works: From
        research to results. Association for Supervision and Curriculum Development (ASCD).
Masyn, K. E. (2017). Measurement invariance and differential item functioning in latent class
        analysis with sepwise multiple indicator multiple cause modeling. Structural Equation
        Modeling, 24(2), 180–197. https://doi.org/10.1080/10705511.2016.1254049
Mertens, S. B., & Flowers, N. (2003). Middle school practices improve student achivement in
        high poverty schools. Middle School Journal, 35(1), 33–43.
Minor, E. C., Porter, A. C., Murphy, J., Goldring, E., & Elliott, S. N. (2017). A test-retest
        analysis of the Vanderbilt Assessment for Leadership in Education in the USA.
        Educational Assessment, Evaluation and Accountability, 29(2), 211–224.
        https://doi.org/10.1007/s11092-016-9254-9
Mitchell, C., & Sackney, L. (2011). Building and leading within learning ecologies. In T.
        Townsend & J. MacBeath (Eds.), International Handbook of Leadership for Learning:
        Part 1 (pp. 975–990). Springer.
Modeste, M. E., & Kelley, C. J. (2020). Examining distributed leadership practices by school
        grade configuration. Leadership and Policy in Schools.
        https://doi.org/10.1080/15700763.2018.1514057
Mohr, N., & Dichter, A. (2002). Stages of Team Development Lessons from the Struggles of Site-
        Based Management.
Mulford, B., & Silins, H. (2011). Revised models and conceptualisation of successful school
        principalship for improved student outcomes. International Journal of Educational
        Management, 25(1), 61–82. https://doi.org/10.1108/09513541111100125
Murphy, J., Elliott, S., Goldring, E., & Porter, A. (2007). Leadership for learning: A research-
        based model and taxonomy of behaviors. School Leadership and Management, 27(2),
        179–201.
Muse, M. D., & Abrams, L. M. (2011). An investigation of school leadership priorities. The
        Delta Kappa Gamma Bulletin: International Journal for Professional Educators, 77(4),
        49–58.
Muthén, B. O. (1991). Multilevel factor analysis of class and student achievement components.
        Journal of Educational Measurement, 28(4), 338–354.
Muthén, B. O. (1994). Multilevel covariance structure analysis. Sociological Methods &
        Research, 22(3), 376–398.
Muthén, L. K., & Muthén, B. O. (19982017). Mplus user’s guide: Statistical analysis with latent
        variables. Eighth Edition. Muthén & Muthén.
Neumerski, C. M. (2013). Rethinking instructional leadership, a review: What do we know about
        principal, teacher, and coach instructional leadership, and where should we go from here?
        Educational Administration Quarterly, 49(2), 310–347.
        https://doi.org/10.1177/0013161X12456700
OECD. (2019). TALIS 2018 technical report. OECD Publishing.
Ogawa, R. T., & Bossert, S. T. (1995). Leadership as an organizational quality. Educational
        Administration Quarterly, 31, 224–243. https://doi.org/10.1177/0013161X95031002004
Park, J.-H., & Ham, S.-H. (2016). Whose perception of principal instructional leadership?
        Principal-teacher perceptual (dis)agreement and its influence on teacher collaboration.
        Asia Pacific Journal of Education, 36(3), 450–469.
        https://doi.org/10.1080/02188791.2014.961895




                                               54

Pietsch, M., Tulowitzki, P., & Koch, T. (2019). On the differential and shared effects of
        leadership for learning on teachers’ organizational commitment and job satisfaction: A
        multilevel perspective. Educational Administration Quarterly, 55(5), 705–741.
        https://doi.org/10.1177/0013161X18806346
Porter, A. C., Polikoff, M. S., Goldring, E. B., Murphy, J., Elliott, S. N., & May, H. (2010).
        Investigating the validity and reliability of the Vanderbilt Assessment of Leadership in
        Education. Elementary School Journal, 111(2), 282–313.
Reio Jr., T. G. (2010). The threat of common method variance bias to theory building. Human
        Resource Development Review, 9(4), 405–411. Scopus®.
        https://doi.org/10.1177/1534484310380331
Robinson, V. M. J., Lloyd, C. A., & Rowe, K. J. (2008). The impact of leadership on student
        outcomes: An analysis of the differential effects of leadership types. Educational
        Administration Quarterly, 44(5), 635–674. https://doi.org/10.1177/0013161X08321509
Sablan, J. R. (2019). Can you really measure that? Combining critical race theory and
        quantitative methods. American Educational Research Journal, 56(1), 178–203.
        https://doi.org/10.3102/0002831218798325
Sammons, P., Davis, S., Day, C., & Gu, Q. (2014). Using mixed methods to investigate school
        improvement and the role of leadership: An example of a longitudinal study in England.
        Journal of Educational Administration, 52(5), 565–589. https://doi.org/10.1108/JEA-10-
        2013-0121
Sammons, P., Gu, Q., Day, C., & Ko, J. (2011). Exploring the impact of school leadership on
        pupil outcomes: Results from a study of academically improved and effective schools in
        England. International Journal of Educational Management, 25(1), 83–101.
        https://doi.org/10.1108/09513541111100134
Savalei, V., & Rhemtulla, M. (2012). On obtaining estimates of the fraction of missing
        information from full information maximum likelihood. Structural Equation Modeling: A
        Multidisciplinary Journal, 19(3), 477–494.
        https://doi.org/10.1080/10705511.2012.687669
Shatzer, R. H., Caldarella, P., Hallam, P. R., & Brown, B. L. (2013). Comparing the effects of
        instructional and transformational leadership on student achievement: Implications for
        practice. Educational Management Administration & Leadership, 42(4), 445–459.
        https://doi.org/10.1177/1741143213502192
Silins, H., & Mulford, B. (2004). Schools as learning organisations—Effects on teacher
        leadership and student outcomes. School Effectiveness and School Improvement, 15(3–4),
        43–466.
Silins, H., & Mulford, B. (2011). Re-conceptualizing school principalship that improves student
        outcomes. International Journal of Educational Management, 25(1), 61–82.
        https://doi.org/10.1108/09513541111100125
Spillane, J. P. (2006). Distributed leadership. Jossey-Bass.
Spillane, J. P., Camburn, E. M., Pustejovsky, J., Pareja, A. S., & Lewis, G. (2008). Taking a
        distributed perspective: Epistemological and methodological tradeoffs in operationalizing
        the leader-plus aspect. Journal of Educational Administration, 46(2), 189–213.
        https://doi.org/10.1108/09578230810863262
Spillane, J. P., Halverson, R., & Diamond, J. B. (2004). Towards a theory of leadership practice:
        A distributed perspective. Journal of Curriculum Studies, 36(1), 3–34.
        https://doi.org/10.1080/0022027032000106726



                                               55

Storey, A. (2004). The problem of distributed leadership in schools. School Leadership &
        Management, 24(3), 249. https://doi.org/10.1080/1363243042000266918
Tan, C. Y., Gao, L., & Shi, M. (2020). Second-order meta-analysis synthesizing the evidence on
        associations between school leadership and different school outcomes. Educational
        Management Administration & Leadership, 1741143220935456.
        https://doi.org/10.1177/1741143220935456
Thoonen, E. E. J., Sleegers, P. J. C., Oort, F. J., Peetsma, T. T. D., & Geijsel, F. P. (2011). How
        to improve teaching practices: The role of teacher motivation, organizational factors, and
        leadership practices. Educational Administration Quarterly, 47(3), 496–536.
Tian, M., Risku, M., & Collin, K. (2016). A meta-analysis of distributed leadership from 2002 to
        2013: Theory development, empirical evidence and future research focus. Educational
        Management Administration and Leadership, 44(1), 146–164.
        https://doi.org/10.1177/1741143214558576
Urick, A. (2016). Examining US principal perception of multiple leadership styles used to
        practice shared instructional leadership. Journal of Educational Administration, 54(2),
        152–172.
Urick, A., & Bowers, A. J. (2014). What are the different types of principals across the United
        States? A latent class analysis of principal perception of leadership. Educational
        Administration Quarterly, 50(1), 96–134. https://doi.org/10.1177/0013161X13489019
Urick, A., & Bowers, A. J. (2019). Assessing international teacher and principal perceptions of
        instructional leadership: A multilevel factor analysis of TALIS 2008. Leadership and
        Policy in Schools, 18(3), 249–269. https://doi.org/10.1080/15700763.2017.1384499
Vanblaere, B., & Devos, G. (2018). The role of departmental leadership for professional learning
        communities. Educational Administration Quarterly, 54(1), 85–114.
        https://doi.org/10.1177/0013161X17718023
VanDerHeyden, A. M. (2007). A multi-year evaluation of the effects of a Response to
        Intervention (RTI) model on identification of children for special education. Journal of
        School Psychology, 45(2), 225–256.
Voorhees, C., Brady, M., Calantone, R., & Ramirez, E. (2016). Discriminant validity testing in
        marketing: An analysis, causes for concern, and proposed remedies. Journal of the
        Academy of Marketing Science, 44(1), 119–134. https://doi.org/10.1007/s11747-015-
        0455-4
Wang, K., Li, Y., Luo, W., & Zhang, S. (2019). Selected factors contributing to teacher job
        satisfaction: A quantitative investigation using 2013 TALIS data. Leadership and Policy
        in Schools. https://doi.org/10.1080/15700763.2019.1586963
Wang, Y. (2018). The panorama of the last decade’s theoretical groundings of educational
        leadership research: A concept co-occurrence network analysis. Educational
        Administration Quarterly, 54(3), 327–365. https://doi.org/10.1177/0013161X18761342
Whitaker, T., & Turner, E. (2000). What is your priority? NASSP Bulletin, 84(617), 29–36.
        https://doi.org/10.1177/019263650008461704
Whittaker Tiffany A. (2012). Using the modification index and standardized expected parameter
        change for model modification. The Journal of Experimental Education, 80(1), 26.
Witziers, B., Bosker, R. J., & Kruger, M. L. (2003). Educational leadership and student
        achievement: The elusive search for an association. Educational Administration
        Quarterly, 39(3), 398–425. https://doi.org/10.1177/0013161X03253411




                                                56

Yong, A. G., & Pearce, S. (2013). A Beginner’s guide to factor analysis: Focusing on
      exploratory factor analysis. Tutorials in Quantitative Methods for Psychology, 9(2), 79–
      94. https://doi.org/10.20982/tqmp.09.2.p079
Zepeda, S. (2011). Instructional supervision, coherence, and job-embedded learning. In T.
      Townsend & J. MacBeath (Eds.), International Handbook of Leadership for Learning
      (pp. 741–756). Springer.




                                              57

Table 1. Mapping TALIS Teacher Items to CALL Subdomains
   CALL                   CALL Subdomains                                                 2018 TALIS Teacher Survey Items                                             TALIS     Transformed
  Domain                                                                                                                                                             Variable     Variable
Focus on      1.1 Maintain a school-wide focus on learning   School has a culture of shared responsibility for school issues                                         TT3G48D        T1
Learning                                                     Staff share a common set of beliefs about teaching and learning                                         TT3G48F
              1.2 Formal leaders recognized as instructional School provides staff with opportunities to actively participate in school decisions                    TT3G48A        T2
              leaders                                        School encourages staff to lead new initiatives                                                         TT3G48H
              1.3 Collaborative design of an integrated      There is a collaborative school culture which is characterized my mutual support                        TT3G48E        T3
              learning plan
              1.4 Provide services for S who traditionally   Most teachers believe that students’ well-being is important                                            TT3G49B        T4
              struggle                                       If a student needs extra assistance, school provides it                                                 TT3G49D
Monitoring    2.1 Formative evaluation of student learning   Information on school-based and classroom-based results (e.g., project results, test score) is shared   TT3G29E        T5
Teaching and 2.2 Summative evaluation of student learning Information on external results of students I teach (e.g., national test scores) is shared                 TT3G29D        T6
Learning      2.3 Formative evaluation of teaching           Information on assessment of my content knowledge is shared                                             TT3G29C        T7
                                                             Information on self-assessment of my work (e.g., analysis of my teaching video) is shared               TT3G29F
              2.4 Summative evaluation of teaching           Information on observation of my classroom teaching is shared                                           TT3G29A        T8
                                                             Information on student survey responses related to my teaching is shared                                TT3G29B
Building      3.1 Collaborative school-wide focus on         I engage in discussions about the learning development of specific students                             TT3G33E        T9
Nested        teaching and learning
Learning      3.2 Professional learning                      I attended team conference                                                                              TT3G33G        T10
Communities                                                  I took part in collaborative professional learning                                                      TT3G33H
              3.3 Socially distributed leadership            Most teachers strive to develop new ideas for teaching and learning                                     TT3G32A        T11
                                                             Most teachers search for new ways to solve problems                                                     TT3G32C
                                                             Most teachers in this school provide practical support to each other to apply new ideas                 TT3G32D
              3.4 Coaching and mentoring                     I work with other teachers to ensure common standards for assessing student progress                    TT3G33F        T12
Acquiring and 4.1 Personnel practices                        Hours I spent on professional development activities                                                    TT3G18G        T13
Allocating
Resources     4.2 Structuring and maintaining time           Hours I spent on teamwork and dialogue with colleagues                                                  TT3G18B        T14
              4.3 School resources are focused on student Hours I spent on participation in school management                                                        TT3G18E        T15
              learning                                       Hours I spent on general administrative work (communication, paperwork)                                 TT3G18F
              4.4 Integrating external expertise into school I participated in courses/seminars in person                                                            TT3G22A        T16
              instructional program                          I participated in online courses/seminars                                                               TT3G22B
                                                             I participated in education conference                                                                  TT3G22C
              4.5 Coordinating relations with families and   Hours I spent on communication and cooperation with parents or guardians                                TT3G18H        T17
              communities
Maintaining 5.1 Clear, consistent, and enforced              Student behavior and classroom management were included in my professional development                  TT3G23F        T18
safe and      expectation for student behavior               School management and administration were included in my professional development                       TT3G23G
effective                                                    School staff enforces rules for student behavior consistently throughout the school                     TT3G48G
learning      5.2 Clean and safe learning environment        Stress comes from maintaining classroom discipline*                                                     TT3G52G        T19
environment                                                  Stress comes from being intimidated or verbally abused by students*                                     TT3G52H
              5.3 Student support services provide a safe    Professional development includes approaches to individualized learning                                 TT3G23H        T20
              haven for student who traditionally struggle   Teaching students with special needs was included in my professional development                        TT3G23I
                                                             Teaching in multicultural or multilingual setting was included in my professional development           TT3G23J
              5.4 Buffering the teaching environment         Teacher-parent/guardian cooperation was included in my professional development                         TT3G23M        T21
                                                             Communicating with people from different cultures or countries was included in my professional          TT3G23N
                                                             development                                                                                             TT3G52J
                                                             Stress comes from addressing parent or guardian concerns*
Note. Transformed variables were used in the analyses. Items with an asterisk (*) indicate they were reverse coded.




                                                                                               58

Table 2. Mapping TALIS Principal Items to CALL Subdomains
   CALL                         CALL Subdomain                                                   2018 TALIS Principal Survey Items                                         TALIS Transformed
  Domain                                                                                                                                                                  Variable Variable
Focus on       1.1 Maintain a school-wide focus on learning              School has a culture of shared responsibility for school issues                                  TC3G26D    P1
Learning                                                                 Staff share a common set of beliefs about teaching and learning                                  TC3G26G
               1.2 Formal leaders recognized as instructional leaders    School provides staff with opportunities to actively participate in school decisions             TC3G26A    P2
                                                                         School encourages staff to lead new initiatives                                                  TC3G26I
               1.3 Collaborative design of an integrated learning plan   There is a collaborative school culture which is characterized by mutual support                 TC3G26F    P3
               1.4 Provide services for students who traditionally       Policy is implemented to teach students to be inclusive of different Socioeconomic backgrounds   TC3G39A    P4
               struggle                                                  Policy is implemented against socio-economic discrimination                                      TC3G39C
                                                                         Policy is implemented to support students from disadvantaged backgrounds                         TC3G39D
Monitoring   2.1 Formative evaluation of student learning                Information on school- and classroom-based results is shared                                     TC3G24E    P5
Teaching and 2.2 Summative evaluation of student learning                Information on external results of students is shared (e.g., national test scores)               TC3G24D    P6
Learning     2.3 Formative evaluation of teaching                        Information on teacher’s content knowledge is shared                                             TC3G24C    P7
                                                                         Information on the self-assessment of teacher’s work is shared                                   TC3G24F
               2.4 Summative evaluation of teaching                      Information on observation of classroom teaching is shared                                       TC3G24A    P8
                                                                         Information on student survey responses related to teaching is shared                            TC3G24B
Building    3.1 Collaborative school-wide focus on teaching and          I collaborated with teachers to solve classroom discipline problems                              TC3G22A    P9
Nested      learning                                                     I took actions to ensure that teachers feel responsible for student learning outcomes            TC3G22F
Learning
Communities 3.2 Professional learning                                  I worked on a professional development plan for this school                                        TC3G22K    P10
                                                                       I took actions to ensure that teachers take responsibility for improving teaching skills           TC3G22E
              3.3 Socially distributed leadership                      I took actions to support cooperation among teachers to develop teaching practices                 TC3G22D    P11
              3.4 Coaching and mentoring                               I observed instruction in the classroom                                                            TC3G22B    P12
                                                                       I provided feedback to teachers based on my observations                                           TC3G22C
                                                                       I value the importance of supporting less experienced teachers in their teaching                   TC3G36D
Acquiring and 4.1 Personnel practices                                  Responsibility for appointing or hiring teachers is shared                                         TC3G20A    P13
Allocating                                                             Responsibility for dismissing or suspending teachers from employment is shared                     TC3G20B
Resources     4.2 Structuring and maintaining time                     Adequate time for instructional leadership*                                                        TC3G29N    P14
                                                                       Responsibility for establishing student assessment policies is shared                              TC3G20G
                                                                       Responsibility for choosing which learning materials are used is shared                            TC3G20I
              4.3 School resources are focused on student learning     Responsibility for deciding budget allocations within school is shared                             TC3G20E    P15
              4.4 Integrating external expertise into school           Responsibility for determining course content is shared                                            TC3G20J    P16
              instructional program                                    Responsibility for deciding which courses are offered is shared                                    TC3G20K
              4.5 Coordinating relations with families and communities Parents and guardians are involved in school activities                                            TC3G27E    P17
                                                                       School cooperates with the local community                                                         TC3G27G
Maintaining 5.1 Clear, consistent, and enforced expectation for        Staff enforces rules for student behavior consistently throughout the school                       TC3G26H    P18
safe and      student behavior                                         Responsibility for establishing student disciplinary policies and procedures is shared             TC3G20F
effective
learning      5.2 Clean and safe learning environment                  Adequate instructional materials (e.g., textbooks)*                                                TC3G29D    P19
environment                                                            Adequate instructional space (e.g., classrooms)*                                                   TC3G29I
                                                                         Adequate physical infrastructure (e.g., classroom furniture, school buildings)*                  TC3G29J
               5.3 Student support services provide a safe haven for     Enough teachers with competence in teaching students with special needs*                         TC3G29B    P20
               students who traditionally struggle                       Enough teachers who can teach students in multicultural/multilingual setting*                    TC3G29K
                                                                         Enough teachers who can teach students from low SES homes*                                       TC3G29L
               5.4 Buffering the teaching environment                                        No survey items available from TALIS survey items
Note. Transformed variables were used in the analysis. Items with an asterisk (*) indicate they were reverse coded.




                                                                                                 59

Table 3. Descriptive Statistics of TALIS 2018 Participating Countries
                              Teachers                Principals (Schools)
        Country            N              %            N               %
 Australia               3,573           2.32         238             2.57
 Austria                 4,255           2.77         277             3.00
 Belgium                 5,257           3.42         308             3.33
 Brazil                  2,447           1.59         186             2.01
 Bulbaria                2,862           1.86         200             2.16
 Chile                   1,963           1.28         179             1.94
 Chinese Taipei          3,835           2.5          202             2.18
 Colombia                2,398           1.56         157             1.70
 Croatia                 3,358           2.19         195             2.11
 Cyprus                  1,611           1.05         89              0.96
 Czech Republic          3,447           2.24         219             2.37
 Denmark                 2,001           1.3          148             1.60
 Estonia                 3,004           1.95         195             2.11
 Finland                 2,851           1.86         148             1.60
 France                  3,006           1.96         196             2.12
 Georgia                 3,101           2.02         192             2.08
 Hungary                 3,245           2.11         189             2.04
 Israel                  2,627           1.71         187             2.02
 Italy                   3,612           2.35         192             2.08
 Japan                   3,555           2.31         196             2.12
 Kazakhstan              6,566           4.27         331             3.58
 Korea                   2,931           1.91         165             1.78
 Latvia                  2,315           1.51         137             1.48
 Lithuania               3,759           2.45         195             2.11
 Malta                   1,656           1.08         58              0.63
 Mexico                  2,926           1.9          193             2.09
 Netherlands             1,884           1.23         127             1.37
 New Zealand             2,257           1.47         190             2.05
 Norway                  4,154           2.7          193             2.09
 Portugal                3,676           2.39         200             2.16
 Russian Federation      4,011           2.61         230             2.49
 Saudi Arabia            2,744           1.79         195             2.11
 Singapore               3,280           2.13         169             1.83
 Slovak Republic         3,015           1.96         180             1.95
 Viet Nam                3,825           2.49         196             2.12
 Slovenia                2,094           1.36         134             1.45
 South Africa            2,046           1.33         177             1.91
 Spain                   7,407           4.82         399             4.31
 Sweden                  2,782           1.81         183             1.98
 United Arab Emirates    8,648           5.63         521             5.63
 Turkey                  3,952           2.57         198             2.14
 United States           2,560           1.67         166             1.80
 England (UK)            2,376           1.55         157             1.70
 Alberta (Canada)        1,077           0.7          129             1.40
 Romania                 3,658           2.38         199             2.15
 Argentina               2,099           1.37         134             1.45
 Shanghai (China)        3,976           2.57         198             2.14
         Total          153,682          100         9,247            100




                                                60

Table 4. CALL-TALIS Conceptual Mapping: Teacher Items
   CALL               CALL Subdomains                                TALIS Indicator                                                             Theoretical Rationale
  Domain
Focus on     1.1 Maintain a school-wide focus on TT3G48D (Shared responsibility to school issue)           Leaders in high-performing schools place an extensive effort to articulate a vision for learning
Learning     learning                             TT3G48F (Common set of belief about learning)            shared by stakeholders (Blase & Blase, 1999; Hallinger, 2011b; Murphy et al., 2007)
             1.2 Formal leaders recognized as     TT3G48A (Staff involvement in decision making)           Instructional decision making is a collaborative practice (Diamond & Spillane, 2016; Hallinger &
             instructional leaders                TT3G48H (Encourage staff lead new initiatives)           Heck, 2011a)
             1.3 Collaborative design of an       TT3G48E (Collaborative school culture)                   Collaborative instructional planning is a key characteristic of shared focus on learning (Halverson &
             integrated learning plan                                                                      Dikkers, 2011)
             1.4 Provide services for S who       TT3G49B (Teachers value student well-being)              Focus on learning requires providing appropriate assistance for students who struggle (Halverson
             traditionally struggle               TT3G49D (School offer assistance to students)            & Dikkers, 2011)
Monitoring   2.1 Formative evaluation of student TT3G29E (Feedback on student result, internal)            Effective instructional leaders use diverse data for monitoring and improving student learning
Teaching and learning                                                                                      (Murphy et al., 2007)
Learning     2.2 Summative evaluation of student TT3G29D (Student result, national test)                   Effective instructional leaders use diverse data for monitoring and improving student learning
             learning                                                                                      (Murphy et al., 2007)
             2.3 Formative evaluation of teaching TT3G29C (Assess content knowledge)                       Summative evaluation must be linked to formative supervision, embedded in teachers’ instructional
                                                  TT3G29F (Self-assessment of teaching)                    routines (Zepeda, 2011)
             2.4 Summative evaluation of          TT3G29A (Classroom observation)                          Summative evaluation aims to offer feedback on teaching and is defined by learning outcomes
             teaching                             TT3G29B (Student survey about teaching)                  (Halverson & Dikkers, 2011)
Building     3.1 Collaborative school-wide focus TT3G33E (Discuss with others about student learning       Knowledgebase to fulfill teacher responsibilities are best achieved through reflective dialogues and
Nested       on teaching and learning             development)                                             shared experiences (Buysse et al., 2003)
Learning     3.2 Professional learning            TT3G33G (Attend team conference)                         Effective communities engage teachers in professional growth in key instructional areas (Halverson
Communities                                       TT3G33H (Collaborative professional learning)            & Dikkers, 2011)
             3.3 Socially distributed leadership  TT3G32A (Teachers develop ideas for teaching)            Professional communities characterized by shared responsibilities enable staff to collaboratively
                                                  TT3G32C (Search for ways to solve problems)              solve problems and transform cultures (Halverson & Dikkers, 2011)
                                                  TT3G32D (Mutual support to apply new ideas)
             3.4 Coaching and mentoring           TT3G33F (Work w/ others for student progress)            Reflective dialogues and coaching enhance collective responsibility for student learning (Vanblaere
                                                                                                           & Devos, 2018)
Acquiring and 4.1 Personnel practices              TT3G18G (Time for professional development)             The promotion of teacher professional development has the largest effect size on student learning
Allocating                                                                                                 (Robinson et al., 2008)
Resources     4.2 Structuring and maintaining time TT3G18B (Time for team work, diaglogues)                Structured time to discuss instructional issues is beneficial for improving teaching and learning
                                                                                                           (Mertens & Flowers, 2003)
            4.3 School resources are focused on TT3G18E (Time for school management)                       Managerial and administrative responsibilities are often distributed across staff (Diamond &
            student learning                        TT3G18F (Time for administrative work)                 Spillane, 2016)
            4.4 Integrating external expertise into TT3G22A (Attend courses/seminars)                      Effective leaders integrate external expertise into staff development (Cawelti & Protheroe, 2001)
            school instructional program            TT3G22B (Attend online courses/seminars)
                                                    TT3G22C (Attend educational conferences)
            4.5 Coordinating relations with         TT3G18H (Communication with parents)                   Parental involvement with student learning is positively associated with learning outcomes
            families and communities                                                                       (Halverson & Dikkers, 2011)
Maintaining 5.1 Clear, consistent, and enforced TT3G23F (PD, classroom management)                         Maintaining order as it has central impact on student learning (Halverson & Dikkers, 2011)
safe and    expectation for student behavior        TT3G23G (PD, management, administration)
effective                                           TT3G48G (Consistent behavior enforcement)
learning    5.2 Clean and safe learning             TT3G52G (Stress from classroom discipline)*            Few extreme discipline issues are observable in safe and orderly schools (Halverson & Dikkers,
environment environment                             TT3G52H (Stress from being intimidated)*               2011)
            5.3 Student support services provide TT3G23H (PD, Individualized learning)                     Effective leaders build systems and safety nets for disadvantaged students (VanDerHeyden, 2007)
            a safe haven for student who            TT3G23I (PD, teaching students w/ spec. needs)
            traditionally struggle                  TT3G23J (PD, teaching in multicultural setting)
            5.4 Buffering the teaching              TT3G23M (PD, parent coordination)                      Positive parent-teacher relations are posively and teacher stress and burnout are negatively
            environment                             TT3G23N (PD, communicating w/ people from              associated with student learning (Marzano et al., 2005)
                                                    different cultures, countries)
                                                    TT3G52J (Stress from parent concerns)*
Note. Items with an asterisk (*) indicate they were reverse coded.




                                                                                                      61

Table 5. CALL-TALIS Conceptual Mapping: Principal Items
   CALL                CALL Subdomain                                   TALIS Indicator                                                            Theoretical Rationale
  Domain
Focus on      1.1 Maintain a school-wide focus on TC3G26D (Shared responsibility to school issue)            Leaders in high-performing schools place an extensive effort to articulate a vision for learning
Learning      learning                            TC3G26G (Common set of belief about learning)              shared by stakeholders (Blase & Blase, 1999; Hallinger, 2011b; Murphy et al., 2007)

              1.2 Formal leaders recognized as      TC3G26A (Staff involvement in decision making)           Instructional decision making is a collaborative practice (Diamond & Spillane, 2016; Hallinger &
              instructional leaders                 TC3G26I (Encourage staff lead new initiatives)           Heck, 2011a)
              1.3 Collaborative design of an        TC3G26F (Collaborative school culture)                   Collaborative instructional planning is a key characteristic of shared focus on learning (Halverson
              integrated learning plan                                                                       & Dikkers, 2011)
              1.4 Provide services for students     TC3G39A (Support students w/ diverse SES)                Focus on learning requires providing appropriate assistance for students who struggle
              who traditionally struggle            TC3G39C (Policy against SES discrimination)              (Halverson & Dikkers, 2011)
                                                    TC3G39D (Support disadvantaged students)
Monitoring   2.1 Formative evaluation of student    TC3G24E (Feedback on student result, internal)           Effective instructional leaders use diverse data for monitoring and improving student learning
Teaching and learning                                                                                        (Murphy et al., 2007)
Learning     2.2 Summative evaluation of student TC3G24D (Student result, national test)                     Effective instructional leaders use diverse data for monitoring and improving student learning
             learning                                                                                        (Murphy et al., 2007)
             2.3 Formative evaluation of teaching TC3G24C (Assess content knowledge)                         Summative evaluation must be linked to formative supervision, embedded in teachers’
                                                  TC3G24F (Self-assessment of teaching)                      instructional routines (Zepeda, 2011)
             2.4 Summative evaluation of          TC3G24A (Classroom observation)                            Summative evaluation aims to offer feedback on teaching and is defined by learning outcomes
             teaching                             TC3G24B (Student survey about teaching)                    (Halverson & Dikkers, 2011)
Building     3.1 Collaborative school-wide focus TC3G22A (Collaborate w/ teachers, discipline)               Knowledgebase to fulfill teacher responsibilities are best achieved through reflective dialogues
Nested       on teaching and learning             TC3G22F (Collaborate w/ teachers, learning)                and shared experiences (Buysse et al., 2003)
Learning
Communities 3.2 Professional learning             TC3G22K (Work on PD plan for the school)                   Effective communities engage teachers in professional growth in key instructional areas
                                                  TC3G22E (Collaborate w/ teachers, instruction)             (Halverson & Dikkers, 2011)
             3.3 Socially distributed leadership  TC3G22D (Cooperation among teachers)                       Professional communities characterized by shared responsibilities enable staff to collaboratively
                                                                                                             solve problems and transform cultures (Halverson & Dikkers, 2011)
              3.4 Coaching and mentoring              TC3G22B (Classroom observation)                        Reflective dialogues and coaching enhance collective responsibility for student learning
                                                      TC3G22C (Feedback after observations)                  (Vanblaere & Devos, 2018)
                                                      TC3G36D (Support inexperienced teachers)
Acquiring and 4.1 Personnel practices                 TC3G20A, B (responsibility for teacher hiring/dismissal Leadership tasks to strategically improve teaching & learning can be distributed across staff in
Allocating                                            is shared)                                              the areas of personnel, budget, & curriculum content (Diamond & Spillane, 2016)
Resources     4.2 Structuring and maintaining time TC3G29N (Time for instructional leadership)                Structured time to discuss instructional issues is beneficial for improving teaching and learning
                                                      TC3G20G,I (Shared responsibility in student             (Mertens & Flowers, 2003)
                                                      assessment, learning material selection)
              4.3 School resources are focused on TC3G20E (Shared responsibility in budget allocation) Leadership tasks to strategically improve teaching & learning can be distributed across staff in
              student learning                                                                                the areas of personnel, budget, & curriculum content (Diamond & Spillane, 2016)
              4.4 Integrating external expertise into TC3G20J,K (Shared responsibility with external experts Effective leaders integrate external expertise into staff development (Cawelti & Protheroe, 2001)
              school instructional program            in course content, course offering)
              4.5 Coordinating relations with         TC3G27E (Parent invove in school activities)            Parental involvement with student learning is positively associated with learning outcomes
              families and communities                TC3G27G (School cooperate w/ community)                 (Halverson & Dikkers, 2011)
Maintaining 5.1 Clear, consistent, and enforced TC3G26H (Consistent behavior enforcement)                     Maintaining order has central impact on student learning (Halverson & Dikkers, 2011)
safe and      expectation for student behavior        TC3G20F (Student discipline policy)
effective     5.2 Clean and safe learning             TC3G29D,I,J (Shortage in instructional material,        Effective leaders build systems and safety nets for disadvantaged students (VanDerHeyden,
learning      environment                             instructional space, physical infrastructure)           2007)
environment 5.3 Student support services provide TC3G29B, K, L (Adequate number of teachers                   Leaders have a clear role to create an effective learning environment by hiring adequate number
              a safe haven for students who           competent in teaching students w/ special needs, from of highly qualified teachers for all students (Halverson & Dikkers, 2011)
              traditionally struggle                  multicultural setting, diverse SES)
              5.4 Buffering the teaching              N/A                                                     N/A
              environment
Note. Items with an asterisk (*) indicate they were reverse coded




                                                                                                       62

Figure 1. EFA and CFA Subsample



        Initial                Initial                 Initial               Initial
     Subsample1             Subsample2              Subsample3            Subsample4




                       EFA Subsample 1 (75%)                               N/A (25%)




      N/A (25%)                              EFA Subsample 2 (75%)




                             N/A (25%)                   EFA Subsample 3 (75%)




           EFA Subsample 4 (75%)                     N/A (25%)




        CFA
                          CFA Subsample 2         CFA Subsample 3       CFA Subsample 4
     Subsample
                               (25%)                   (25%)                 (25%)
      1 (25%)


Note. N/A denotes the unused proportion (25%) in creating each of the four exploratory
subsamples


                                             63

Table 6. Descriptive Statistics of Entire 2018 TALIS
                   Teacher Survey                                     Principal Survey
  Item      N      Min      Max     Mean      SD      Item      N      Min       Max     Mean     SD
   T1    148,531     1        4      2.91    0.59     P1      8,807      1        4      3.09    0.50
   T2    148,771     1        4      2.95    0.62     P2      8,808      1        4      3.35    0.44
   T3    148,050     1        4      2.98    0.67     P3      8,785      1        4      3.26    0.57
   T4    148,852     1        4      3.30    0.50     P4      8,766      0        3      2.52    0.74
   T5    145,178     1        4      1.97    0.71     P5      8,280      0        5      2.20    1.20
   T6    141,667     1        4      1.87    0.75     P6      8,141      0        5      2.23    1.31
   T7    147,024     1        4      1.74    0.66     P7      8,304      0        5      1.49    1.06
   T8    149,119     1        4      1.96    0.64     P8      8,326      0        5      1.96    1.05
   T9    148,748     1        4      2.94    0.97     P9      8,847      1        4      2.85    0.61
  T10    149,300     1        4      2.38    0.86     P10     8,846      1        4      2.79    0.64
  T11    149,689     1        4      2.99    0.63     P11     8,836      1        4      2.78    0.74
  T12    148,719     1        4      2.58    1.02     P12     8,862      1        4      2.88    0.67
  T13    149,550     1        4      2.30    1.21     P13     8,851     0.5       5      1.42    0.64
  T14    149,884     1        4      2.97    0.97     P14     8,889      1        5      2.30    0.74
  T15    149,998     1        4      2.22    0.94     P15     8,786      0        5      1.67    0.91
  T16    150,999     1        4      2.68    0.98     P16     8,815      0        5      1.96    1.02
  T17    149,788     1        4      2.24    1.00     P17     8,807      1        4      2.79    0.62
  T18    150,986     1        4      2.57    0.92     P18     8,889      1        5      2.63    0.66
  T19    148,654     1        4      3.08    0.78     P19     8,796      1        4      3.11    0.79
  T20    142,477     1        4      2.26    1.08     P20     8,799      1        4      3.06    0.73
  T21    151,001     1        4      2.34    0.90
Note: Abbreviations are used for the sake of space: Min = Minimum, Max = Maximum, SD = Standard deviation




                                                     64

Table 7. Descriptive Statistics of CFA Subsample 3
                   Teacher Survey                                     Principal Survey
  Item      N      Min      Max     Mean      SD      Item      N      Min       Max     Mean     SD
   T1     37,052     1        4      2.91    0.59     P1      8,441      1        4      3.09    0.50
   T2     37,113     1        4      2.95    0.62     P2      8,442      1        4      3.35    0.44
   T3     36,922     1        4      2.99    0.67     P3      8,419      1        4      3.27    0.56
   T4     37,159     1        4      3.30    0.50     P4      8,401      0        3      2.53    0.73
   T5     36,210     1        4      1.98    0.71     P5      7,935      0        5      2.21    1.20
   T6     35,372     1        4      1.86    0.75     P6      7,801      0        5      2.24    1.31
   T7     36,710     1        4      1.74    0.66     P7      7,957      0        5      1.50    1.06
   T8     37,242     1        4      1.97    0.63     P8      7,979      0        5      1.96    1.05
   T9     37,132     1        4      2.95    0.97     P9      8,478      1        4      2.85    0.61
  T10     37,276     1        4      2.38    0.85     P10     8,477      1        4      2.79    0.64
  T11     37,344     1        4      2.99    0.63     P11     8,467      1        4      2.78    0.74
  T12     37,128     1        4      2.59    1.02     P12     8,493      1        4      2.88    0.66
  T13     37,338     1        4      2.30    1.21     P13     8,478     0.5       5      1.42    0.64
  T14     37,417     1        4      2.96    0.97     P14     8,514      1        5      2.30    0.74
  T15     37,447     1        4      2.22    0.94     P15     8,418      0        5      1.67    0.91
  T16     37,708     1        4      2.68    0.98     P16     8,442      0        5      1.96    1.03
  T17     37,391     1        4      2.24    1.00     P17     8,443      1        4      2.79    0.62
  T18     37,711     1        4      2.56    0.92     P18     8,514      1        5      2.63    0.66
  T19     37,107     1        4      3.07    0.79     P19     8,433      1        4      3.11    0.79
  T20     35,575     1        4      2.27    1.08     P20     8,436      1        4      3.06    0.73
  T21     37,721     1        4      2.34    0.90
Note: Abbreviations are used for the sake of space: Min = Minimum, Max = Maximum, SD = Standard deviation




                                                     65

Table 8. Model Fit Indices of Pooled-Within MEFA: Subsample 1
  Number            2              df            p       RMSEA         CFI       TLI      SRMRwithin
 of Factors
      1         280878.035         189          0.00    0.119          0.466     0.406       0.121
      2         151263.422         169          0.00    0.092          0.712     0.643       0.081
      3          90911.559         150          0.00    0.076          0.827     0.758       0.056
      4          49999.108         132          0.00    0.060          0.905     0.849       0.042
      5          14909.933         115          0.00    0.035          0.972     0.949       0.017
      6                                          No Convergence
Note. 2 = Chi-square goodness of fit statistic; df = degrees of freedom; p = significance level;
RMSEA = The root mean square error of approximation; SRMR = the standardized root mean
square residual; CFI = the comparative fit index; TLI = the Tucker-Lewis index. We followed a
reporting format from Boyce and Bowers (2018a).




                                                  66

Table 9. Model Fit Indices of Pooled-Between MEFA: Subsample 1
  Number           2              df           p       RMSEA        CFI        TLI    SRMRbetween
    of
  Factors
     1             *****          779          0.00       0.161     0.257     0.218        0.146
     2             *****          739          0.00       0.154     0.356     0.285        0.121
     3             *****          700          0.00       0.137     0.518     0.435        0.099
     4             *****          662          0.00       0.130     0.585     0.486        0.081
     5             *****          625          0.00       0.124     0.646     0.535        0.069
     6         859813.284         589          0.00       0.118     0.698     0.579        0.064
     7         698590.263         554          0.00       0.110     0.754     0.636        0.051
     8         596955.518         520          0.00       0.105     0.790     0.669        0.042
     9         254567.166         487          0.00       0.101     0.816     0.690        0.035
    10         433816.602         455          0.00       0.095     0.848     0.725        0.029
Note. 2 = Chi-square goodness of fit statistic; df = degrees of freedom; p = significance level;
RMSEA = The root mean square error of approximation; SRMR = the standardized root mean
square residual; CFI = the comparative fit index; TLI = the Tucker-Lewis index. The multiple
asterisks in the chi-square column between one and five factor solutions indicate that the software
could not calculate the chi-square statistics because of the model misspecification. We followed a
reporting format from Boyce & Bowers (2018a).




                                                 67

Table 10. Model Fit Improvement through Item Pruning
         Subsample             RMSEA        CFI       TLI    SRMRwithin   SRMRbetween
 Initial model
     Subsample1                 0.009      0.917     0.858     0.017        0.040
     Subsample2                 0.023      0.444     0.048     0.018        0.044
     Subsample3                 0.010      0.889     0.810     0.018        0.053
     Subsample4                 0.009      0.905     0.838     0.018        0.052
 After Pruning
     Subsample1                 0.009      0.925     0.863     0.015        0.041
     Subsample2                 0.010      0.908     0.833     0.016        0.050
     Subsample3                 0.009      0.932     0.876     0.015        0.051
     Subsample4                 0.008      0.936     0.882     0.016        0.050
Note. We followed a reporting format from Boyce & Bowers (2018a).




                                            68

Table 11. Geomin-Rotated Factor Loadings from Multilevel Exploratory Factor Analysis (5-Within, 9-Between Model): EFA Sub-
sample 4
                                      Within School                                                                                               Between Schools
                                   Individual Teachers                                               Collective Teachers                                                                      Principals
Indicator                                    W1       W2       W3        W4       W5               BT1        BT2      BT3      BT4                Indicator                   BP1       BP2        BP3       BP4        BP5
T1: Shared belief about learning            0.872    0.006    -0.015    0.003    0.007         0.888      -0.058     0.030    0.254 P1: Shared belief about learning          0.853    -0.015     -0.005    -0.015      0.038
T2: Staff engagement                        0.763    0.019    0.012    -0.001    0.017         0.876        0.034   -0.045    0.098 P2: Staff engagement                      0.584    -0.004      0.144     0.014     -0.123
0.016T3: Collaborative school culture       0.819    -0.005   -0.015    0.014   -0.012         0.932        0.018    0.045   -0.008 P3: Collaborative school culture          0.620     0.014      0.018     0.043      0.016
T4: Teachers care student wellbeing         0.485    0.001    0.088    -0.009   -0.011         0.658        0.070   -0.082   -0.342 P5: Classroom student assessment         -0.025     0.808      0.003     0.099     -0.009
T5: Classroom student assessment            -0.005   0.765    0.012     0.003   -0.056         0.032        0.538    0.576    0.113 P6: External student assessment          -0.017     0.763     -0.014     0.029     -0.065
T6: External student assessment             -0.018   0.666    0.032    -0.006   -0.030         -0.017       0.253    0.836    0.020 P7: Feedback on teaching                  0.056     0.665      0.059    -0.004      0.034
T7: Feedback on teaching                    0.021    0.718    -0.008    0.013    0.066         0.032        0.690    0.081    0.365 P8: Feedback on teaching evaluation       0.006     0.751     -0.007    -0.019      0.032
T8: Feedback on teaching evaluation         0.016    0.702    -0.022   -0.006    0.042         0.078        0.950   -0.019    0.020 P9: Collaborate with Ts on learning      -0.016    -0.051      0.688     0.029     -0.186
T9: Collaborative discussion of learning    -0.012   0.011    0.672     0.018   -0.036         0.213      -0.275     0.025   -0.104 P10: Work on T professional growth        0.097     0.039      0.657    -0.006      0.071
T10: Collaborative professional learning    0.021    0.018    0.551     0.050    0.102         0.300      -0.120     0.152   -0.196 P11: Support cooperation among Ts        -0.003     0.018      0.738    -0.001     -0.114
T11: Collaborative teaching development     0.407    0.004    0.156    -0.028    0.012         0.709        0.062    0.061    0.026 P12: Provide feedback on teaching         0.035     0.021      0.558    -0.110      0.191
T12: Collaboration on common standard       0.013    -0.011   0.773    -0.028    0.012         0.314      -0.067     0.472    0.023 P14: Shared R for instruction             0.009     0.028      0.008     0.781      0.219
T13: Hours spent on PD                      -0.004   0.025    -0.019    0.492    0.082         -0.024       0.080    0.060    0.737 P15: Shared R for budget decision         0.034     0.061     -0.041     0.598     -0.002
T14: Hours for teamwork                     0.019    0.011    0.091     0.539   -0.039         0.036        0.411    0.183   -0.173 P16: Shared R for course offering        -0.040    -0.010      0.007     0.753      0.101
T15: Hours school management                0.008    -0.003   -0.043    0.636    0.028         -0.100       0.338    0.398   -0.166 P18: Consistent behavior enforcement      0.250     0.027     -0.026     0.714     -0.108
T16: Attend external seminar/conference     -0.046   0.071    0.058     0.097    0.328         0.017      -0.134     0.097    0.524 P19: Adequate learning environment        0.004    -0.023     -0.032    -0.026      0.762
T17: Hours cooperation with parents         -0.014 -0.020     0.024     0.621   -0.018         0.029        0.060    0.517    0.223 P20: Ts for disadvantaged Ss              0.085    -0.001     -0.119    -0.032      0.676
T18: Consistent behavior enforcement        0.179    -0.021   -0.016    0.046    0.590         0.242        0.036   -0.039    0.756
T20: Teaching disadvantaged students        -0.033   0.024    0.036    -0.017    0.681         0.061        0.173    0.000    0.413
T21: Teacher-parent cooperation             0.017    -0.006   -0.007   -0.038    0.624         0.084        0.017    0.022    0.836
                         Inter-Factor Correlation Coefficients: Individual Teachers                    Collective Teachers                                                                                          Principals
                                            W1       W2       W3       W4       W5           BT1         BT2        BT3      BT4                                            BP1       BP2        BP3       BP4        BP5
                                        W1 1.000                                         BT1 1.000                                                                      BP1 1.000
                                        W2 0.168* 1.000                                  BT2 0.262*      1.000                                                          BP2 0.101*    1.000
                                        W3 0.273* 0.265* 1.000                           BT3 0.225*      0.280      1.000                                               BP3 0.274*    0.078      1.000
                                        W4 0.076* 0.155* 0.226*        1.000             BT4 0.299*      0.476*     0.319*   1.000                                      BP4 0.108*    0.396*     0.008     1.000
                                        W5 0.236* 0.254* 0.232*        0.290*   1.000                                                                                   BP5 0.101     -0.006     -0.013    0.200*     1.000
Note. All factor loadings were standardized. Significant (> .40) and strong ( > .50) factor loadings appear in bold. All significant and strong loadings were
statistically significant at 0.05 level except two between-level items (i.e., T12, T17). 𝜒 2 =3766.960; df=602; p < 0.0001; RMSEA=0.008; CFI=0.936; TLI=0.882;
SRMRwithin=0.016; SRMRbetween=0.050. Abbreviations are used for the sake of space: T(s) = teacher(s); S(s) = student(s); R = responsibility; PD = professional
development. *p < 0.05 in interfactor correlations coefficients. We followed a reporting format from Boyce & Bowers (2018a).



                                                                                                       69

Table 12. Multilevel Confirmatory Factor Analysis Model Fit Indices
         Subsample           RMSEA         CFI       TLI      SRMRwithin   SRMRbetween
 Initial model
     CFA Subsample1           0.011       0.877     0.864       0.057        0.152
     CFA Subsample2           0.010       0.887     0.875       0.058        0.155
     CFA Subsample3           0.011       0.889     0.877       0.058        0.148
     CFA Subsample4           0.010       0.875     0.861       0.055        0.141
 Second Round
     CFA Subsample1           0.011       0.880     0.865       0.055        0.125
     CFA Subsample2           0.010       0.890     0.876       0.055        0.123
     CFA Subsample3           0.011       0.895     0.881       0.057        0.126
     CFA Subsample4           0.010       0.872     0.855       0.053        0.123
 Third Round
     CFA Subsample1           0.011       0.883     0.868       0.053        0.120
     CFA Subsample2           0.010       0.894     0.881       0.054        0.115
     CFA Subsample3           0.011       0.896     0.882       0.057        0.124
     CFA Subsample4           0.010       0.882     0.867       0.052        0.117
 Fourth Round
     CFA Subsample1           0.011       0.891     0.876       0.053        0.091
     CFA Subsample2           0.010       0.894     0.881       0.054        0.115
     CFA Subsample3           0.010       0.902     0.888       0.056        0.117
     CFA Subsample4           0.010       0.877     0.860       0.052        0.098
 Modification Indices
 (Final MCFA Models)
     CFA Subsample1           0.010       0.913     0.901       0.054        0.089
     CFA Subsample2           0.009       0.908     0.896       0.053        0.113
     CFA Subsample3           0.009       0.919     0.907       0.053        0.117
     CFA Subsample4           0.009       0.896     0.881       0.051        0.097
Note. We followed a reporting format from Boyce & Bowers (2018a).




                                                   70

Table 13. Results of Multilevel Confirmatory Factor Analysis (5-Within, 9-Between Model): CFA Sub-sample3
                                 Within School                                                                                             Between Schools
                               Individual Teachers                                      Collective Teachers                                                             Principals
Indicator                                    W1       W2      W3      W4      W5     BT1 BT2     BT3     BT4                         Indicator                BP1     BP2      BP3    BP4     BP5
T1: Shared belief about learning           0.880                                     0.985                            P1: Shared belief about learning       0.819
T2: Staff engagement                       0.804                                     0.859                            P2: Staff engagement                   0.648
T3: Collaborative school culture           0.814                                     0.884                            P3: Collaborative school culture       0.665
T4: Teachers care student wellbeing        0.584                                     0.587                    -0.502 P4: Policy disadvantaged students
T5: Classroom student assessment                     0.674                                   0.976   0.239            P5: Classroom student assessment               0.742
T6: External student assessment                      0.568                                   0.832   0.426            P6: External student assessment                0.636
T7: Feedback on teaching                             0.783                                   1.000                    P7: Feedback on teaching                       0.756
T8: Feedback on teaching evaluation                  0.766                                   0.882                    P8: Feedback on teaching evaluation            0.835
T9: Collaborative discussion of learning                     0.687                                   1.000            P9: Collaborate with Ts on learning                    0.659
T10: Collaborative professional learning                     0.625                                   0.144            P10: Work on T professional growth                     0.758
T11: Collaborative teaching development    0.489                                     0.572                            P11: Support cooperation among Ts                      0.740
T12: Collaboration on common standard                        0.786                                   0.410            P12: Provide feedback on teaching                      0.554
T13: Hours spent on PD                                               0.522                                    0.895 P13: Shared R for personnel service
T14: Hours for teamwork                                              0.638                   0.301   0.230            P14: Shared R for instruction                                  0.861
T15: Hours school management                                         0.610                   0.222                    P15: Shared R for budget decision                              0.621
T16: Attend external seminar/conference                                                                       0.511 P16: Shared R for course offering                                0.753
T17: Hours cooperation with parents                                  0.636                           -0.143   0.525 P17: Cooperation with parents
T18: Consistent behavior enforcement                                         0.827                            0.837 P18: Consistent behavior enforcement                             0.700
T19: Severity of disciplinary issues                                                                                  P19: Adequate learning environment                                     0.820
T20: Teaching disadvantaged students                                         0.534                            0.364 P20: Ts for disadvantaged Ss                                             0.681
T21: Teacher-parent cooperation                                              0.451                            0.944

Note. All factor loadings were standardized. All significant ( > .40) and strong ( > .50) factor loadings were statistically significant at p < 0.05
level. Significant and strong factor loadings appear in bold. 𝜒 2 = 3287.174; df=747; p < 0.0001; RMSEA=0.009; CFI=0.919; TLI=0.907;
SRMRwithin=0.053; SRMRbetween=0.117; Abbreviations are used for the sake of space: T(s) = teacher(s); S(s) = student(s); R = responsibility;
PD = professional development. We followed a reporting format from Boyce and Bowers (2018a).




                                                                                                        71

Figure 2. Final Factor Structure of Leadership for Learning from 2018 TALIS




Note. The asterisk (*) attached to BP2 denotes that, although BP2 shares its constituent indicators
with WT2 and BT2, each indicator’s order of loading strength differs from that of WT2 and BT2.
Indicators within WT2 and BT2 share exactly the same order of factor loading strength.



                                                 72

Table 15. Comparison of Recent Leadership Measurement Studies
                   Urick & Bowers      Goff et al. (2014)   Autho (2018b)         This Study
                       (2019)
  Analytic Data      2008 TALIS             VAL-ED               SASS             2018 TALIS



   Leadership        Instructional       Instructional      Leadership for       Leadership for
   Framework          Leadership          Leadership           learning             learning


 Whose Practice        Principal           Principal           Teacher           School climate
  to measure                                                                        Teacher
                                                                                    Principal

  Whose Data      Individual Teachers Individual Teachers Individual Teachers Individual Teachers
                  Collective Teachers      Principals     Collective Teachers Collective Teachers
                                                                                   Principals

   Congruence            Yes                  No                  No          • When measuring
                                                                                school climate: Y
                                                                              • When measuring
                                                                                teacher practice: N
Note. VAL-ED: the Vanderbilt Assessment of Leadership in Education; SASS: Schools and Staffing
Survey




                                               73

Appendix A. Mplus Code for Creating the Pooled-Within & Pooled-Between Correlation Matrices
 TITLE: MEFA
 DATA: FILE = EFA1.TXT;

 VARIABLE: NAMES = TCHWGT T1-T21 ID
                   SCHWGT P1-P20;

            MISSING = ALL (999);
            CLUSTER = ID;
            WEIGHT = TCHWGT;
            BWEIGHT = SCHWGT;

 USEVARIABLES = T1-T21 P1-P20;
 BETWEEN = P1-P20;

 ANALYSIS: TYPE = TWOLEVEL EFA 5 5 UW 7 10 UB;
 ESTIMATOR = MLR;
 H1ITERATIONS = 80000;

Appendix B. Mplus Code for Pooled-Within EFA
 TITLE: POOLED WITHIN-ONLY EFA
 DATA: FILE = WITHCOR.DAT;
        TYPE = CORRELATION;
        NOBSERVATIONS = 104820;
        VARIABLE:
        NAMES = T1-T21;

 ANALYSIS: TYPE = EFA 1 8;
           PARALLEL = 50;


Appendix C. Mplus Code for Pooled-Between EFA
 TITLE: POOLED BETWEEN-ONLY EFA
 DATA: FILE = BETCOR1.DAT;
        TYPE = CORRELATION;
        NOBSERVATIONS = 104820;
        VARIABLE:
        NAMES = T1-T21 P1-P20;

 ANALYSIS: TYPE = EFA 1 10;
           PARALLEL = 50;
           H1ITERATIONS = 200000;


Appendix D. Mplus Codes for Full Multilevel Exploratory Factor Analysis
 TITLE:   MEFA1 REMOVING P4, P13, P17, T19 (Next FIRST TRIM)
 DATA:    FILE = EFA1.TXT;
          VARIABLE: NAMES = TCHWGT T1-T21 ID SCHWGT P1-P20;
          MISSING = ALL(999);
          CLUSTER = ID;
          WEIGHT = TCHWGT;
          BWEIGHT = SCHWGT;
          USEVARIABLES = T1-T18 T20 T21 P1-P3 P5-P12 P14-P16 P18-P20;
          BETWEEN = P1-P3 P5-P12 P14-P16 P18-P20;

 ANALYSIS: TYPE = TWOLEVEL EFA 5 5 UW 9 9 UB;
           ESTIMATOR = MLR;
           H1ITERATIONS = 80000;




                                                 74

Appendix E. Mplus Code for Final Multilevel Confirmatory Factor Analysis, CFA Subsample 3
 TITLE: MODINDICES MCFA3 fixing Between T7 Residual Variance at zero within T6 WITH T5

  DATA: FILE = CFA3.TXT;
        VARIABLE: NAMES = TCHWGT T1-T21 ID SCHWGT P1-P20;
        MISSING = ALL(999);
        WEIGHT = TCHWGT;
        BWEIGHT = SCHWGT;
        CLUSTER = ID;
        USEVARIABLES = T1-T18 T20 T21 P1-P3 P5-P12 P14-P16 P18-P20;
        BETWEEN = P1-P3 P5-P12 P14-P16 P18-P20;

  ANALYSIS: TYPE = TWOLEVEL;
            H1ITERATIONS = 10000;
            ALGO = EM;
  MODEL:
         %WITHIN%
         W1 BY T1* T2 T3 T4 T11;
         W2 BY T5* T6 T7 T8;
         W3 BY T9* T10 T12;
         W4 BY T13* T14 T15 T17;
         W5 BY T18* T20 T21;
         W1@1; W2@1; W3@1; W4@1; W5@1; T6 WITH T5;

           %BETWEEN%
           BT1 BY T1* T2 T3 T4 T11;
           BT2 BY T5* T6 T7 T8 T14 T15;
           BT3 BY T4* T13 T16 T17 T18 T20 T21;
           BT4 BY T5* T6 T9 T10 T12 T14 T17;
           T7@0;

           BP1 BY P1* P2 P3;
           BP2 BY P5* P6 P7 P8;
           BP3 BY P9* P10 P11 P12;
           BP4 BY P14* P15 P16 P18;
           BP5 BY P19* P20;

           BT1@1; BT2@1; BT3@1; BT4@1;
           BP1@1; BP2@1; BP3@1; BP4@1; BP5@1;

  OUTPUT: SAMPSTAT STAND MODINDICES;




                                                75