Theory & Practice in Rural Education (TPRE)                               Copyright 2024 ISSN:2641-7170
2024, Vol. 14, No. 1, Pp. 156-182                        https://doi.org/10.3776/tpre.2024.v14n1p156-182




Forming networks between rural schools and their
local areas: Shared projects and their impact in the
Asturian context
M. Esther del-Moral-Pérez, University of Oviedo
Nerea López-Bouzas, University of Oviedo
Jonathan Castañeda-Fernández, University of Oviedo
María del Rosario Neira-Piñeiro, University of Oviedo


   Rural schools play an essential role in their local areas, helping stimulate the
   community and promoting activities with economic, social, and cultural impact on
   the area. This study aimed to identify the projects undertaken by 44 rural schools in
   Asturias (Spain) in collaboration with local agents and organizations by consulting
   the school management teams. It also sought their opinions about the impact of
   these projects. The study used a mixed methodology: quantitative, analyzing the
   data collected from a semi-open questionnaire, qualitative, and listing and
   describing the projects. The questionnaire included questions about the
   organizations the schools collaborated with, the goals and subjects of the shared
   projects, and funding sources, and asked for opinions about their impact. The results
   indicate that rural schools in Asturias have undertaken projects covering various
   subjects in collaboration with local authorities, cultural centers, libraries, public
   health centers, small businesses, and non-governmental organizations (NGOs).
   The respondents were very satisfied with the activities. They viewed their schools
   as a stimulus for their areas, stating that the projects encouraged a sense of
   belonging to the area and helped construct a collective identity. They also felt that
   they responded to shared needs, offered services to the community, allowed people
   to settle or remain in the area, and, to a lesser extent, helped local businesses and
   the local economy. Finally, the study concludes that these schools play an active
   role in their local areas and highlight the importance of external support in
   implementing initiatives that benefit the rural population.
     Keywords: rural school, collaborative project, local development,
     leadership


      In recent years, there has been a variety of research about rural schools, as
evidenced by various bibliographic reviews. Fargas-Malet and Bagley (2022) identified
five main lines of research about rural schools in the European setting: the study of



                                                                                                    156

del-Moral-Pérez et al.     Forming networks between rural schools and their local areas


context, analyzing the concept "rural" and educational policies; the relationship between
school and community, including school closures, the role of the school in the community,
and the degree of family involvement; the learning environment, assessing educational
practices, the impact of Information and Communication Technologies (ICT) on rural
schools, and multi-grade classrooms; leadership, looking at school management teams,
inter-school collaboration, and teacher training, among other topics; and finally, aspects
related to equity in education and academic achievement.
        Some studies have examined rural schools' limitations, problems, challenges, and
advantages based on their characteristics (Santamaría & Sampedro, 2020). It is worth
highlighting that some geographically isolated schools find it difficult to access certain
services and report being ignored by the authorities, a lack of human and material
resources, a digital divide, and a lack of stable teaching teams (Álvarez-Álvarez et al.,
2020; Azano et al., 2020; Echazarra & Radinger, 2019; Kormos & Wisdom, 2021;
Santamaría & Sampedro, 2020). In addition, rural schools' organization as classes with
students from multiple grades (e.g., multi-grade classrooms) means that teachers need
specific training to apply the most suitable teaching methodologies (Naparan & Alinsug,
2021), training that is often not provided when earning teaching degrees (Villa & Knutas,
2020). Rural schools are also affected by the increasing rural depopulation (Moreno-
Pinillos, 2022).
       Despite the difficulties these schools face, some of their characteristics, such as
small class sizes and multi-grade classrooms, do offer learning opportunities as they
allow tailored attention (Santamaría & Sampedro, 2020), encourage responsibility,
cooperation, and support between peers (Villa & Knutas, 2020), and promote the
development of innovative projects that stimulate creativity and critical thinking
(Echazarra, & Radinger, 2019). Other strengths of rural schools include closer
relationships between teachers, students, and their families, lower levels of conflict, and
families' engagement with school (activitiesÁlvarez-Álvarez et al., 2020; Azano et al.,
2020; Echazarra & Radinger, 2019). These make the school an ideal setting for
implementing innovative methodologies, such as service-learning, where educational
practice is linked to community needs and problems (Ingman et al., 2022).
       The role of rural schools goes beyond just their teaching work; they are, in addition
to educational institutions, agents of local development. Various studies have highlighted
the impact of rural schools in maintaining population levels (Cedering & Wihlborg, 2020;
Moreno-Pinillos, 2022; Santamaría & Sampedro, 2020). In contrast, school closures have
negative repercussions on the area, accelerating the rate at which people leave, impairing
community development and vitality, as well as weakening the area's economic and social
growth (Haynes, 2022; Lehtonen, 2022; Sørensen et al., 2021).
       Rural schools certainly play an active role in their local areas, participating in or
leading projects that positively impact them (Zuckerman, 2020). They contribute to local


                                                         Theory & Practice in Rural Education, (14 )1 | 157

del-Moral-Pérez et al.      Forming networks between rural schools and their local areas


development through the various projects they drive and the initiatives they participate in
alongside different agents and organizations. Many of these projects are planned to offer
services that provide meeting points for the population, reinforce links to the area, share
information about local heritage, or stimulate local life (Villa & Knutas, 2020). Doubtlessly,
these schools have an essential function in their rural context: to promote the population's
sense of belonging to the area (Villa & Knutas, 2020). It is crucial to analyze their projects
with various local agents and organizations so as to determine their role in stimulating the
area.
       The present study examined the relationships between rural schools and their local
areas. This field has recently attracted research interest in the European setting (Fargas-
Malet & Bagley, 2022). The Spanish context frames the analysis, precisely that of
Asturias, one of the Spanish regions with the most significant proportion of schoolchildren
at rural schools (Ministerio de Educación y Formación Profesional, 2019), making it
particularly interesting to study the impact of rural schools on their local areas.
                                 Theoretical Framework
Recipes for Cohesion between the School and the Region: Collaborative Projects
       Some studies have focused on analyzing rural schools' role in their local areas,
looking at the relationships with families and other agents in the local community
(Santamaría & Sampedro, 2020). The close bonds between rural schools and their local
areas are one of their strengths (Fargas-Malet & Bagley, 2022) as it helps to ensure that
their work stimulates the region, acting as educational, social, and cultural focal points for
the community. Undoubtedly, rural schools contribute to social cohesion and benefit the
community in many ways (Sørensen et al., 2021), positively impacting the area
economically and socially (Haynes, 2022).
        In this regard, some authors use the terms "community school" or "extended
school" to label schools that offer services and activities to the community beyond the
work of their teaching (Supule, 2019). The phrase "community active schools" has also
been used for schools that play an active role in their community. It often happens in rural
schools in various European countries, including Finland, Sweden, and Austria (Fargas-
Malet & Bagley, 2022). Schools' active role is recognized and appreciated by members
of the educational community (i.e., teachers, students, families), the local population, and
local authorities, meaning they have particular importance within the community (Moreno-
Pinillos, 2022). In addition, rural schools help glue communities together, stimulate social
life, and perform other functions.
        The links between schools and their regions can be established in various ways.
Miller (1995, cited in Supule, 2019) indicated that rural schools can get involved in the
community in three ways. On the one hand, rural schools can be thought of as serving
the local population by offering cultural, training, and social resources. Many schools


                                                          Theory & Practice in Rural Education, (14 )1 | 158

del-Moral-Pérez et al.      Forming networks between rural schools and their local areas


become intergenerational meeting points that provide essential services for the local
people, such as summer learning activities, courses and workshops for families and
adults in general, and spaces for outside activities (Álvarez-Álvarez & Vejo-Sainz, 2017;
Supule, 2019; Villa & Knutas, 2020). There are also examples of activities designed to
reinforce school–community relations by promoting joint discussion and reflection that
initiatives align with the interests shared by the school and its local area (Moliner et al.,
2017).
        On the other hand, a connection with the area can be established through teaching
practices involving the students in activities and projects related to their surroundings and
by linking those activities to elements of their own culture, the natural environment,
traditional crafts, or local business activities. These teaching practices motivate students
and their families (Moreno-Pinillos, 2022); they give a practical element to curricular
learning and encourage knowledge and appreciation of local heritage (Villa & Knutas,
2020). In addition, some schools invite their students to participate in service-learning
projects, resulting in reported improvements to the schools and their regions; they
encourage intergenerational cooperation, develop professional skills, and enable
collaborative working (Ingman et al., 2022).
       Finally, an additional possibility is involving students in rural enterprise projects.
Although these types of experience are less widespread (Supule, 2019), they greatly
interest students' professional training. Business-based projects, combined with Science,
Technology, Engineering, Arts, and Mathematics (STEAM) methodology, encourage the
development of creativity, science and technology competencies and student motivation,
and they help cultivate enterprising attitudes in rural students, as indicated in some
experiences (Amri et al., 2021). These projects may be planned in cooperation with
families and function as initiatives that provide occupational and economic benefits to the
rural population. The project "Hilvanando culturas" [Binding cultures together] run in
schools in Aragón (Spain) is based on creating a dressmaking workshop that promotes
businesses and women's employment in the rural environment (Neila & Llorente, 2019).
        External support and collaboration are essential for projects that consolidate the
ties between schools and the community. Many schools maintain cooperative
relationships with various agents or organizations and count on the unconditional support
of the population or collaboration with NGOs, associations, or local institutions for multiple
projects that ultimately benefit the community, for example, in rural Norwegian schools
(Villa & Knutas, 2020). In Spain, rural schools often undertake collaborative projects with
various entities, such as local authorities, cultural centers (e.g., museums, libraries, and
foundations), associations, public health centers, NGOs, or other schools, which
promotes community connectedness (Álvarez-Álvarez & Vejo-Sainz, 2017).
Consequently, it is essential for the participants to start with everyday needs and interests




                                                          Theory & Practice in Rural Education, (14 )1 | 159

del-Moral-Pérez et al.      Forming networks between rural schools and their local areas


and to plan and consider them together (Moliner et al., 2017). In this way, rural schools
become essential drivers for the community and vice versa (Villa & Knutas, 2020).
         This means there is a need to look more thoroughly at the projects these schools
undertake and understand the topics they prioritize, the organizations they bring together,
and their impact on their area. In addition, because external support is fundamental, it is
also essential to look at funding sources and the collaboration of external agents and
organizations, their functions, and the support they provide. The present study analyzes
the role rural schools play in their local areas. Consequently, it helps to raise their profile
and acknowledge their contribution as components of social cohesion and stimulus to
both rural life and the rural economy. In this context, the role of school management teams
is critical for establishing and maintaining contact with the various local agents (Nordholm
et al., 2022) to undertake joint projects. They know their schools' projects and are a
privileged source of information for identifying and highlighting their involvement in the
community. For this reason, the present study sought their perspectives as have other
similar studies about rural schools (Álvarez-Álvarez et al., 2020; Nordholm et al., 2022).
                                         Objectives
         This study aims to: 1) identify the projects undertaken by rural schools in Asturias
in collaboration with local organizations or social agents and to determine the roles they
played; 2) describe the defining characteristics of the projects (i. e., objectives, subjects,
priorities, etc.); and 3) determine their impact on the local area. This was achieved by
consulting the schools' management teams responsible for the projects and their
management.
                                           Method
       This study resulted from a research project funded by the Spanish Ministry of
Education (PID2020-115880RB-100). It is a descriptive, exploratory, and analytical study,
according to Cohen et al. (2011). The study used a mixed methodology: a) quantitative,
based on the analysis of data collected via a questionnaire surveying the opinions of
Asturian rural school management teams to identify the projects they have undertaken
with various agents in their local areas; and b) qualitative, in that the projects are
described and analyzed, along with their impact on the local area.
Sampling context
The Principality of Asturias (Spain) has 57 rural schools. Over three-quarters (44) of the
schools participated— by reporting their management teams' opinions—a sample
representing 77.19% of the population. The distribution of the schools by region is shown
in Figure 1.




                                                           Theory & Practice in Rural Education, (14 )1 | 160

del-Moral-Pérez et al.      Forming networks between rural schools and their local areas


Figure 1
Geographical distribution of rural schools of Principality of Asturias (Spain) in the study




      The survey reflected the opinions of the management teams in the various rural
schools; 25 (56.8%) were men, and 19 (43.2%) were women. Two (4.5%) were between
25 and 29 years old; 3 (6.8%) were aged 35–39; 8 (18.2%) were aged 40–44; 14 (31.8%)
were aged 45–49; 7 (15.9%) were aged 50–54; 6 (13.6%) were aged 55–59; and 4 (9.1%)
were aged 60–64. Almost half of the respondents, 21 (47.7%), worked in Colegios
Rurales Agrupados (CRA) [Grouped Rural Schools]; 10 (22.7%) worked in Colegios
Públicos de Educación Infantil y Primaria (CEIP) [Public Infant and Primary Schools]; 9
(20.5%) worked in Colegios Públicos de Educación Básica (CPEB) [Public Basic
Education Schools]; 3 (6.8%) worked in Escuelas Unitarias [Unitary Schools]; and 1
(2.3%) worked in an Escuela Hogar [Home School]. Most of these schools (36; 81.1%)
had multi-grade classes whereas 8 (18.2%) had full ordinary classes.
Based on the data, the respondents who began their teaching careers in rural schools
have decided to continue teaching in them (Table 1).
Table 1
Percentage distribution of the respondents based on their teaching experience

                                               Total amount of years of teaching

                                      <5         6-10        11-15            16-20            > 20

Years of teaching         <5         100.0       0.0          42.9              7.1             4.8
only in rural school
                         6-10         0.0       100.0         14.3              7.1             9.5

                         11-15        0.0        0.0          42.9             71.4            23.8

                         16-20        0.0        0.0           0.0             14.3            28.6

                         > 20         0.0        0.0           0.0              0.0            33.3




                                                         Theory & Practice in Rural Education, (14 )1 | 161

del-Moral-Pérez et al.     Forming networks between rural schools and their local areas


        The respondents indicated that, in addition to their managerial functions, 14
(11.8%) were homeroom tutors, 10 (8.4%) were specialist teachers, and 9 (7.6%) were
floating teachers who were teaching in more than one school. In terms of teaching, half
28 (50%) taught primary education, 20 (35.7%) taught infant education, and 8 (14.3%)
taught secondary education. They were asked about how satisfied they were with their
work in the rural context, and 38 (86.4%) reported being very satisfied, 5 (11.4%) reported
being satisfied, and 1 (2.3%) reported not being very satisfied.
Instrument
        The questionnaire (see Appendix A) used for the survey was designed for the
study—with high reliability (α=0.800). It has a semi-open structure to gather quantitative
and qualitative data to enhance the study. The instrument collected the responses from
the management teams in the rural schools in Asturias. They were asked about local
institutions, cultural organizations, businesses, NGOs, universities, and other schools
with whom they had shared projects or participated and what roles they felt were played
in those projects. They were asked to detail the collaborative projects' objectives and
topics and identify funding organizations that provided them with the resources they
needed for those projects.
        In addition, they were asked about their opinions of the impact of the projects: a)
on the school, indicating how satisfied they were with the shared experience; and b) on
development in the local area, indicating how—in their opinion—the projects contributed
to driving local business and economic activity, the services offered to the community,
attracting people to the area or helping people stay in the area, meeting shared needs
between the school and the local area, promoting local heritage (tangible or otherwise),
and promoting a sense of belonging to the rural context.
Procedure
   The study phases were as follows:
   •   Phase I: Design and validation of the questionnaire. A pilot study with a small
       sample representative of the target population confirmed that the questionnaire
       met the criteria for reliability and validity.
   •   Phase II: Data collection. The Principality of Asturias Department of Education
       helped send an email asking the heads of each rural school to participate in the
       study by responding to the questionnaire online.
   •   Phase III: Statistical treatment of the collected data. Using SPSS v26, a descriptive
       analysis (frequencies and percentages) of the study's target variables was
       performed.




                                                         Theory & Practice in Rural Education, (14 )1 | 162

del-Moral-Pérez et al.     Forming networks between rural schools and their local areas


                                         Results
       The section below summarizes the information collected from the rural Asturian
schools' management teams about the projects they had undertaken in collaboration with
various local institutions or organizations and their thoughts about the impact of those
projects on the local area.
       The web of relationships between the schools and the various local organizations
encouraged numerous projects (Figure 2). 86.4% of the respondents indicated doing
projects with local authorities, and 63.6% undertook educational activities with local
cultural organizations (i. e., libraries, ethnographic museums, folk music or artistic
associations, etc.). 56.8% reported establishing bridges for collaboration with small farms,
local businesses, and COGERSA (an Asturian waste management consortium). 45.5%
had various projects with the University of Oviedo, often associated with students from
infant and primary education degrees doing practical work. In addition, 40.9% reported
collaboration with local NGOs, and lastly, 31.8% collaborated in activities with other
schools.
Figure 2
Networks of institutions and organizations collaborating with rural schools




       Figure 3 shows that 34.7% of the projects that rural Asturian schools participated
in sought to open themselves up to the local area for mutual enrichment, offering local
people workshops, conferences, and courses. Just over a fifth (21.5%) promoted service
learning by involving the schools in social action (such as accompanying older people or


                                                         Theory & Practice in Rural Education, (14 )1 | 163

del-Moral-Pérez et al.      Forming networks between rural schools and their local areas


cleaning up natural spaces). Just under a fifth (19.0%) sought to preserve tangible or
intangible rural heritage through conserving typical rural constructions (hórreos, paneras,
and cabazos) or preserving popular folk songs. The same proportion (19.0%) was aimed
at consolidating the local population. A smaller proportion (5.8%) promoted business and
economic activity by promoting tourism, emphasizing local attractions (archeological
sites, prehistoric Castro settlements, cave paintings, and local beauty spots), or
promoting the production of local or artisan products (such as cheeses, wines, local
cakes, and pastries).
Figure 3
Shared school projects, grouped by objective




        According to the school management teams, 38.6% of their schools drove the
projects they participated in with local organizations and social agents, leading the various
activities and phases. 34.1% were active project participants, whereas 22.7% were
beneficiaries. More specifically, Figure 4 shows their predominant roles, considering the
various projects they were involved in.
Figure 4
Roles played by the schools in the projects they took part in




       Most respondents noted driving or participating in projects prioritizing various
topics (Table 2), some of which were associated with Sustainable Development Goals


                                                         Theory & Practice in Rural Education, (14 )1 | 164

del-Moral-Pérez et al.        Forming networks between rural schools and their local areas


(SDG) such as caring for the environment, healthy habits, sport, harmonious living, co-
education, and interculturality. Others had cultural components, such as reassessing the
local area. There were also strictly pedagogical projects related to methodological
strategies that affect school education regarding curriculum and values.
Table 2
Percentage distribution of schools by topics prioritized in the projects

                          Themes                                    Fre(%)

    a) Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs)

    Sustainability and environment                                 38(86.4)

    Healthy habits                                                 37(84.1)

    Coexistence, co-education, interculturality,                   36(81.8)
    etc.

    Sport Promotion                                                26(59.1)

    Culture (heritage, museums, ethnography,                       18(40.9)
    etc.)

    b) Educational Projects

    Encouragement to read                                          33(75.0)

    ITC (audiovisual, robotics, STEAM, etc.)                       33(75.0)

    Emotional education                                            32(72.7)

    Implementation of innovative methodologies                     25(56.8)

    Scientific learning                                            20(45.5)


        The vast majority of schools (86.4%) were involved—with others—in projects
closely related to sustainability and care of the environment. It is worth highlighting their
links to programs such as School Allotments and Schools for Recycling, in collaboration
with COGERSA. Schools also participated in environmental projects such as the Three
R's (reduce, reuse, recycle) to promote the circular economy. Some schools collaborated
with the Lids for New Life (Tapones para una nueva vida) initiative from Fundación Seu.
Others were part of the Repsol Zinkers project, aimed at raising student awareness of the
need to promote ecological transition and a sustainable economy through recycling.
       Most schools (84.1%) participated in projects encouraging healthy habits in
collaboration with the Principality of Asturias Health Department. Dental health was a
particular interest, especially in critical stages of child development; many schools were



                                                         Theory & Practice in Rural Education, (14 )1 | 165

del-Moral-Pérez et al.      Forming networks between rural schools and their local areas


part of a project called A la Conquista de la Boca Sana [The Struggle for a Healthy Mouth]
in which pediatricians and dentists took part in activities, workshops, and talks aimed at
students and their families. Some schools also collaborated closely with local health
centers, inviting health specialists to give workshops about first-aid, hygiene, sex
education, and relationships. Others did specific activities related to nutrition and healthy
eating habits in collaboration with local shops (i. e., greengrocers, butchers, fishmongers,
etc.).
         Sport was also a priority for 58.1% of the schools. Concern about playing sports
was evidenced through participation in activities promoted by the regional Department for
Education, Culture, and Sport, such as inter-school tournaments and competitions. These
initiatives also promoted awareness and preservation of sports-related Asturian cultural
heritage associated with traditional rural sports and games, with activities run with the
assistance of social centers. Schools did other activities with local authorities, such as
Yoga for Children, to teach them techniques for relaxation, concentration, balance, and
awareness of their bodies. Some schools participated in the Biciescuela [Bike-School]
program, which promoted cycling as sustainable transport and involved the local police
talking about road safety. Most schools also organized fun runs, collaborating with local
charities or support groups.
        Over three-quarters (81.8%) of the management teams reported that their schools
participated in projects that promoted harmony, co-education, and interculturality in
collaboration with inter-municipal social services centers to develop equality programs.
Participation in the Asturian government's Project LOITA (Ley de Ordenación Integral del
Territorio de Asturias) [Law of comprehensive planning for the territory of Asturias] was
significant, aimed at enhancing synergies between rural and urban areas and mutual
enrichment. Specifically, it raised awareness of the role of rural schools and the benefits
of their teaching model (small class sizes, multi-grade classrooms, personalization,
innovation, cooperation, family involvement, contact with nature, etc.) while bringing
cultural opportunities enjoyed in larger cities.
       Some schools were involved in the Rompiendo distancias [Breaking Distances]
program to encourage intergenerational communication. Similarly, other schools
encouraged activities with older people through projects such as Güelifriends
[Grandfriends] for sharing experiences through enjoyable activities. Other projects were
aimed at equality and diversity, involving families in the educational process. In addition,
supportive activities were done in collaboration with charities such as Save the Children
with others helping people experiencing homelessness (Asociación Albéniz) or helping
children with cancer (Asociación Galbán).
        There was a particular emphasis on co-educational projects with schools
participating in activities together with nationally recognized organizations such as the
Centro Mujer y Ciencia [Center for Women and Science] (Centro Superior de


                                                         Theory & Practice in Rural Education, (14 )1 | 166

del-Moral-Pérez et al.     Forming networks between rural schools and their local areas


Investigaciones Científicas, CSIC) and internationally recognized bodies such as WISE
Diversity (Centro Nacional de Investigaciones Oncológicas, CNIO) [National Center of
Oncological Research] to promote female talent in science. This was complemented by
events such as Women's Week and projects highlighting women's careers in science. In
addition, spaces for debate were created where women from various professions spoke,
underscoring their contribution to society. Similarly, intercultural projects were organized
to understand other countries and their peculiarities, promoting acceptance and help for
migrant families or families from different cultures.
       Around two-fifths (40.9%) of the schools ran cultural projects with local or regional
organizations to raise awareness of the ethnographic heritage in towns and villages (i. e.,
museums, visitor centers, etc.). The Rutas para Compartir [Routes for Sharing] projects
brought together rural schools from various regions to highlight their cultural richness
through exchanging traditions, language traditions, folklore, food, etc. Other projects
promoted local tourism by producing informative walking routes. Some schools opted for
service learning and did social activities that combined tradition and business (such as
making and selling typical local desserts, artisan wood products, etc.). Artistic projects,
such as ConectArt and El Museín, brought various schools together. Others held
competitions for drawings, making the local area and the school into artistic objects and
collaborating with local artists to decorate the local surroundings (such as building
facades and garage doors) (Figure 5).
Figure 5
The Trampantojos art project in the village of Vega (Asturias)




Note. Ribadesella Town Hall.
       Projects of a more pedagogical nature should not be ignored. Three-quarters
(75.0%) of the schools did activities related to encouraging reading in collaboration with
municipal libraries (such as reading activities and storytelling). These included the
Travelling School Library, promoting the exchange of books between various rural
schools, and participation in national and regional competitions. 72.7% of the schools
incorporated activities about emotional education via workshops or stories. A similar
proportion (75.0%) were part of projects to develop digital competencies in the
audiovisual sphere, robotics, STEAM, and computational thinking.




                                                         Theory & Practice in Rural Education, (14 )1 | 167

del-Moral-Pérez et al.      Forming networks between rural schools and their local areas


       A little over half (56.8%) of the rural schools were concerned about offering quality
education, employing innovative methodologies in collaboration with the University of
Oviedo, such as the Caravana de los Sentidos [Caravan of the Senses] project (Figure
6). This involved the creation of an interactive multisensorial stimulation classroom,
encouraging learning by discovery and developing motor, social, and intellectual skills,
particularly in children with special educational needs.
Figure 6
The Caravan of the Senses project




Note. Padre Ossó Faculty (University of Oviedo).
       Other schools participated in the eTwinning project, which promoted collaborative
work between European schools around a set topic to stimulate soft skills. Students
sometimes participated in business projects linked to local development to benefit the
local population (such as sociocultural activities, care, physiotherapy, digitalization in the
third age, etc.), which even won national prizes. Other activities included the creation of
Learning Academies, Young People with Ideas, and the Time Bank. Some schools
collaborated with the sociocultural business Arkuos, which offered alternative learning
spaces (Figure 7), encouraging participation and inclusion for the whole community.
Figure 7
Arkuos: Space for Socioeducational Activity.




Note. Arkuos Center (https://arkuos.org/)
        Just under half (45.5%) of the schools did activities linked to scientific learning,
participating in regional events as part of Science Week with other schools or the
university. More specifically, some participated in the initiative from the Ministry of
Science and Innovation and the business LabsLand, with the R3 Project: Rural, Remote,
and Real—promoting natural science and technology practice in rural schools and
training centers through remote experiments or simulations where the students interact


                                                          Theory & Practice in Rural Education, (14 )1 | 168

del-Moral-Pérez et al.      Forming networks between rural schools and their local areas


through a web interface, with their hands on the mouse and their eyes at the webcams
(https://proyecto-r3.ingenieria.deusto.es/).
        Lastly, other schools participated in PROA+ projects [Program for Guidance,
Advancement, and Educational Enrichment] from the Ministry of Education to give
guidance to educationally vulnerable students and reduce school dropout. Some schools
collaborated with the Municipal Department for Childhood and Adolescence, a
consultative body that organizes children's participation, giving them a space where they
can express their ideas and make decisions in the local environment about issues that
affect them directly or indirectly.
        All the schools received funding for their projects from the Asturian Department of
Education. Almost a third (31.8%) reported that their local town councils contributed to
sustaining some of their initiatives and projects. A quarter (25%) of schools indicated that
they received funding from the national Spanish Ministry of Education. 16.0% reported
getting financing from their own schools or parent-teacher associations. A smaller
proportion (6.8%) of the schools received help from private businesses for particular
activities or to acquire resources.
       Regarding the projects' impact and contribution to local development, the
management teams' satisfaction with their collaborations with various local institutions
and organizations depended on the subjects the projects addressed. Those related to
harmony, co-education, interculturality, etc., and those aimed at education about
sustainability and the environment produced the highest levels of satisfaction (Figure 8),
followed by those about emotional education and healthy habits.
Figure 8
Percentage distribution of management teams according to satisfaction with projects




       Most (86.4%) of the schools stated that they undertook projects that promoted a
sense of belonging to the local area (Figure 9). Just over three-quarters (77.3%) said that
their activities made a notable contribution to the creation of a collective identity. A similar


                                                           Theory & Practice in Rural Education, (14 )1 | 169

del-Moral-Pérez et al.     Forming networks between rural schools and their local areas


amount (75.0%) reported promoting initiatives that met the school and the local area's
needs. Just under three-quarters (72.7%) said promoting local heritage (tangible or
intangible) whereas around half (54.5%) announced initiatives that helped attract people
to or keep people in the local area. Finally, around a third (34.1%) reported that their
activity encouraged local business and economic activity.
Figure 9
Percentage distribution of opinions about the impact of projects on the local area




        In response to the question about the schools' roles in local development, 68.2%
identified them as active collaborators. However, 15.9% assessed it as relatively
unimportant with only 9.1% indicating leadership and drive as the role played. The most
critical respondents thought the schools' role was unrelated to the local area's needs
(2.3%). On the other hand, when asked about schools' roles in promoting and creating
collaborative networks with local institutions and organizations, 80.0% considered it to be
important or very important (Figure 10).
Figure 10
Percentage distribution of the role of the schools in creating and promoting collaborative
networks in their local areas, according to their management teams




                                                        Theory & Practice in Rural Education, (14 )1 | 170

del-Moral-Pérez et al.     Forming networks between rural schools and their local areas


                                       Discussion
       The schools' management teams felt rural schools in Asturias to be a source of
stimulus for the local area as most demonstrated having undertaken cultural activities
together with local institutions as well as participated in projects with local cultural and
social centers, libraries, ethnographic museums, and more, which involved various
sectors of the population. Along similar lines, López-Álvarez et al. (2011) emphasized the
central role of ethnographic museums together with schools for consolidating Asturian
cultural values, solidifying bonds with the community, collecting and interpreting people's
voices or testimony, and also offering guided or educational visits and workshops to
enhance students' understanding of it so that visitors may be enriched by their heritage,
value it, and look after it so that it lasts.
       The schools also built bridges with local farms and shops, charities, recycling
plants, and others, seeking an exchange of experiences and helping their students be
aware of what these local businesses do so as to recognize their roles in rural
development. It is worth highlighting the collaborative initiatives to transform the
classroom into flexible learning spaces to develop 21st-century competencies. These
local bodies are considered innovative learning environments and are a shared
ecosystem where the student and their local community converge, as Carvalho et al.
(2020) noted.
       More generally, there is an essential collaborative network with diverse agents and
organizations from schools' surrounding areas as the basis for various projects. In this
regard, our results are consistent with the results from Álvarez-Álvarez and Vejo-Sainz
(2017), who highlighted innovative projects in rural schools in Spain that were supported
by the cooperation of public and private bodies.
       Similar to the conclusion from Meyers et al. (2015), the links between rural schools
and the university allowed the exchange of experiences and collaboration in joint projects,
which provided mutual enrichment. More specifically—and despite the distances, in some
cases from around 100 km away—around half of Asturian schools exhibited a smooth-
flowing relationship with the University of Oviedo in Spain. These schools collaborated
with practical components of the Infant and Primary Teaching degree to help facilitate
degree completion of future teachers. They also shared projects that affected aspects of
environmental education (Pérez-Solís & Torralba, 2021) and developed narrative
competencies with digital applications (Del Moral et al., 2022), and so forth. However,
other schools felt excluded from innovative projects to strengthen relationships between
teaching teams and university research groups. This finding indicates a need to enhance
the capacity of rural schools as a unique learning space, as noted by Monge et al. (2022),
because teachers' initial training does not ensure the specific competencies for working
in these schools at an organizational or functional level, something also recognized by
Downes and Roberts (2017) about Australian schools.


                                                         Theory & Practice in Rural Education, (14 )1 | 171

del-Moral-Pérez et al.      Forming networks between rural schools and their local areas


       Most of the respondents underscored the role of the school as a driver and
collaborator in the projects they participated in. The school focuses on cultural stimulation
for the area, which is realized through the educational projects they lead. It emphasizes
being open to the local area by driving social actions and contributing to preserving local
heritage. In addition, schools indirectly encourage the rural population to stay in the area
as the schools there ensure that families will be in the villages (Lehtonen, 2021). Logically,
schools are not in the business of promoting local tourism or local business, but their
collaboration with local organizations may help reactivate life in the villages, and help
generate work and wealth.
        Looking at the subjects prioritized in the projects the schools participate in, many
are in line with what has been laid down by supranational organizations such as the
United Nations, as they are linked with sustainable development goals (e.g., education,
sustainability, healthy habits, etc.), that help build bridges with their local areas. This
finding coincides with the study by Dieste et al. (2019), who showed the treatment of
SDG-related topics in rural schools in Zaragoza (Spain), with particular attention to
cultural diversity, gender equality, responsible consumer habits, and solidarity. Schools
also undertook purely pedagogical projects that had an impact on children's education in
these areas through methodological innovations such as using ICT, STEAM, and
scientific learning in an attempt to bridge the digital divide by offering rural students the
same opportunities as students in urban environments as other countries also do (Kormos
& Wisdom, 2021).
        In parallel, initiatives also prompted participatory culture through fun, non-formal
education spaces open to the community. Schools also drove the creation of networks in
the local area through collaborative activities with geriatric care centers, people
experiencing homelessness, or other schools through intercultural, co-educational
projects promoting respect and attention to diversity. In addition, some activities raised
awareness of the cultural wealth and traditions in the schools' local areas (e.g., linguistic
variety, folklore, food, etc.). A few projects promoted rural tourism: educational walking
routes, decorating the local environment with local artists, social action combining
tradition and business, etc. Occasionally, students even participated in business projects
linked to local development to benefit the local population, such as closing the digital
divide in the third age, facilitating physiotherapy, and engaging in sociocultural activities.
                                        Conclusion
       More generally, rural schools in Asturias demonstrated examples of the three
forms of involvement in the community proposed by Miller (1995, cited in Supule, 2019)
as they offered services for the local population, such as courses and workshops,
undertook various types of activities and projects linked to the local area, and, to a lesser
extent, promoted initiatives for business that supported local industry and the local
economy.


                                                          Theory & Practice in Rural Education, (14 )1 | 172

del-Moral-Pérez et al.      Forming networks between rural schools and their local areas


        It is also important to highlight rural schools' great interest in recognizing the role
of teachers as stimulators for the area and spreaders of culture by collaborating with
nearby institutions and organizations and raising awareness of their social and teaching
work. The respondents had very positive opinions of the shared projects, noting their
significant impact on the school and the local area. There is no doubt that rural schools
create collaborative networks that increase the feeling of belonging to the local area while
encouraging people to settle or stay there. However, there is a need for logistical and
economic support from local institutions and organizations to strengthen a school's role
as a stimulator, to be informed of possible sources of funding and potential national and
international projects, and to support the teams managing them and the teachers.
        This study offers a broad view of rural schools in Asturias, which may be compared
with the other Spanish regions—and other countries—to identify common problems and
effective responses to those problems, establishing and consolidating collaborative
networks that would amplify the synergies with local areas.



                                  Acknowledgments
This work was supported by the Ministry of Science and Innovation of Spain [reference:
PID2020-115880RB-100]. It belongs to the Research Project “La escuela rural: un
servicio básico para la justicia social y la equidad territorial en la España con baja
densidad de población” [Rural School: a basic service for social justice and territorial
equity in Spanish areas with low population density].



                                        References
Álvarez-Álvarez, C., García-Prieto, F. J., & Pozuelos, F. J. (2020). Posibilidades,
       limitaciones y demandas de los centros educativos del medio rural en el norte y
       sur de España contemplados desde la dirección escolar [Possibilities, limitations
       and demands of educational centers in rural areas in the north and south of
       Spain from the point of view of the school management]. Perfiles Educativos,
       42(168), 94–106. https://doi.org/10.22201/iisue.24486167e.2020.168.59153
Álvarez-Álvarez, C., & Vejo-Sainz, R. (2017). ¿Cómo se sitúan las escuelas Españolas
       del medio rural ante la innovación? Un estudio exploratorio mediante entrevistas.
       [How do Spanish schools of rural contexts face innovation? An exploratory study
       through interviews]. Aula Abierta, 45(1), 25–32.
       https://doi.org/10.17811/rifie.45.1.2017.25-32
Amri, H., Adlim, M., & Nurdin, S. (2021). STEM learning of "value-added on banana
       chips" to enhance students' motivation and entrepreneurship attitude in a rural




                                                           Theory & Practice in Rural Education, (14 )1 | 173

del-Moral-Pérez et al.    Forming networks between rural schools and their local areas


       school. Journal of Physics: Conference Series, 1882, 1–7.
       https://doi.org/10.1088/1742-6596/1882/1/012163
Carvalho, L., Nicholson, T., Yeoman, P., & Thibaut, P. (2020). Space matters: Framing
       the New Zealand learning landscape. Learning Environments Research, 23(3),
       307–329. https://doi.org/10.1007/s10984-020-09311-4
Cedering, M., & Wihlborg, E. (2020). Village schools as a hub in the community. A time-
       geographical analysis of the closing of two rural schools in southern Sweden.
       Journal of Rural Studies, 80, 606–617.
       https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jrurstud.2020.09.007
Cohen, L., Manion, L., & Morrison, K. (2011). Research methods in education.
       Routledge.
Del Moral, M. E., Neira-Piñeiro, M. R., López-Bouzas, N., & Castañeda, J. (2022).
       Producción de narraciones orales con una app en Educación Infantil: Análisis del
       engagement y la competencia narrativa [Production of oral narratives with an app
       in Early Childhood Education: Analysis of engagement and narrative
       competence]. Digital Education Review, 41, 65–81.
       https://doi.org/10.1344/der.2022.41.65-81
Dieste, B., Coma, T., & Blasco-Serrano, A. C. (2019). Inclusión de los objetivos de
       desarrollo sostenible en el currículum de Educación primaria y secundaria en
       escuelas rurales de Zaragoza [Inclusion of the sustainable development goals in
       the Curriculum of Primary and Secondary Education in rural schools of
       Zaragoza]. Revista Internacional de Educación para la Justicia Social, 8(1), 97–
       115. https://doi.org/10.15366/riejs2019.8.1.006
Downes, N., & Roberts, P. (2017). Revisiting the schoolhouse: A literature review on
       staffing rural, remote and isolated schools in Australia 2004–2016. Australian and
       International Journal of Rural Education, 28(1), 31–54.
       https://doi.org/10.47381/aijre.v28i1.112
Echazarra, A., & Radinger, T. (2019, March). Learning in rural schools: Insights from
       PISA, TALIS and the literature. (OECD Education Working Paper No. 196).
       http://dx.doi.org/10.1787/8b1a5cb9-en
Fargas-Malet, M., & Bagley, C. (2022). Is small beautiful? A scoping review of 21st-
       century research on small rural schools in Europe. European Educational
       Research Journal, 21(5), 822–844. https://doi.org/10.1177/14749041211022202
Kormos, E., & Wisdom, K. (2021). Rural schools and the digital divide: Technology in
       the learning experience and challenges to integration. Theory & Practice in Rural
       Education, 11(1), 25–39. https://doi.org/10.3776/tpre.2021.v11n1p25-39
Haynes, M. (2022). The impacts of school closure on rural communities in Canada: A
       review. The Rural Educator, 43(2), 60–74.
       https://files.eric.ed.gov/fulltext/EJ1362170.pdf




                                                       Theory & Practice in Rural Education, (14 )1 | 174

del-Moral-Pérez et al.     Forming networks between rural schools and their local areas


Ingman, B.C., Lohmiller, K., Cutforth, N., & Belansky, E. S. (2022). The potential of
        service learning in rural schools: The case of the working together project. The
        Rural Educator, 43(2), 1–15. https://eric.ed.gov/?id=EJ1362125
Lehtonen, O. (2021). Primary school closures and population development–Is school
        vitality an investment in the attractiveness of the (rural) communities or not?.
        Journal of Rural Studies, 82, 138–147.
        https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jrurstud.2021.01.011
López-Álvarez, J. L., Molleda, M. E., & Eguren, M. G. (2011). La complicidad del museo
        y el territorio: La red de museos etnográficos de asturias [The complicity between
        museum and territory: The ethnographic museums network of asturias]. Heritage
        & Museography, 7, 31–37.
        https://raco.cat/index.php/Hermus/article/view/313602.
Meyers, A. B., Tobin, R. M., Huber, B. J., Conway, D. E., & Shelvin, K. H. (2015).
        Interdisciplinary collaboration supporting social-emotional learning in rural school
        systems. Journal of Educational and Psychological Consultation, 25(2-3), 109–
        128. https://doi.org/10.1080/10474412.2014.929956
Ministerio de Educación y Formación Profesional. (2019). Las cifras de la educación en
        España. Estadísticas e indicadores. Estadística 2019 [Education figures in Spain.
        Statistics and indicators. Statistics 2019]. Secretaría General Técnica.
        https://cutt.ly/iwBNrvt4
Moliner, O., Sales, A., & Sanahuja, A. (2017). Social mapping in the context of a
        community-build day: Strategy to strengthen links with community in a small rural
        school. Procedia-Social and Behavioral Sciences, 237(21), 305–310.
        https://doi.org/10.1016/j.sbspro.2017.02.083
Monge, C., García, F., & Gómez, P. (2022). La escuela rural en la formación inicial del
        profesorado de Educación Infantil y Primaria: Un campo por explorar. [The rural
        school in the initial training of early childhood and primary school teachers: A
        field to explore]. Profesorado, Revista de Currículum y Formación del
        Profesorado, 26(2), 141–159. https://doi.org/10.30827/profesorado.v26i2.21481
Moreno-Pinillos, C. (2022). School in and linked to rural territory: Teaching practices in
        connection with the context from an ethnographic study. Australian and
        International Journal of Rural Education, 32(2), 19–35.
        https://doi.org/10.47381/aijre.v32i2.328
Naparan, G. B., & Alinsug, V.G. (2021). Classroom strategies of multi-grade teachers.
        Social Sciences Humanities Open, 3(1), 100–109.
        https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ssaho.2021.100109
Neila. I. & Llorente, R. M. (2019). Hilvanando culturas, confeccionando el futuro:
        Emprendimiento femenino textil en innovación social en la escuela [Binding
        cultures together making the future: Female textile entrepreneurship in social




                                                         Theory & Practice in Rural Education, (14 )1 | 175

del-Moral-Pérez et al.      Forming networks between rural schools and their local areas


        innovation at school]. Fórum Aragón, 28, 57–59. https://feae.eu/revista-digital-
        de-educacion-del-feae-aragon-numero-28-diciembre-2019/
Nordholm, D., Nihlfors, E., & Arnqvist. A. (2022). Perceptions on the local school and
        further education: A rural school leader's perspective. Scandinavian Journal of
        Educational Research, 66(1), 150–162.
        https://doi.org/10.1080/00313831.2020.1865447
Pérez-Solís, S., & Torralba, A. (2021). Empleando elementos naturales para la
        vinculación ambiental en educación infantil en una escuela rural multigrado
        [Using natural elements for environmental connection in early childhood
        education in a rural multigrade school]. Revista de Educación Ambiental y
        Sostenibilidad, 3(2), 2302.
        https://doi.org/10.25267/Rev_educ_ambient_sostenibilidad.2021.v3.i2.2302
Santamaría, N. & Sampedro, R. (2020). La escuela rural: Una revisión de la literatura
        científica [The rural school: A review of the scientific literature]. Ager. Revista de
        Estudios sobre Despoblación y Desarrollo Rural, 30, 153–176.
        https://doi.org/10.4422/ager.2020.12
Sørensen, J. F. L., Svendsen, G. L. H. Jensen, P. S., & Schmidt, T. D. (2021). Do rural
        school closures lead to local population decline? Journal of Rural Studies, 87,
        226–235. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jrurstud.2021.09.016
Supule, I. (2019). Community School Model: Is it an alternative for school closures in
        rural territories? Eastern European Countryside, 25(1), 171–193.
        http://dx.doi.org/10.12775/EEC.2019.007
Villa, M., & Knutas, A. (2020). Rural communities and schools. Valuing and reproducing
        local culture. Journal of Rural Studies, 80, 626–633.
        https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jrurstud.2020.09.004
Zuckerman, S. J. (2020). The role of rural school leaders in a school-community
        partnership. Theory & Practice in Rural Education, 10(1) 73–91.
        https://doi.org/10.3776/tpre.2020.v10n1p73-91



                                    About the Authors
Dr. María Esther del-Moral-Pérez is a University Professor at the Faculty of Education
(Department of Education) of the University of Oviedo (Spain). She teaches ICT applied
to education. She has four six-year research periods. She coordinates the TECN@
Research Group: Technology and Learning. Principal investigator of competitive projects
and author of impact articles in prestigious journals. Her research areas are media, digital
literacy, television and childhood, video games, social networks, augmented reality, digital
applications, gamification, education in rural areas, etc. She carried out research stays in
Calgary (Canada), Poitiers (France), Freiburg (Germany), and ITD Genoa (Italy). She



                                                           Theory & Practice in Rural Education, (14 )1 | 176

del-Moral-Pérez et al.      Forming networks between rural schools and their local areas


taught courses in        Latin   American   universities     (Chile,      Mexico,         and      Peru).
emoral@uniovi.es
Nerea López-Bouzas is a PhD student in Education and Psychology with a University
Teacher Training Scholarship (FPU) at the Faculty of Education of the University of
Oviedo (Spain). She has a Teacher of Early Childhood Education and a Master's in
Research and Innovation in Early Childhood and Primary Education. She collaborates
with the Department of Education and is a member of the TECN@: Technology and
Learning research group at the University of Oviedo. Her lines of research focus on the
integration of technological resources in the teaching-learning process, inclusive
education, digital applications, augmented reality, gamification, analysis of audiovisual
narratives, and more. lopeznerea@uniovi.es
Dr. Jonathan Castañeda-Fernández is a lecturer at the Faculty of Education
(Department of Education) of the University of Oviedo (Spain), where he is attached to
the area of Research and Diagnosis Methods in Education (MIDE). He has a Degree in
Pedagogy (obtaining the National Prize for the Completion of University Studies) and a
Doctorate with international mention from the University of Oviedo, achieved thanks to a
University Teacher Training scholarship (FPU) and predoctoral research stay at the
Universidade Lusiada de Lisboa. At the teaching level, he has taught subjects primarily
linked to educational research and evaluation. At the research level, he has participated
in various projects (such as evaluation of training activities, learning approaches,
ecosystems to build global citizenship, etc.) and is currently part of the "TECN@:
Technology      and     Learning"     research     group     of   Oviedo      University.
castanedajonathan@uniovi.es
Dr. María del Rosario Neira-Piñeiro is a university lecturer at the Faculty of Education
(Department of Education) of the University of Oviedo (Spain). She teaches courses in
the Area of Didactics of Language and Literature and is a member of the TECN@
Research Group: Technology and Learning. She has participated in research projects on
educational technology and language teaching. Her research areas are children's
literature in education, cinema and audiovisual media, ICT in education, and ICT in literary
education. neiramaria@uniovi.es




                                                           Theory & Practice in Rural Education, (14 )1 | 177

del-Moral-Pérez et al.                 Forming networks between rural schools and their local areas


                                                 Appendix A
                    Rural schools and their relationships with the context

Research Project I+D+I: The rural school: a basic service for social justice and territorial equity in
Spanish areas with low population density. Supported by the Spanish Ministry of Science and
Innovation (PID2020-115880RB-I00)



                                               1. PERSONAL INFORMATION


                           Variables                                           Categories


 1.1 Gender                                               - Woman
                                                          - Man
                                                          - Other

 1.2 Age                                                  - up to 24 years old
                                                          - 25 - 29 years old
                                                          - 30 -34 years old
                                                          - 35 - 39 years old
                                                          - 40 - 44 years old
                                                          - 45 - 49 years old
                                                          - 50 - 54 years old
                                                          - 55 - 59 years old
                                                          - 60 - 64 years old
                                                          - More than 64 years old

                                                          - Up to 5 years
 1.3. Teaching experience (years)                         - Between 6 and 10 years
                                                          - Between 11 and 15 years
                                                          - More than 5 years

 1.4. Contractual situation                               - Permanent teacher
                                                          - Temporary teacher

 1.5. Years of teaching in rural schools                  - Up to 5 years
                                                          - Between 6 and 10 years
                                                          - Between 11 and 15 years
                                                          - More than 15 years

 1.6. Current role as teacher                             - Home room tutor
                                                          - Member of the management team
                                                          - Floating teachers (teaching in more than           one
                                                          school)
                                                          - Specialist teacher
                                                          - Docente Compartido

 1.7. Educational stages                                  - Infant Education
                                                          - Primary Education
                                                          - Secondary Education




                                                                     Theory & Practice in Rural Education, (14 )1 | 178

del-Moral-Pérez et al.              Forming networks between rural schools and their local areas


1.8. Type of school where you teach                          - Unitary School
                                                             - CEIP (Infant and Primary Education School)
                                                             - CRA (Grouped Rural School)
                                                             - CPEB (Public Basic Education School)
                                                             - EEI (Infant Education School)
                                                             - Home School
                                                             - Other

1.9. Area of Asturias where your school is located           (Avilés, Caudal, Eo-Navia, Gijón, Nalón, Narcea,
                                                             Oriente, Oviedo)


1.10. Type of class organization at your school              - Multi-grade class
                                                             - Ordinary class

1.11. Please indicate your satisfaction level from working   - Not satisfied
in a rural environment                                       - Little satisfied
                                                             - Satisfied
                                                             - Very satisfied

             2. COLLABORATIVE PROJECTS BEWTEEN THE SCHOOL AND THE TERRITORY

                        Variables                                                   Categories

2.1. Does your school develop or has recently developed      - No
shared projects shared with local organizations or social    - Yes, with business (local shops, livestock, waste
agents?                                                      management consortium, etc.)
                                                             - Yes, with NGO
                                                             - Yes with local institutions (council, police, medical
                                                             center…)
                                                             - Yes, with cultural organizations (libraries,
                                                             ethnographic museums, folk-music or artistic
                                                             associations, etc.).
                                                             - Yes, with other schools
                                                             - Yes, with the University
                                                             - Other (please, specify)
                                                             - DK/ DA

2.2. From whom you receive economical support?               - Ministry of Education
                                                             - Department of Education
                                                             - Council
                                                             - School
                                                             - Private entity or local business
                                                             - We don’t receive economical support
                                                             - Other (please, specify)
                                                             - DK/DA

2.3. Please, indicate the objectives of your projects        - To open the schools to the rural environment for
                                                             mutual enrichment (workshops, talks, etc.).
                                                             -To promote entrepreneurship and economical
                                                             activities (tourist promotion and local products).
                                                             - To promote Service-Learning (school serving the
                                                             community with social actions)
                                                             -To contribute to the preservation of the rural heritage
                                                             (tangible and intangible )
                                                             - To avoid depopulation
                                                             - Other (please, specify)
                                                             - DK/DA




                                                                          Theory & Practice in Rural Education, (14 )1 | 179

del-Moral-Pérez et al.             Forming networks between rural schools and their local areas


2.4. Topics addressed in the projects                          - Reading promotion
                                                               - Culture (heritage, museums, ethnography...)
                                                               - Sustainability and environment
                                                               - Coexistence, coeducation, interculturality, etc.
                                                               - Emotional education
                                                               - Sport promotion
                                                               - Healthy habits
                                                               - Scientific learning
                                                               - Implementation of innovative methodologies
                                                               - ICT (audiovisuals, robotics, STEAM, etc.)
                                                               - Other (please, specify)
                                                               - DK/DA

2.5. Please mention the current main projects of your          (open answer)
school (name of the project, educational stage,
organizations that participate, etc.)

2.6. Please indicate the role played by your school in the     - Recipient.
projects                                                       - Active collaborator. The school participates actively
                                                               - Promoter. The school leads all the actions and
                                                               stages
                                                               - DK/DA

2.7. Regarding the projects shared with the entities and/or    - Department of Education
social agents, please indicate the type of communication       - Council
                                                               - Other local institutions (police, medical center…)
                                                               - Cultural associations (libraries, museums, folk-
                                                               music associations, etc.).
                                                               - Schools
                                                               - University
                                                               - Private organization or business.
                                                               - NGO
                                                               - Other (please, specify)

                                                               (Type of communication: none, occasional, frequent,
                                                               we do not collaborate)

2.8. Please indicate your general level of satisfaction with   - Sport activities
the projects developed.                                        - Reading promotion
                                                               - Scientific learning
                                                               - Coexistence, coeducation, interculturality, etc.
                                                               - Culture (heritage, museums, ethnography...)
                                                               - Emotional education
                                                               - Sustainability and environment
                                                               Implementation of innovative methodologies
                                                               - Healthy habits
                                                               - ICT (audiovisuals, robotics, STEAM, etc.)
                                                               - Other (please, specify)


                                                               (Level of satisfaction: not satisfied, little satisfied,
                                                               satisfied, very satisfied, without projects about this
                                                               topic)

2.9. Please indicate the level of impact of the projects,      - Creating a collective identity (community)
regarding these aspects related to local development           - Promoting entrepreneurship and economical
                                                               activities
                                                               - Providing services for the community
                                                               - Contributing to attract and keep people in the local
                                                               area




                                                                           Theory & Practice in Rural Education, (14 )1 | 180

del-Moral-Pérez et al.            Forming networks between rural schools and their local areas


                                                             - Responding to shared needs school-territory
                                                             - Promoting the local heritage (tangible and
                                                             intangible)
                                                             - Developing the sense of belonging to the territory

                                                             (Level of impact: None, Low, Medium, High)

2.10. From your point of view, please indicate the role of   - Not at all relevant
the school in creating and promoting collaborative           - Little relevant
networks in the local areas.                                 - Relevant
                                                             - Very relevant
                                                             - DK/DA




                                                                         Theory & Practice in Rural Education, (14 )1 | 181