https://ressat.org

                                                                                       E-ISSN: 2468-6891
                      Research in Social Sciences and Technology
                                                                                       Volume: 7 Issue: 1 2022

                                                                                       pp. 20-41




     Exploring Perceived Human Resources Factors Influencing the
Performance of Grade 12 Accounting Learners in North West Secondary
                        Schools in South Africa
                           Lilian Ifunanya Nwosu*a & Martha Matashub


* Corresponding author                        ABSTRACT
Email: 23012064@nwu.ac.za                     This study explored the perceived human resources factors
a. Faculty of Economics and                   influencing the performance of accounting learners in North
Management Sciences, North West               West secondary schools in South Africa. Despite the significant
University, Mafikeng, South Africa            role that secondary school accounting education is perceived to
b. School of Commerce and Social              play in shaping the development of accounting professionals, few
Studies in Education, North West              studies have focused on investigating the effect of human
University, Mafikeng, South Africa            resources on accounting learners’ performance in secondary
                                              school. The study sought to understand the human resource
                                              factors influencing the performance of accounting learners in
Article Info
                                              North West secondary schools in South Africa. The study’s
Received: December 29, 2021
                                              findings may assist the school management to improve human
Revised: January 21, 2022
                                              resource utilisation towards the achievement of a better
Accepted: February 20, 2022
                                              accounting learners’ performance. To address the gap in the
                                              literature, a mixed method sequential explanatory study was
     10.46303/ressat.2022.3                   conducted in North West districts with 183 School Management
                                              Teams and 61 educators. The sequential explanatory study aimed
How to cite
                                              to explore the perceived human resources factors influencing the
Nwosu, L. I., & Matashu, M. (2022).
                                              performance of Grade 12 Accounting learners in secondary
Exploring Perceived Human Resources
                                              schools in the North West Province, South Africa. The findings
Factors Influencing the Performance of
                                              from the quantitative phase showed that human resource factors
Grade 12 Accounting Learners in North
                                              such as pedagogical subject content knowledge and skills held by
West Secondary Schools in South Africa.
                                              the educator are perceived to influence learner performance. In
Research in Social Sciences and
                                              the second phase, the qualitative approach validated and
Technology, 7(1), 20-41.
                                              explained the various human resource factors that influence
https://doi.org/10.46303/ressat.2022.3
                                              accounting learners’ performance in North West secondary
                                              schools in South Africa. School management should ensure that
Copyright license
                                              they employ adequate accounting learners to teach accounting
This is an Open Access article distributed
                                              in schools. This is so because accounting requires a pedagogical
under the terms of the Creative
                                              content knowledge and skills in teaching and learning. In
Commons Attribution 4.0 International
                                              conclusion, it is recommended that schools interested in
license.
https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0
                                              improving learner performance should identify and address
                                              context-specific perceived human resources factors that
                                              influence learner performance within their schools.
                                              KEYWORDS
                                              Accounting; learners’ performance; human resource; secondary
                                              schools; South Africa.

21


                              ORIENTATION AND RESEARCH PURPOSE
This study aimed to explore perceived human resource factors influencing the performance of
Grade 12 Accounting learners in North West secondary schools in South Africa. The importance
of the accounting subject in secondary schools is underscored by the fact that throughout the
world every sector in the economy depends on accounting knowledge, information, and
measurement of financial performance. Studies provided evidence of the significant role of
accounting in different sectors. For example, Vazakidis et al. (2010); Kouriati et al. (2021) as well
as Argilés and Slof (2001) discussed the importance of Accounting in the farming sector; while
Wakuła (2020) and Pallot (1992) discussed its importance in the public sector. Moreover, Allan
et al. (2011) focused on renewal energy; and Putra (2019), and Nyathi et al. (2018) studied small-
medium entrepreneurship. Accounting is one of the subjects in the national curriculum in South
Africa and is recognised as significant for measuring, processing, and disseminating financial
information about economic sectors in the country (Department of Basic Education, 2012).
Despite its critical national economic and social important outcomes associated with the subject
in all sectors of the economy, a decline in the number of students enrolled for accounting and
poor Grade 12 Accounting learners’ performance in South African schools remains a challenge.
Omebe (2014) suggested effective human resource management by educational management
teams in schools building human capacities that foster improved learner performance. School
Management Teams (SMTs), which consist of principals, deputy principals, and Head of
Departments (HoDs), together with the educators, are responsible for the implementation of
educational curriculum within schools. There is consensus amongst scholars that the
organisational performance of any institution is dependent on human resources (Anwar &
Abdullah, 2021; Lloréns et al., 2021). Human resources encompass the skills and abilities of
people within an organisation that are regarded as a critical asset for the successful attainment
of any organisational goals. Competencies and performance of the educator have been
identified in empirical studies as some of the major determinants of learner performance
(Magulod 2021; Ranjbar & Soodmand, 2021; Turetsky et al. 2021). Regarding the achievement
of educational outcomes, Romlah and Latie (2021) explained that the quality of learner
educational attainment is dependent on the educator as a human resource.
         Mupfudze and Mapolisa (2021) recognised the importance of exploring factors
influencing learner academic performance in exit examination levels, thereby emphasising the
importance of such an understanding to evaluate and measure the attainment of educational
goals within an economy. Evidence from the Department of Education National Examination
Report (2020) indicates that the number of accounting learners enrolled nationally decreased
from 140 474 in 2015 to 128 853 in 2016, and plummeted further to 92 767 in 2020. It is evident
that there was a 28% decline in enrolment for accounting between the years 2016 and 2020.
The overall performance trends from 2016 to 2020 revealed that students that achieve 40% and
above ranged between 42% to 52%, suggesting that the majority of accounting learners only
achieved between 30% and less than 40% (Department of Education National Examination

                                                                           RESSAT 2022, 7(1): 20-41

                                                                                             22


Report, 2020). Various provincial departments of education have noted the decline in learner
enrolment and underperformance in accounting as a challenge. For instance, in 2018 35 139
learners in the Gauteng province were enrolled in accounting; however, in 2019 this number
dropped to 14 768 (Department of Basic Education, 2020). Similarly, the Limpopo Department
of Education Subject Improvement Plan Report (2018) indicated that from 2014 to 2018, the
number of schools offering the accounting subject declined from 1097 to 882, and learners
enrolled for the subject also decreased from 17 320 to 14 188 (News SA, 2019). Worth noting,
the Department of Education had and continues to put in place several intervention measures
aimed at improving the performance of accounting learners. The Department of Education
National Examination Report (2020) highlighted the reduction of time management pressure by
splitting the Grade 12 Accounting assessment into two papers (combined with a total of four
hours to complete a 300 marks examination in contrast to the previous three hours). The
Department of Education National Examination Report (2020) explains that the splitting of the
examination into two papers allowed the distribution of content during the assessment.
Moreover, individuals such as educators, subject advisors, and other professional bodies also
contributed through intervention strategies. Despite interventions from various stakeholders,
the performance of accounting learners remains unsatisfactory, suggesting that additional
strategies for improving learner performance should be explored.
        The challenge that arises is the decreased number of previously disadvantaged learners
enrolling for accounting at the secondary school level where there are growing concerns about
a shortage of chartered accountants in South Africa, which is adversely affecting industries
(Mkhize, 2017; Terre Blanche, 2019). If the observed challenges are left unresolved, the
accounting subject is likely to become extinct, thereby depriving South African learners of an
opportunity to pursue a career in accounting or finance related discipline. The following
problem question can be posed in terms of the continued observed decline in the enrolment
and learner performance; are perceived human resource factors influencing the performance
of Grade 12 Accounting learners?
        This suggests that differences in learners’ performance may be explained by the
differences in the skills, knowledge, expertise, and competences of the teacher with which
implementation of the curriculum is done in the classroom. As a profound point of departure
from previous research, this study focuses on exploring perceived human resource factors
influencing the performance of Grade 12 Accounting learner’s in North West secondary schools
in South Africa.
        This study is guided by three objectives:
        To explore the principals’ and deputy principals’ perceived human resource factors
         influencing the performance of accounting learners.
        To investigate the head of departments’ perceived human resource factors
         influencing the performance of accounting learners.



                                                                      RESSAT 2022, 7(1): 20-41

23


        To establish the educators’ perceived human resource factors influencing the
         performance of accounting learners.
Theoretical framework
In this study, the performance theory was adopted to explore the influence of human resource
on learner performance. The performance theory recognises individual performance as the
main predictor of the attainment of desired organisational goals. Sonnentag and Frese (2001)
point out that organisations require high performing individuals to meet their goals and to
deliver the products and services they specialise in despite any stress. Schools are organisations
that focus on implementing the teaching and learning of a curriculum to achieve the desired
national educational outcomes as reflected by learner attainment. Interpreted within the
context of the performance theory, educators are human resources that are responsible for the
implementation of the national curriculum to achieve the desired educational goals. The
performance theory distinguishes performance into behavioural and outcome aspects of
performance (Sonnentag & Frese, 2001). The performance theory implies that it establishes an
understanding of the human resource factor’s role influencing learner performance in schools,
and the effect of the behavioural and outcome aspects of the performance of the teacher.
        Sonnentag and Frese (2001) explain that behavioural aspects relate to the actions
performed by an individual in the workplace to cope with stress and achieve set organisational
goals. Behavioural aspects in the context of the educator encompasses the tasks that an
educator does in the school, such as facilitating teaching and learning, lesson planning,
assessment of learners, management of the classroom, and portraying leadership in
instructional activities. Behavioural aspects are different from performance aspects which
Campbell et al. (1993) describe as the tasks that one is employed to perform with an
organisation. Interpreted from the human resource perspective, employees within the
organisation should be in possession of skills and competences that enable them to perform
their tasks. Gathumbi (2013) maintains that the performance enables the educator to undertake
a complex series of actions that integrate skills and knowledge to produce a valuable result.
Outcomes are the consequences of the individual behaviour, whilst outcome in the
performance aspects are dependent on other factors besides the individual behaviour.
Gathumbi (2013) adds that for effective implementation of performance theory, educators can
employ various teaching and learning strategies. The performance theory explained human
resource factors that influence performance in an organisation. The following section presents
a literature review that primarily focuses on exploring these elements.
                                      LITERATURE REVIEW
Advances have been in the literature that human resource is a predictor of performance in any
organisation and schools as institutions. There is evidence that human resource capacities
possessed by the educator determine long-term learner academic achievement (Liu & Loeb,
2021; Romlah & Latief, 2021). The literature highlights several practical implications of


                                                                         RESSAT 2022, 7(1): 20-41

                                                                                               24


behaviour performance aspects of the teacher, that have an impact on learner performance
across subjects, for example, teacher pedagogical knowledge and competences and
administrative skills (Hashmi, 2014; Kleickmann et al., 2011). Hashmi (2014) further explained
that some schools are struggling to recruit the human resource that has adequate teachers’
competences and capability, arguing that this poses a threat towards the attainment of learners’
performance. Eaglesham (2020) and Hashmi (2014) raised the importance for schools to ensure
efficient teacher recruitment and the need for capability such as knowing the content to teach,
an understanding of the teaching materials that will aid in teaching, and creative and critical
thinking. Kleickmann et al. (2011) underscore that teachers need to have content knowledge
and pedagogical content knowledge as it is a key competence that affects learners’ progress.
Seezink and Poel (2011) affirm that teacher’s professional development should be centred on
developing their skills and competences. This is because a lack of competency might result in
poor teaching and learning of accounting as a subject. Sonnentag and Frese (2001) identified
job performance as influenced by several personal attributes of the employee such as the
person’s abilities, personality, education, training, experience, and self-management. This
implies that SMTs and educators should consider these human resources variables when
considering learner performance.
        The Curriculum and Assessment Policy Statement (CAPS) (Department of Basic
Education, 2012) describes accounting as a subject that requires learners to be able to record,
analyse. and interpret financial and other relevant data to make informed decisions, present
and/or communicate financial information effectively. These afore-mentioned learning
outcomes highlight the behavioural and outcome performance that educators should be able
to achieve in their assigned task of teaching and learning in accounting. Terre-Blanche (2019)
found that the teaching and learning of accounting in secondary schools is a major factor
influencing the shortage of talent in the accountancy profession. This finding is consistent with
Baard et al. (2010) who identified the overall academic performance (in Grade 12 results) as a
strong predictor of success in first-year accounting at university. The failure to achieve the
desired attainment in secondary school accounting education raises a major concern because it
reduces and deprives the learners’ prospects of pursuing chartered accountancy or a finance-
related professional. Fry et al. (2009) observed that most accounting learners were discouraged
from pursuing Accounting at university if they struggled with grasping the subject in secondary
school. Van Romburgh (2014) suggested that accounting school teachers might be ill-equipped
with the relevant teaching and learning methods that may enhance learners’ performance.
        Ngwenya (2014) recommended that educators should develop the ability to construct
assessments that enable learners to be creative and also attain the aims outlined in the CAPS.
Grieser et al. (2018) confirm that another competency of the teacher is to have a pedagogical
understanding of the content of the subject taught. Understanding this from the performance
theory perspective entails that an educator should have certain behavioural and operational
performance competences. Stringham (2015) affirms that an educator should be able to

                                                                        RESSAT 2022, 7(1): 20-41

25


communicate accurate content, concepts, and explanation of a given curriculum in an
assessment. Such competences that an educator should possess may include the ability to use
different teaching, learning, and assessment strategies to achieve the desired learner academic
attainment. Research by Molise (2017) laments that there are deficiencies relating to teachers'
content knowledge and competence of accounting teachers in both rural and urban schools.
This may be a result of inadequate human resources employed to teach Accounting. Generally,
accounting as a subject is considered very difficult. This makes for fewer people pursuing
accounting as a profession, particularly in the teaching of accounting. As such, there tends to be
difficulty in recruiting the appropriate human resource for teaching accounting in secondary
schools. Additionally, human resource management (HRM) is seen to incorporate specific
practices and processes, formal policies, and overarching human resource philosophies where
an organisation’s employees are secured, developed, retained, and rewarded (Cloete, 2016).
Omebe (2014) adds that HRM should be considered in schools to ensure that the appropriate
educators are appointed in the teaching and learning of a given curriculum. This suggests that
SMTs are expected to ensure that the appropriate educator is recruited to teach accounting to
ensure improved performance of learners in accounting. This is as a result of those who venture
into the field of accounting who may only do so for the financial gains; hence, only a few
personnel are available to teach accounting as a subject.

                                            METHOD
Research Design
This study followed the explanatory mixed-method sequential design. This design is carried out
in two phases. This involves the collection and analysis of quantitative data, followed by the
collection and analysis of qualitative data (West, 2012). Given the scarcity of empirical evidence
on human resource factors affecting accounting learners’ performance in secondary schools,
this study will benefit from an explanatory sequential approach. According to Boru (2018),
explanatory sequential design is useful for gathering a more detailed understanding where little
information in the quantitative phase exists. This implies that the use of explanatory sequential
design enabled quantitative data to be used to identify constructs or variables that can further
be validated, explained, interpreted, or contextualised in detail with the qualitative findings.
Sample
A sample total of 183 SMTs and 61 educators in Ngaka Modiri Molema District (NMMDM) in the
North West Province were randomly selected from 61 accounting secondary schools in North
West province. The participants are combination of 97 males and 86 females. The accounting
educators utilised are educators with three to five years of experience in teaching accounting
subject in secondary schools. A structured questionnaire and interview were used to collect
data. The emerging constructs/factors in the questionnaire were statistically analysed,
presented, and further validated with the themes found in the qualitative analysis through the


                                                                         RESSAT 2022, 7(1): 20-41

                                                                                                 26


aid of ATLAS.ti. The Appendix shows the reliability and validity test of the factors from data
collected from SMTs and educators.
Research Instrument
Several measures were taken to ensure the rigour, validity, and reliability of the findings from
this study. Cronbach’s Alpha was used to test the reliability of each factor in the questionnaires
to measure the internal consistency among the items/variables associated with a factor. The
Appendix shows that the Cronbach’s Alpha for the items under each of the factor in the study is
at least 0.6 indicating that variables were valid. According to Babbie (2010), a validity test
measures the extent to which the study reflects the real meaning of the concept under
consideration. A Confirmatory Factor Analysis (CFA) was used to confirm the validity of each
factor (Dasgupta et al., 2017). The validity test in the Appendix also shows that all the estimated
paths from CFA for all the items remaining in the instrument are significant at a 5% level of
significance (p-values < 0.05); therefore, each of the items in the table significantly belong to
their respective factors (Garritz, 2013). This implies that all the factors are reliable. Ethical
considerations for this study were also observed and attained.
Data Collection and Data Analysis
Factors F16, F17, and F18 represent the findings from principals, together with deputy
principals, HoDs, and educators respectively. The emerging constructs from the quantitative
phase were validated using a qualitative detailed interview. This enabled the researcher to
validate and explain the emerging themes from the quantitative phase of the study. According
to the principals and deputy principals, the human resource factors that influenced the
performance of accounting learners are presented in Figure 1 below. These were analysed using
Factor F16 for SMTs sub-items F16.3, F16.4, F16.5, and F16.6. Where the sub-items represented
the following: F16.3 = experienced educators are used for the teaching of accounting; F16.4 =
educators that specialise in accounting education; F16.5 = educators in possession of finance or
chartered accounting qualifications but have no pedagogical knowledge; and F16.6 = educators
that understand the principles and content relating to the didactics of accounting but have
inadequate qualifications.

                                  RESULTS AND DISCUSSION
Figure 1 shows that principals and deputy principals strongly agree to agree, whilst others
strongly disagree to disagree that some human resource factors influence learners’
performance. This indicates that principals, deputy principals, and HoDs have some mixed
perceptions about the effect of human resources on learner performance. For instance, in item
F16.3, 11.7% strongly agree and 57% agree, while 25.7% disagree and 5.6% strongly disagree
that the use of experienced educators in the teaching of accounting has an impact on learner
performance. This suggests that some principals and deputy principals disregard the basic
human resources principles that require employees to be in possession of skills and knowledge


                                                                          RESSAT 2022, 7(1): 20-41

27


that enable them to perform their responsibilities. Similarly, item F16.1 shows that 18.4% of
principals and deputy principals strongly agree and 56.4% agree, while 16.8% disagree and 8.4%
strongly disagree that educators that specialise in accounting education are used to teach
accounting. This suggests that some schools are using educators who are not qualified to teach
accounting. The findings in item F16.5 show that 73.2% disagree and 3.9% strongly disagree that
educators that do not have the relevant knowledge of Financial Accounting and Chartered
Accounting education improve learner performance. The findings in item F16.6 show that 6.7%
strongly agree, 18.4% agree, 63.1% disagree, and 11.7% strongly disagree that educators that
understand the principles and content relating to the didactics of accounting are used to teach
accounting.
Figure 1. Principals and deputy principals’ perceptions on the influence of human resources on
the performance of accounting learners




       In the second phase of the study, qualitative data was collected to validate and provide
an explanation to the constructs emerging from Factor F16, as presented in items F16.3, F16.4,
F16.5, and F16.6. This section presents the responses from the interviews with principals on the
perceived influences of human resources on learners’ performance.




                                                                       RESSAT 2022, 7(1): 20-41

                                                                                                  28


Figure 2. Principals’ views on human resource factors influencing the performance of accounting
learners




        Figure 2 shows that principals hold the view that human resource has a positive effect
on learners’ performance through its influence on teaching and learning. It is evident that all
the principals have different views; they have a shared common belief that qualified educators
with both subject and pedagogical content knowledge in accounting contribute to improved
learner performance. P1, P2, and P3 represent peculiar verbatim words from the three
principals who were interviewed during the qualitative phase:
        For human resources, if we have the relevant accounting educator, I believe learners’
        performance in accounting can improve… We struggled to get accounting educators with
        relevant qualifications. From our educators, three have the relevant qualification, while
        one has a BEd in Education, majoring in accounting. The rest have qualifications in
        Advanced Certificate in Education (ACE) programmes, and one has a BCom Economics
        and Postgraduate Certificate in Education (PGCE) [P1].
        Based on the above comment, it is evident that P1 believes that learner performance can
be attributed to the qualification that an educator has. P2, below, shares similar sentiments that
a relevant qualification can equip the individual educator with subject content knowledge and
didactics:
        Our department has killed education by closing education colleges, now we are begging
        for human resources. We took someone with PGCE rather than an education degree.
        That is where we got it wrong because they do not have the full methodology to teach.
        They cannot come up with strategies to teach difficult topics. If we hire a full educationist
        in accounting, then the performance would be good. Our accounting educators here

                                                                           RESSAT 2022, 7(1): 20-41

29


        always say that they were trained to be Accountants, not to teach. They, unfortunately,
        couldn’t make it as Accountants, and thus settled for teaching. As a result, they enrolled
        in a one-year PGCE programme which does not cater for all teaching and content
        methodology. [P2]
        P2 highlights the challenges associated with employing educators who are perceived to
have inadequate teacher education training. P2 holds the view that acquiring a PGCE
qualification does not sufficiently equip educators with training on the methodology of teaching
and learning. However, P3’s response asserts and reinforces the idea that good learner
performance depends on the skills and knowledge of the educator.
        The right accounting educator will enhance good performance. I would not encourage
        schools to employ educators that have basic knowledge on accounting because they do
        not have grounded knowledge. [P3]
        These perceptions validate and explain the construct that emerged in F16.5, where
respondents strongly agree to agree that employing suitably qualified educators with adequate
pedagogical and content knowledge improves learners’ performance. Based on the verbatim
comments provided, it is evident that all the principals discourage the practice of employing
accounting educators who are not suitably qualified because this contributes to poor learner
performance. These perceptions are consistent with the views of Anwar and Abdullah (2021)
who expounded that the performance of any organisation is dependent on the effectiveness of
its human resources.
        Furthermore, Figure 3 depicts the responses of the deputy principals who were
interviewed in the qualitative phase of the study in a bid to validate and explain the construct
that emerged from the analysis of Factor 16 presented in Figure 1. The Deputy Principals (DP)
form part of the school management team that is responsible for strategic planning of the
human resource need of the school as such they were interviewed in this study.
Judging by the views depicted in Figure 3, it emerged from the interviews conducted with the
deputy principals that they all share the common view that the lack of adequately qualified
educators can negatively influence the teaching and learning of accounting. It can be concluded
that although DP1, DP4, and DP5 recognise the need to employ suitably qualified employees to
teach the subject of accounting, they acknowledge that schools are facing challenges of finding
such qualified educators.
        For human resources, we also struggle. Our accounting educator only has an ACE
        qualification; however, if the number of learners enrolled in Accounting improves, then
        we will look at hiring a better educator… Our accounting educator does not have the
        relevant skills but we are working on it because this a commercial school. accounting is
        a commercial subject and we do not want to let it die. [DP1]




                                                                         RESSAT 2022, 7(1): 20-41

                                                                                              30


Figure 3. Views of deputy principals’ on human resource factors influencing the performance of
accounting learners




       The picture painted by [DP1] suggests that the use of unqualified educators to teach
accounting is a contributing factor to an observed decline in the enrolment figures. This
observation confirms the views of Romlah and Latief (2021) as well as Liu and Loeb (2021) who
suggested that the decreasing enrolment of accounting learners and poor performance were
associated with poor teacher pedagogical content, knowledge, and competences to teach
accounting. Similar concerns can also be detected from the responses cited below:
       Our accounting educator holds an Honours in Education degree, majoring in accounting
       and business Studies. We make sure that we get the best accounting educator that will
       also be good in other EMS subjects. She teaches EMS and Accounting. We are hoping
       that the learners’ interest in choosing accounting as a subject increase. [DP4]
       Currently, we are struggling with the adequate human resource to teach accounting. We
       have employed more than four accounting educators in the past two years, but their
       performance was not great. We are planning to phase out accounting because the
       students are small in number, unlike in business studies and economics. [DP5]
        These perceptions indicate that despite an understanding of the importance of hiring
qualified educators to teach accounting in school, SMTs are facing challenges in attracting such
human personal. For instance, DP4 reported that his school has a qualified educator to teach
accounting. However, it remains a concern that schools such as those of DP5 are struggling to
get adequate educators; thus, they are considering discontinuing accounting as a subject. The
responsibility of recruiting competent educators lies with the principals and deputy principals,
together with other SMT members and the Department of Education district officials. Such

                                                                       RESSAT 2022, 7(1): 20-41

31


information provides a basis for the SMTs and department officials to design and implement a
human resource strategic development plan to support the offering of accounting in secondary
schools.
       HoDs as members of the SMTs views on human resources and its influence in teaching
and learning of accounting were captured and depicted in Figure 4 below.
Figure 4. Views of HoDs on human resource factors influencing the performance of accounting
learners




       The importance of finding suitably trained educators to facilitate teaching and learning
in secondary schools is reinforced and reflected in the views of the HoDs (as depicted in Figure
4). The HoDs views are centred on three constructs, namely lack of accounting didactics, key
knowledge of the subject matter, and challenges in hiring suitably qualified accounting
educators. These are human resource factors that are affecting learner performance across the
schools that participated in this study. It is evident from the HODs’ responses that they are
concerned and thus the challenge in recruiting qualified and competent educators should be
addressed. The views of the HoDs indicate the challenges of a lack of accounting didactics and
lack of key knowledge of the subject matter as imminent operational risks that arise from
unqualified educators can negatively influence the teaching and learning of accounting. The
perceptions of the HoDs are consistent with Cloete (2016) who attests that human resource is
an important element that every organisation should consider enhancing performance.
Verbatim comments of the HoDs that were interviewed are shared below:
       Some of the accounting educators that we have are from the Chartered Accounting
       (CA) and Financial Accounting (FA) routes with PGCE, which is somewhat okay for us even
       though we would prefer someone with a strong BEd background. [HoD1]


                                                                       RESSAT 2022, 7(1): 20-41

                                                                                                32


       For human resource, I think if the knowledge exists, the person can perform well
       regardless of the qualification”. Let me be sincere; I do not have the qualification, but I
       have the skills. I only completed ACE and have accounting secondary school knowledge.
       My qualification is not in line with the current requirement. By the way, I did
       mathematics and accounting in Grade 12 at this very school but since I was a good
       accounting student the principal absorbed me. Therefore, I have been teaching
       Accounting for 15 years at this school. I have tried to upgrade my qualifications to the
       minimum level, but this is still not in line with the current qualification. [HoD2]
       HoD2 is of the view that qualifications do not matter if the educator has the content
knowledge. This is an indication that some HoDs do not see the need to employ qualified
educators to teach the accounting curriculum. These perceptions run parallel to that of the
human resource principles which explain that employees should be in possession of skills and
knowledge that enhance their performance.
       Human resource needs to be relevant, although at times it is a challenge to get the right
       candidate. [HoD3].
       The human resources employed to teach accounting in the school are not all
       experienced. Most of them lack accounting didactics in teaching accounting, hence it is
       challenging. [HoD6]
       Based on these responses, it can be interpreted that whilst most HoDs perceived the
hiring of qualified educators who have accounting content and didactics knowledge as
necessary for safeguarding learners’ performance, a few members hold a different view. It
appears from the responses of HoD1, HoD2, HoD3, and HoD6 that in practice, HoDs hold
different perceptions about the influence of human resources on learner performance. In
particular, it appears that whilst some HoDs believe that competent accountant educators
should be in possession of relevant qualifications, others hold the view that qualifications do
not matter for an educator to teach learners successfully.
       Advice on the above findings can be inferred from Elger (2012) who expounded the
theoretical constructs of the performance theory which posits that better performance is
obtained when management teams recruit the appropriate educators with both subject and
pedagogical content knowledge. The afore-mentioned assertion leads one to conclude that
employing educators without the required knowledge, skills, and values poses a risk to the
learners’ performance.
       The Educators perceived that human resource factors influence the performance of
accounting learners (Figure 5). These were analysed using Factor F16. Factor F16 constructs
were further analysed using items F16.1, F16.2, and F16.3. Where F16.1 = The use of temporary
accounting educators has a positive effect on learner performance; F16.2 = accounting
educators that can build strong teaching and learning relationships with learners are used to
teach accounting which has a positive influence on learners’ performance; F16.3 = accounting


                                                                         RESSAT 2022, 7(1): 20-41

33


educators that are well experienced and are properly selected or recommended by the SMTs
are employed in the schools, which influences accounting learners’ performance.
Figure 5. The educators perceived human resource factors influencing the performance of
accounting learners




        Figure 5 above shows that the majority of the respondents strongly agree to agree, while
the minority strongly disagree to disagree those different aspects of human resources influence
learners’ performance. The findings in item F16.1 indicate that 16.1% strongly agree and 62.9%
agree, whilst 17.7% disagree and 3.2% strongly disagree that the use of qualified educators has
a positive influence on learners’ performance. It is a concern that a few educators strongly
disagree to disagree with the item. This indicates that in some schools, the accounting
educators are unqualified, which may be the reason that there is a decrease in the number of
students interested in studying accounting in secondary schools. As a precautionary measure,
Nwosu (2017) recommended that training and workshops should be offered to keep educators’
knowledge and competences updated with recent developments. It also remains a concern that
in some schools, the case is different as some educators strongly disagree to disagree with the
item. In the second phase of the study, qualitative data was collected to validate and provide an
explanation to the constructs emerging from Factor F16. Figure 6 shows the type of educators
that were currently employed to teach accounting in schools.
        Figure 6 below shows a sample of the qualifications of the 10 accounting educators used
in the qualitative phase of the study. The findings above show that of the ten educators
interviewed, four have obtained a four-year degree in accounting education, one has a four-
year Education degree (with Honours), two have a Chartered Accounting (CA)/Financial
Accounting (FA) degree with a PGCE, two have a BCom Economics degree, and one has a BCom
degree in Business Management. This portrays why some educators in the quantitative phase
for items F16.1 and F16.3 strongly disagree to disagree that the qualifications held by the
accounting educators have any significant influence on learners’ performance. The findings


                                                                        RESSAT 2022, 7(1): 20-41

                                                                                         34


also show that of the 10 educators interviewed, one had a BCom Economics degree while
another one had a BCom in Business Management degree. Figure 7 further expands on the
educator’s qualifications with frequencies.
Figure 6. Accounting educator’s qualifications




Figure 7. Accounting educator’s qualifications with frequencies




                                                                  RESSAT 2022, 7(1): 20-41

35


        Figure 7 above shows educators qualifications with frequencies, where G = grandness or
frequencies of qualifications. For example, G1 for education means one participant reported to
have a degree in accounting education or Financial Accounting with a PGCE. Also, D represents
the number of qualifications noted. In total, participants reported eight different qualifications
(D8) here, namely an accounting education degree, Advance Certificate in Education, PGCE, an
Economics degree, a Business Management degree, a CA degree, a degree in FA, and Honours
in Education. Verbatim comments are demonstrated below.
        I have a degree in accounting education, but I need more training because I graduated a
        long time ago. My qualification is old, so I may not be exposed to recent concepts. (AE1)
        I have a CA degree, then enrolled for PGCE. I also have Methodology in accounting, hence
        it will help in teaching the right concepts. (AE2)
        I majored in accounting and business, and did my Honours in BEd. My qualification is
        appropriate, but I need training to enhance my skills. (AE3)
        I did accounting education. (AE4)
        I did accounting education decades ago, but I know the content has since changed so
        there are challenges with the content. (AE5)
        I have a BCom in Economics, I teach accounting and economics even though Accounting
        is not my major. The principal requested that I teach the subject. (AE6)
        I did BCom Accounting Education, which is four years of training. I obtained the
        qualification a long time ago”. (AE7).
        I have a degree in Financial Accounting with PGCE. I know the content in Accounting and
        believe it will help to improve learners’ performance. (AE8)
        I did ACE, BCom Economics but the principal requested me to teach accounting due to
        the lack of an accounting educator. (AE9)
        I did BCom in Business Management; I had to fill in to teach accounting, which I find
        difficult. (A10)
        Based on the verbatim comments provided above, it can be interpreted that some
educators have the relevant qualifications to teach accounting. However, there is an indication
from AE1, AE3, AE5, and AE7 that they require training to improve their knowledge in accounting
as some of the qualifications were obtained decades ago. AE7 also indicated that he has
challenges in teaching the content as the accounting curriculum often changes. AE6 and AE10
indicated that they do not have a qualification in accounting but were compelled by the SMTs
to teach accounting. To obtain the organisational goal, the relevant human resource must be
utilised. These findings are inconsistent with Sikhombo’s (2018) findings, which revealed that
accounting subjects in schools are sometimes taught by educators who do not have the
necessary expertise in accounting. This shows that there is a challenge in recruiting qualified
accounting educators to teach accounting subjects in secondary school. The findings from this
study have proven that some schools had to employ educators that do not have the relevant
qualification. It was also found in Modise’s (2016) study that schools are stuck with unqualified

                                                                         RESSAT 2022, 7(1): 20-41

                                                                                               36


or inexperienced educators for a specific subject because their schools did not have access to
the relevant human resource. It can be deduced that employing educators without the required
skills to teach accounting poses a risk to the performance of learners in secondary schools.

                                        CONCLUSIONS
As stated, the main aim of this study was to explore perceived human resources factors
influencing Grade 12 Accounting learner’s performance in secondary schools in the North West
Province, South Africa. Based on the findings of the first phase, the study concluded that the
majority of SMTs and educators agree to strongly agree that human resource factors influence
the performance of Grade 12 Accounting learners’ performance, whilst a few disagree to
strongly disagree with this perception. These findings lead to the conclusion that human
resources determine learner performance through the influence of several factors such as skills,
competences, and knowledge that educators possess in the implementation of the educational
curriculum. This study stressed that different members of principals, deputy principals, HoDs,
and Educators hold different perceptions about the influence of human resources on learner
performance. Together, these findings highlight the impact of performance, pedagogical
competence, and subject content knowledge on learner performance in Grade 12 Accounting.
The schools interested in improving learner performance should prioritise understanding
human resource factors that influence learners’ attainment. The significant contribution of this
study lies in outlining the real-life experiences, opinions, and perceptions of the influence of
human resource factors on learner performance. It is thus recommended that schools
interested in improving learner performance should focus on identifying and addressing human
resource factors that influence learner performance.
Disclosure and conflicts of interest
This article does not have any financial or other substantive conflicting, or competing, interest
that may be construed to influence the results or interpretation of the article. The publication
of this study will be financed by the higher institution of the researchers.

                                            REFERENCES
Allan, G., Mcgregor, P., & Swales, K. (2011). The importance of revenue sharing for the local
        economic impacts of a renewable energy project: A social accounting matrix
        approach. Regional Studies, 45(9), 1171-1186.
        https://doi.org/10.1080/00343404.2010.497132
Anwar, G., & Abdullah, N. N. (2021). The impact of Human resource management practice on
        Organizational performance. International journal of Engineering, Business and
        Management (IJEBM), 5. https://doi.org/10.22161/ijebm.5.1.4
Argilés, J. M., & Slof, E. J. (2001). New opportunities for farm accounting . European
        Accounting Review, 10(2), 361-383. https://doi.org/10.1080/09638180126640


                                                                        RESSAT 2022, 7(1): 20-41

37




Baard, R., Steenkamp, L., Frick, B., & Kidd, M. (2010). Factors influencing success in first-year
        Accounting at a South African university: The profile of a successful first-year
        Accounting student. South African Journal of Accounting Research, 24(1), 129-147.
        https://doi.org/10.1080/10291954.2010.11435150
Babbie, E. R. (2020). The practice of social research. Cengage learning.
Boru, T. (2018). Chapter five research design and methodology [PhD Thesis, University of South
        Africa]. Pretoria.
Campbell, J. P., McCloy, R. A., Oppler, S. H., & Sager, C. E. (1993). A theory of performance.
        Personnel selection in organizations, 3570, 35-70.
Cloete, H. C. A. (2016). Human resource development in local government: A management
        perspective [PhD dissertation, Stellenbosch University]. Stellenbosch.
Dasgupta, S., Biswal, S. K., & Ramesh, M. A. (2017). Holistic approaches to brand culture and
        communication across industries. IGI Global.
Department of Basic Education. (2012). Curriculum and Assessment Policy Statement (CAPS):
        Accounting. Pretoria: Government Printers
Department of Basic Education. (2020). National curriculum statement: National policy on
        assessment and qualifications for schools in the general education and training band.
        Pretoria: Government Printers
Eaglesham, A. (2020, July 10). Developing international teacher competencies: a prerequisite
        for skills-based learning. https://www.skoolspot.com/post/developing-international-
        teacher-competencies-a-prerequisite-for-skills-based-learning
Elger, D. (2012). Theory of performance. https://www.webpages.uidaho.edu/ele
        /scholars/Results /Workshops/Facilitators_Institute/Theory%20of%20Performance.pdf
Fry, H., Ketteridge, S., & Marshall, S. (2009). A handbook for teaching and learning in higher
        education: Enhancing academic practice (3rd ed.). Routledge.
Gathumbi, A. W. (2013). Underachievement in reading and writing skills and the implications
        in promoting life-long learning. Journal of Education and Practice, 4(2), 1-13.
Garritz, A. (2013). Instrument Development of the Affective Domain. School and Corporate
        Applications. Educación Química, 24, pp.538-539.DOI: 10.1016/S0187-893X(13)725254.
Grieser, D. R., & Hendricks, K. S. (2018). Review of literature: Pedagogical content knowledge
        and string teacher preparation. National Association for Music Education, 37(1), 13-19.
        https://doi.org/10.1177/8755123318760970
Hashmi, K. (2014). Human Resource Management Strategies and Teacher's Efficiency within
        Schools: A Co-Relational Study. IAFOR Journal of Education, 2(1), 65-87.
Kleickmann, T., Richter, D., Kunter, M., Elsner, J., Besser, M., Krauss, S., & Baumert, J. (2013).
        Teachers’ content knowledge and pedagogical content knowledge: The role of
        structural differences in teacher education. Journal of Teacher Education, 64(1), 90-
        106. https://doi.org/10.1177/0022487112460398

                                                                         RESSAT 2022, 7(1): 20-41

                                                                                                    38




Kouriati, A., Dimitriadou, E., & Bournaris, T. (2021). Farm accounting for farm decision
         making: a case study in Greece. International Journal of Sustainable Agricultural
         Management and Informatics, 7(2), 77-89.
Limpopo Department of Education. (2018). Annual Report for 2017/18 Financial Year. Pretoria:
         Government Printers
Liu, J., & Loeb, S. (2021). Engaging teachers measuring the impact of teachers on student
         attendance in secondary school. Journal of Human Resources, 56(2), 343-379.
         https://doi.org/10.3368/jhr.56.2.1216-8430R3
Lloréns, R. S., Didac, R., Contreras, M. A., & Luisa, M. (2021). The role of human resources on
         the relationship between high-performance work systems and firm performance.
         Review of Business, Accounting , & Finance, 1(4), 310-327.
Magulod Jr, G. C., Capulso, L. B., Dasig, J. P., Baluyot, M. B. B., Nisperos, J. N. S., Reyes-Chua, E.,
         Ritonga, M., Ventayen, R. J. M., Khassenova, A., & Mustary, M. (2020). Attainment of
         the Immediate Program Graduate Attributes and Learning Outcomes of Teacher
         Candidates towards Global Competence Initiatives. International Journal of Learning,
         Teaching and Educational Research, 19(12), 106-125.
         https://doi.org/10.26803/ijlter.19.12.6
Mkhize, M. V. (2017). Accounting firms’ managers’ and trainees’ perceptions of managerial
         competencies required to manage diversity in KwaZulu-Natal, South Africa. South
         African journal of economic and management sciences, 20(1), 1-11.
         https://doi.org/10.4102/sajems.v20i1.1436
Modise, A. M. (2016). Pedagogical content knowledge challenges of accounting teachers.
         International Journal of Educational Sciences, 13(3), 291-297.
         https://doi.org/10.1080/09751122.2016.11890464
Molise, H. V. (2020). Exploring the Content Knowledge of Accounting Teachers in Rural
         Contexts: A Call for a Decoloniality Approach. International Journal of Learning,
         Teaching and Educational Research, 19(8), 447-458.
Mupfudze, I., & Mapolisa, T. (2021). Variables Affecting Learners' Performance at Ordinary
         Level in Zimbabwean Secondary Schools. Indiana Journal of Humanities and Social
         Sciences, 2(2), 25-40. https://indianapublications.com/Journals/IJHSS
News SA. (2019, July 10). SA's matric distinction eye-opener.
         https://www.sowetanlive.co.za/news/south-africa/2019-01-11-sas-matric-distinction-
         eye-opener/
Ngwenya, J. C. (2014). Accounting teachers’ understandings and practices of teaching and
         assessment in a context of curriculum change. Alternation, 21(1), 171-189.
         https://doi.org/10.4102/td.v17i1.873
Nwosu, L. I. (2017). Managing teaching and learning of accounting in secondary schools in
         Mafikeng area office [M.Sc Dissertation, North-West University]. Mafikeng.

                                                                             RESSAT 2022, 7(1): 20-41

39




Nyathi, K. A., Nyoni, T., Nyoni, M., & Bonga, W. G. (2018). The role of accounting information
        in the success of small & medium enterprises (SMEs) in Zimbabwe: A case of Harare.
        Journal of Business and Management (DRJ-JBM), 1(1), 01-15.
Omebe, C. A. (2014). Human resource management in education: Issues and challenges. British
        Journal of Education, 2(7), 26-31. https://doi.org/10.4236/ce.2021.128138
Pallot, J. (1992). Elements of a theoretical framework for public sector accounting .
        Accounting , Auditing & Accountability Journal, 5(1), 0-0.
        https://doi.org/10.1108/09513579210008244
Putra, Y. M. (2019). Analysis of Factors Affecting the Interests of SMEs Using Accounting
        Applications. Journal of Economics and Business, 2(3).
Ranjbar, N., & Soodmand Afshar, H. (2021). A Survey of EAP Needs in Iran from the Viewpoints
        of Teachers and Students. Iranian Journal of English for Academic Purposes, 10(1), 54-
        74. https://doi.org/10.22132/TEL.2021.137360
Romlah, O. Y., & Latief, S. (2021). Empowering the Quality of School Resources in Improving
        the Quality of Education. Bulletin of Science Education, 1(1), 37-41.
        https://doi.org/10.29210/021121jpgi0005
Seezink, A., & Poell, R. (2011). The role of schools’ perceived human resource policies in
        teachers’ professional development activities: a comparative study of innovations
        toward competence-based education. Asia Pacific Education Review, 12(1), 149-160.
        https://doi.org/10.1007/s12564-010-9115-z
Sikhombo, Z. N. (2018). Academic performance of Grade 12 learners in accounting in the
        Zululand District [PhD Dissertation, University of Kwa-Zulu Natal].
Sonnentag, S & Frese, M (2001) Stress in Organizations. Comprehensive Handbook of
        Psychology, Industrial and Organizational Psychology. Konstanz Germany.
Stringham, S. (2015, Octomber 20). Professional teaching portfolio: Content knowledge.
        https://usu.instructure.com/courses/307108/pages/4-content-knowledge
Terre-Blanche, L. (2019). Barriers and enablers to the career transition of chartered
        accountants in the South African financial services sector [M.Sc Dissertation, University
        of South Africa]. Pretoria.
Turetsky, K. M., Sinclair, S., Starck, J. G., & Shelton, J. N. (2021). Beyond students: how teacher
        psychology shapes educational inequality. Trends in Cognitive Sciences.
        https://doi.org/10.1016/j.tics.2021.04.006
Van Romburgh, H. (2014). Accounting education: Investigating the gap between school,
        university and practice [PhD Dissertation, North-West University]. Mafikeng.

Vazakidis, A., Athianos, S., & Laskaridou, E. (2010). The importance of information through
       accounting practice in agricultural sector-European data network. Journal of Social
       Sciences, 6, 221-228. https://doi.org/10.3844/jssp.2010.221.228

                                                                          RESSAT 2022, 7(1): 20-41

                                                                                                        40


Wakuła, M. (2020). The importance of accounting and reporting in the process of finance
       management in a basic unit of the territorial government. Entrepreneurship and
       Sustainability Issues, 7(3), 1996. https://doi.org/10.9770/jesi.2020.7.3(37)
West, C. P. (2012). A mixed methods sequential explanatory study of the impact of chronic pain
       on family resilience [Dissertation, John Carroll University].

                                                    APPENDIX
Table 1. Reliability test (Factor F16 – H18)
    Factors/construct                      Cronbach's Alpha                  N of Items
    SMTs
    FactorF_16                             .719                                                        41
    FactorG_17                             .600                                                        22
    FactorH_18                             .600                                                        23
    Accounting educators
    Factor_F16                            .813                                                         34
    Factor_G17                            .852                                                         45
    Factor_H18                            .935                                                         26

Table 2. Validity test (Principals, deputy principals and HoDs)

                           Standardised Effects in Linear Equations
    Items/Variables Predictor        Parameter Estimate Standard                       t Value       Pr >
    retained        factor/construct                                Error                             |t|
    SMTs
    F16_3               FactorF_16            p23                0.54719     0.06768      8.0851   <.0001
    F16_4               FactorF_16            p24                0.61406     0.06365      9.6478   <.0001
    F16_5               FactorF_16            p25                0.68532     0.06001 11.4196       <.0001
    F16_6               FactorF_16            p26                0.65774     0.06132 10.7265       <.0001
    G17_2               FactorG_17            p27                0.69642     0.14531      4.7926   <.0001
    G17_7               FactorG_17            p28                0.61150     0.13166      4.6447   <.0001




1
  F16.1 and F16.2 are excluded from further analyses
2
  G17.1, G17.5, G17.6, G17.3, and G17.4 are excluded from further analyses
3
  H18.4 and H18.3 are excluded from further analyses
4
  F16.4, F16.5, F16.6, and F16.7 are excluded from further analyses
5
  G17.1 and G17.4 are excluded from further analyses
6
  H18.1 and H18.2 are excluded from further analyses

                                                                                 RESSAT 2022, 7(1): 20-41

41


Table 3. Validity tests (Accounting educators)

 Items/Variables Predictor        Parameter      Estimate   Standard    t Value       Pr >
 retained        factor/construct                               Error                  |t|
 F16_3             FactorF_16         p23        0.54719     0.06768    8.0851     <.0001
 F16_4             FactorF_16         p24        0.61406     0.06365    9.6478     <.0001
 F16_5             FactorF_16         p25        0.68532     0.06001 11.4196       <.0001
 F16_6             FactorF_16         p26        0.65774     0.06132 10.7265       <.0001
 G17_2             FaGtorG17          p26        0.85274     0.04739 17.9954       <.0001
 G17_3             FaGtorG17          p27        0.82692     0.05165 16.0112       <.0001
 G17_5             FaGtorG17          p28        0.75598     0.06399 11.8146       <.0001
 G17_6             FaGtorG17          p29        0.70394     0.07297    9.6465     <.0001
 H18_2             FaGtorH18          p30        0.90525     0.04387 20.6371       <.0001
 H18_3             FaGtorH18          p31        0.95153     0.04110 23.1493       <.0001




                                                                  RESSAT 2022, 7(1): 20-41