Página |1

//




Rev. Tempos Espaços Educ. v.13, n. 32, e-13168, jan./dez.2020               © 2020 - ISSN 2358-1425
Doi: http://dx.doi.org/10.20952/revtee.v13i32.13168




    STUDENT’S PARTICIPATION IN UPPER SECONDARY SCHOOL MANAGEMENT: APPROACHES
           TO THE REALITY OF THE SCHOOL SYSTEM IN THE STATE OF AMAZONAS

PARTICIPAÇÃO ESTUDANTIL NA GESTÃO ESCOLAR DO ENSINO MÉDIO: APROXIMAÇÕES COM
                  A REALIDADE DA REDE ESTADUAL DO AMAZONAS

    PARTICIPACIÓN ESTUDIANTIL EN LA GESTIÓN DE LA ESCUELA SECUNDARIA: ENFOQUES DE
                      LA REALIDAD DE LA RED ESTATAL DE AMAZONAS



                                                                            Nádia Maciel Falcão 1
                                                                        Sara dos Santos da Silva 2

Abstract: This study discusses upper secondary school student’s participation in educational
management by presenting the results of a research conducted at a public school in the state of
Amazonas, Brazil. Its purpose was to identify institutional actions that enable upper secondary
school students’ participation in educational management processes, assessing to what extent the
principle of democratic management in public education has been made possible in these
institutions. In this qualitative research the document analysis of school documents such as:
Minutes, Pedagogic Political Project, Internal Regulations, Reports, and Manuals was performed.
The findings indicate few and frail forms of student participation in secondary school management.
An effort to mark democratic management as a principle in school documents exists, however there
is a lack of propositions that enables student participation in secondary school management.
Keywords: Democratic Management. Student participation. Upper Secondary School


Resumo: Discute a participação de estudantes do ensino médio na gestão escolar, apresentando
resultados de pesquisa realizada em uma escola pública do Estado do Amazonas. Objetivou
identificar ações institucionais que viabilizam a participação de estudantes do ensino médio nos
processos de gestão, verificando em que medida o princípio da gestão democrática do ensino
público vem se materializando nas escolas de ensino médio. A metodologia tem perspectiva
qualitativa aplicando a técnica da análise documental, contemplando documentos escolares, tais
como: Atas, Projeto Político Pedagógico, Regimento Interno, Relatórios e Manuais. Os resultados

1
    Federal University of Amazonas. Manaus, Amazonas, Brazil.
2
    Municipal Office of Education. Manaus, Amazonas, Brazil.

                                                                                         Página |2

apontam poucas e frágeis formas de participação estudantil na gestão escolar do ensino médio. Há
um esforço de demarcar a gestão democrática como princípio nos documentos escolares, mas
faltam propostas que viabilizem a participação estudantil nas ações da gestão do ensino médio.
Palavras-chave: Gestão Democrática. Participação estudantil. Ensino Médio.


Resumen: Discuta la participación de estudiantes de secundaria en la gestión escolar, presentando
los resultados de la investigación realizada en una escuela pública en el estado de Amazonas. Su
objetivo era identificar acciones institucionales que permitan la participación de estudiantes de
secundaria en los procesos de gestión, verificando hasta qué punto el principio de gestión
democrática de la educación pública se ha materializado en las escuelas secundarias. La
metodología tiene una perspectiva cualitativa que aplica la técnica de análisis de documentos,
incluidos documentos escolares como: Actas, Proyecto político pedagógico, Reglas internas,
Informes y Manuales. Los resultados muestran pocas y frágiles formas de participación estudiantil
en la gestión de la escuela secundaria. Hay un esfuerzo por demarcar la gestión democrática como
principio en los documentos escolares, pero no hay propuestas para garantizar una participación
efectiva de los estudiantes en las acciones de gestión de la escuela secundaria.
Palabras clave: Gestión Democrática. Participación Estudiantil. Enseñanza Media.


1 INTRODUCTION


       This article discusses student participation in educational management in the sphere of
upper secondary education, based on the results of research conducted in a state school, located in
Manaus, the capital city of Amazonas, Brazil. Its objective was to identify institutional assumptions
and actions aimed at student participation in school management processes.
       In this study, democratic management and student status as a subject, which are themes of
major interest in the research field of Education are revisited. Verifying to what extent these two
ideas, which are vital for public education of socially referenced quality, have been materializing in
actions in upper secondary schools, and how they can strengthen each other was considered
relevant.
       The confluence between the two categories (democratic management in basic education
and student status as a subject) gave rise to the object of study that deals with student participation
in educational management processes. Student participation here is understood as a principle of
democratic management and it is regarded both in its operational dimension, represented by the
presence of students in decision-making spaces, and in its political dimension, which occurs when
this group participates in decision-making processes and when actions of participation have the
broadest process of society democratization as their horizon. (SOUZA, 2019; SPOSITO, 2001).

                                                                                            Página |3

       Upper secondary education is the last stage of Brazilian basic education, and it is intended
for individuals aged between 15 and 17 years old and all of those who have not completed this step
within the expected age. As a result, upper secondary school audience consists of teenagers and
young people, who seemingly have expertise regarding the school dynamics that cannot be ignored,
in addition to the accumulation of other skills acquired in different dimensions of social life. As a
pedagogical premise, one tends to expect that the trajectories of this audience are addressed as
well as their position as individuals that able to participate in decisions concerning their school
education path.
       In the context of a democratic school management, student voices and projects must have
a place in different institutional channels of participation, and can take a direct form, as in general
assemblies and meetings, or representative form, through collegiate bodies. Studies on youth,
however, indicate that youth protagonism is something yet to be achieved, within the imposed
student status. (DAYRELL, 2007; DAYRELL; CARRANO, 2014).
       Part of the alleged low student participation is explained by the lack of effective
communication between school and youth cultures, and it is reflected in the obstacles that
institutions find in acknowledging forms of student participation that diverge from the pre-
established molds found in operating rules, school manuals and due to the constant refusal of youth
groups to adjust to traditional models of participation.
                        The performance of young people in their school educational process may not
                        correspond to the educational institution's idea of a student. It is the teenager’s
                        task trying to adapt and live in a turmoil that encompasses school world, youth
                        world, real world. [...] The idea of time is not the same for schools and for youth
                        participation. A divide is placed. (MARTINS; DAYRELL, 2013, p. 1271).


       Seeking to learn to what degree student participation in educational management has
happened and how it has been encouraged in upper secondary schools, the study examined the
experience of a public state school in the state of Amazonas, Brazil, based on the following guiding
questions: 1) What kinds of student participation in school management are established in the
institution's pedagogic political project? 2) What are the main actions of student participation in
educational management? 3) To what degree are the planned forms of participation connected to
the participation practices documented in school?
       Many of the public policies intended for the youth segment are designed and executed
without the participation of students. In schools, a place in which public education policies happen,
it is common to confirm the inexpressive participation of young students.

                                                                                         Página |4

        It is a school disposition not considering a young person a valid interlocutor when important
decisions for the school institution are made. Often, teenagers are not invited to express opinions
and intervene even in matters that concern them directly. And this can surely be considered
discouraging to participation and protagonism. (DAYRELL; CARRANO, 2014, p. 106).
        In research undertaken in Manaus' public schools, Pinheiro and Caldas (2009) concluded that
community participation in school management actions, student’s participation included, is still
modest and restricted to specific moments such as bimonthly parent-teacher conferences and
cultural activities.
        This study intended to verify to what extent the youth protagonism discourse found
objective support points for settling at school, especially in educational management. From the
experiences of the studied school setting, general elements can be extracted to analyze the situation
and the challenges of student participation in upper secondary school management.
        Through qualitative approach, this research seeks to understand student participation in
educational management as a product of the relationship between what is instituted and the
instituting management processes, including the discrepancies between what is stated in the
documents that institutionalize student participation and the effective participation practices found
in upper secondary schools. According to Minayo (1994), this type of research allows the
understanding of singularities that can complete generalizations operated by statistical indicators.
        The study correlates to previous academic knowledge produced in the area of Education on
this topic and focuses on the experiences of student participation collected by a state school in
Amazonas from 2013 to 2016. To preserve the institution's anonymity, the name “Amazonas
School” will be used to refer to the research field.
        At the chosen school, documents containing records on student participation in educational
management practices were collected. School Council and pedagogical meetings minutes,
pedagogic political projects, internal regulations, class representative reports, parents and students’
procedures guidelines, and student president responsibilities were considered.
        Documents are considered by Lüdke and André (1986, p. 39) as “powerful sources from
which evidence that can support the researcher's claims and statements” can be elicited. The
authors also warn that it is important that documentary analysis “is not limited to what is explicit in
the material, but seeks to go deeper, revealing implicit messages, contradictory dimensions and
themes that are systematically silenced.” (LÜDKE and ANDRÉ, 1986, p.48 ).

                                                                                        Página |5

       The documents were examined in search of information that could characterize student
participation in school management actions, detecting the student's involvement, their forms of
participation (direct or representative), among other aspects that contributed to the understanding
of student participation dynamics and its content.


2 DEMOCRATIC MANAGEMENT, YOUTH AND UPPER SECONDARY SCHOOL


       Democratic management is the object of struggle to progressive segments of the education
area. This idea was incorporated into the Federal Constitution of 1988 as a principle of public
education (Brazilian Federal Constitution, of 1988, Art. 206, VI), and reinforced in the National
Educational Guidelines and Framework Law - LDBEN 9,394 of 1996 (Art. 3, VIII; Art. 14, I and II)
likewise.
       The National Education Plan, approved by Law 13.005 of 2014, includes “promoting the
principle of democratic management of public education” as one of its guidelines (Art. 2, VI). Goal
number 19 focuses on: “Ensuring conditions, within 2 (two) years, for the effective management of
democratic education, associated to merit and performance technical criteria, as well as the
participation of the school community”. In the viewpoint of Marques (2014) the word choice in goal
19 is inconsistent because it merges democratic management related lexicon to meritocracy
elements.
       This goal is followed by strategies that address different issues considered fundamental for
the effectiveness of democratic management, of which the strategies number 19.4, 19.5 and 19.6
can be highlighted as those that deal more directly with the participation of students in school
management. These strategies address, respectively: encouraging the creation and strengthening
of student unions and their articulation with school councils; encouraging the constitution and
strengthening of school councils, training counselors and guaranteeing the autonomous functioning
conditions of this collegiate body; and encouraging the participation of students in the formulation
of pedagogic political projects, school curricula, school management plans and school regulations.
       In addition to the achievements in the legal scope, the results of struggles happening both
in the practical actions field and in the defending of ideas area are also reflected on the scientific
production concerning education management , which has been the subject of countless studies in
the field of education, as shown by the state of the art in Martins and Silva's (2011) research.

                                                                                        Página |6

         The authors cataloged the scientific productions on the matter of management, autonomy
and the functioning of collegiate bodies in basic education schools, between the years 2000 and
2008. This investigation resulted in 753 research papers, arranged under the following categories:
1) Spaces and mechanisms for intra-school participation; 2) In-school relationships and practices; 3)
Governmental and non-governmental policies, programs, and projects; 4) Theories and Concepts.
       Martins and Silva (2011) emphasize the poor amount of studies on the institutionalized
representation and participation instances in schools, as well as on their impacts on management.
The authors noted that from the total number of examined works “only 85 focused on the analysis
of collegiate bodies, legitimate channels of representation, participation and negotiation spaces
that, presumably, should constitute the main mechanism of participatory educational
management.” (MARTINS; SILVA, 2011, p. 14).
      Building democratic management in public schools requires a type of work organization that
is suitable to collective action and to the existence of institutional instruments and mechanisms that
guarantee the participation of different segments of the school and the local community in
management and decision-making processes over different issues of interest to the school.
      The Pedagogic Political Project - PPP and the collegiate bodies, especially school councils, are
important means for implementing the democratic management principle if created and conducted
according to the assumptions of this management concept. Although the PPP and the school council
are, in theory, part of the democratic management theoretical framework, the actual situation
observed in many schools reflects a discrepancy on the meaning these instruments assume.
Detached from the political sense that coins them within the scope of democratic management
creation, they appear as mere technical tools.
      The National Educational Guidelines and Framework Law establishes (LDBEN of 1996) the
participation of different school and local community segments in the creation of the PPP and in
School Council as a democratic management principle. Education systems are responsible for
defining the rules for the democratic management of public schools in basic education, by taking
peculiarities into account under the following principles: “participation of education professionals
in the elaboration of the school's pedagogical project; participation of school and local communities
in school councils or equivalent ”. (LDBEN, Art. 14, I and II).
      It is worth mentioning that the mere introduction of a new matter in the legislation does not
have enough strength to promote changes in the daily life of education systems, especially in

                                                                                            Página |7

contexts with a strong record of despotism and personalism, such as Brazilian public education
systems. According to Pires and Mororó (2018),
                        Management can become more democratic even when it is not law determined.
                        When more participatory and collective ways of thinking about the school's
                        directions and of reflecting on its educational intent and its objectives are
                        established, it also creates possibility for learning the democratic mechanisms of
                        participation and decision making which are sustained on another mindset in the
                        way of managing the school and conducting the pedagogical work developed there.

       Thus, the act of reinforcing the importance of assessing to what extent the principle
established since the Federal Constitution of 1988 has resonated in new structures and
demonstrated support for new management practices.


                        Democratic management mainly involves rethinking the school's power structure,
                        aiming at its socialization. The socialization of power promotes the practice of
                        collective participation, which attenuates individualism; reciprocity, which
                        eliminates exploitation; solidarity, which overcomes oppression; autonomy, which
                        eliminates the dependence on intermediary entities that create educational
                        policies of which the school is simply an executor. (VEIGA, 2013, p. 18).


       In this perspective, the goal of a Pedagogic Political Project goes far beyond a “formal school
rearrangement. Instead, it focuses on quality in the whole experienced process”. (VEIGA, 2013, p.
15). The school council, a place where different group segments have representative participation,
is the mainstay of the PPP and the highest level for its approval (VEIGA, 2007).
       The participation of different segments must not only figure as a value, but it also needs to
present material ground for its practical development. Araújo (2009, p. 258) highlights the main
channels of participation regarding students.

                        Among the political-pedagogical channels of participation that should be expanded
                        and guaranteed to students, the following stand out: student union; school council;
                        open and participatory class council; classroom teaching contract; school general
                        assembly and school pedagogical and political project. When the institution's
                        characteristics are respected, these mechanisms work as important spaces for
                        decision making, discussion, and deliberation on the issues that permeate the
                        school routine.

       Discussing student participation in upper secondary school level demands contemplating the
status of youth in Brazil as well. Studies in the youth field argue that a young person should be
treated as a subject of rights and youth should be a stage in life with a meaning of its own, not only

                                                                                         Página |8

as a transition phase (ARROYO, 2014). Research indicates that young people resent not being heard,
even in youth-related socially accredited institutions such as schools.
        In Brazil, the development of a public agenda around youth issues dates to the late 1980s.
The first youth-related public policies considered this period and the lack of dialogue with an action-
demanding audience as social problems. (SPOSITO; CARRANO, 2003). Over the years, the
development of a certain sensitivity to the understanding of young people as a subject of rights was
noticed. Within this new perspective, the process of formulating and evaluating policies saw greater
acceptance for dialogue. (RIBEIRO; MACÊDO, 2018).
       This tenuous opening of the public agenda to young subject’s participation did not radically
modify youth public policies arrangement. Public policies of a broader nature that reach young
people, such as educational policy, are still marked by the lack of spaces and/or strategies for
listening and participation both in the formulation and in the implementation and evaluation
methodologies.
       At school, this is reflected in teaching methodologies that range from excessive guidance to
punctual student participation. The first perspective restricts the student's action to practical
responses to school rules and tasks. The second is characterized by fragmented actions of student
involvement in the organization or development of actions. Alternatively, the second perspective is
characterized by the opening of formal spaces of participation, such as seats in collegiate bodies,
however without favoring training processes for this participation.
       Since the 1990s, accelerated growth in the upper secondary education demand has pushed
public authorities to an expansion of the network of educational institutions. Every state had to
enlarge their network of schools, considering they have priority for upper secondary education
provision, attributed to these federated entities by LDBEN of 1996. Today, state schools account for
84.7% of enrollments in this educational level (INEP, 2019).
       In the “quantity versus quality versus diversity” equation, it is still necessary to investigate
the real operating conditions of Brazilian upper secondary schools, especially considering the
existing suspension of public education expenses, which was instated through the Constitutional
Amendment 95 of 2016. In Mariano's understanding (2019), such a measure represents Brazil's
return to a state of economic exception and disastrous capitalism.
       To Dayrell and Carrano (2014) it is vital for a school to know its students and consider the
multiple dimensions that constitute their youth situations. According to the authors, such an

                                                                                        Página |9

understanding will assist in reorienting the ways young students are seen and treated, making upper
secondary school a more pleasant place to be.
       When a school seeks to understand the diversity of styles, tastes, languages, and projects of
young people, respecting and aiming to adapt pedagogical and curricular proposals to the profile of
its audience, everyone involved wins. Being in an environment that encourages autonomy and
strives for dialogue and freedom, not only is more pleasant but also generates a sense of belonging
as it inspires students to care for their school.
       Several young people-related prejudices disseminated at schools repeat recurring common
opinions in which teenagers are seen as individuals who are rebels, disinterested, contrary to norms
and obligations, among other things. With such mindset schools risk not discovering young people
with great potential, who could contribute to the school environment and in their community.
       Upper secondary schools become vital spaces to make young people recognize themselves
as subjects, considering these places deal with individuals at a stage in their lives defined by their
need for self-assertiveness, when seeking new life experiences and demonstrating their skills and
potential to the society around them.


3 THE SITUATION OF STUDENT PARTICIPATION IN THE AMAZONAS SCHOOL


       The study’s empirical phase was carried out in a state school located in Manaus, capital of
the State of Amazonas, Brazil. This City, which concentrates more than half of the State's population,
is riddled with contradictions on the distribution of public services and urban infrastructure. The
Amazonas School is located in a privileged area due to the infrastructure apparatus it brings
together, contrary to many locations where state public schools are distributed.
       Amazonas School is configured as a small unit in terms of physical structure and number of
students (initial enrollment of 550 students in 2016), considering the current Amazonas state
educational network parameters. It exclusively focuses on upper secondary education during
mornings and afternoons.
       The school’s General Rules and Regulations document is a perfect replica of the General
Rules of the State Schools of Amazonas, established by Resolution No. 122 of the Amazonas State
Education Council - CEE / AM, of November 30, 2010. Among other objectives, the document
establishes the following democratic management related items:

                                                                                         P á g i n a | 10

                        To define forms of democratic management for the schools integrating the State
                        Education Network according to their peculiarities, based on the following
                        principles: a) participation of education professionals in the school’s Pedagogic
                        Political Project development; b) participation of both school and the local
                        community in an equivalent School Council. (AMAZONAS / SEDUC, 2010, Art. 6 °, V)


       Concerning the responsibilities of the different federated entities in school education
provision, LDBEN of 1996 establishes that it their task, "to ensure elementary education and to offer,
with priority, upper secondary education to all who demand it [...]" (Art. 10, VI). In Amazonas, the
State has a significant role in the provision of elementary education. Thus, the General Regulation
under analysis presents provisions aimed at all teaching units in the state network. In order to keep
the focus on the research objectives, the analysis of this document focused on aspects that refer to
the school management and upper secondary school axis.
       Abiding by the national rule, the General Regiment of State Schools of Amazonas establishes
a minimum three-year duration for upper secondary education. It also reinforces the aims of this
educational level, which are: consolidation and deepening of knowledge acquired during
elementary school and enabling of further education; preparation for professional life and
citizenship, to continue learning and flexibly adapting to occupation or improvement conditions;
improvement of ethical training and developing intellectual autonomy and critical thinking, making
it possible to understand the scientific-technological foundations of production processes, relating
theory to practice. (AMAZONAS. SEDUC, 2010)
       A proper fulfillment of such purposes requires an environment that fosters participation and
is guided by democratic society values, so that the school satisfies its role in ethical training, in
addition to bringing students closer to the knowledge produced about different languages and
technologies.
       When addressing pedagogical practice methods available to teachers' choice, the School
Rules and Regulations reveals an idea of student which refers to the hypothetical universe of a
school that fosters democratic participation. The methods include dialogue, interpretation and
critique, freedom of speech, respect for the student's culture and social practices, encouragement
to the practice of citizenship, participation, leadership, personal growth and promotion of the
students and their co-responsibility in knowledge acquisition, cooperation amidst parents,
technicians and other members of the school system, et cetera. (AMAZONAS, 2010).
       As for the assessment of school performance, article 61, paragraph 6 of the Rules and
Regulation document, states that the development of reasoning, critical sense and the abilities to

                                                                                         P á g i n a | 11

relate concepts and facts, associating cause and effect, analyzing and making decisions, are criteria
for evaluating the teaching-learning process results.
         Regarding the school community involvement in management processes, the General
Regulation provides for the importance of such participation, when it states schools’ obligation of
maintaining a parent, teacher and community association as a minimum operating requirement,
and institutes others school support bodies (AMAZONAS, 2010, Art. 15, IX). Among the ones defined
as supporting entities in the analyzed Regulation, it is important to highlight the Student Union and
the School Council for this research’s objectives.
         As provided in the Rules, "The School Council is a deliberative, consultative, supervisory and
mobilizing collegiate body" (AMAZONAS, 2010, Art.102, p. 32). It consists of the following
representative members: President (School Principal), Teachers and Education Specialists
Association, Parent Teacher and Community Association, Student Union and Organized Social
Movements, as determined (AMAZONAS, 2010).
         Some goals that must be assured by the Internal School Regulation. Among these, the
purpose of "ensuring the principle of plurality and democratic participation in the School's
deliberative plan" stands out (AMAZONAS, 2010, Article 102, III).
         The Regulation establishes the student body’s rights to “speak and vote in the administrative
decisions of the School Institution; access the internal school facilities, except for places the school
manager considers restricted; participate in school collegiate bodies ”(AMAZONAS, 2010, Article
250, II, IV, VIII).
         Further Regulation analysis shows that, despite some inconsistencies and weaknesses found
in the referred document’s content, the State of Amazonas Education Network has reinforced
democratic management as a public education principle, also establishing assumptions for student
participation.
         The General Rules of State Network Schools, in which community participation is foreseen,
encompass curricula standards, teachers’ pedagogical practices, student evaluation methods,
autonomy for schools when creating their internal normative act, student’s rights and the creation
of school support organizations.
         The school's General Rules and regulations endorse democratic management. Yet there are
some obstacles to its implementation in public schools, such as nomination as a way of filling the
position of school principal and the delegation of school management to the Schools' functional

                                                                                          P á g i n a | 12

bodies (board, secretary, pedagogical and administrative areas), which do not bind the school
council, nor the representation of students and other segments.
The occupation of the school principal position follows the national trend found by Souza (2019,
286), who claims that “the partial victory is not using more democratic models such as elections and
emphasizing the technical aspect of the political (and electoral) association of the school leader to
the current government. ”
         In the sequence of this research’s development, the following school documents were
analyzed: Pedagogic and Political Project (2015), Class Representatives Reports, Student
Representative Class Assignments, School Board Election Book 2009 to 2018, Minutes Book of
Pedagogical Meetings from 2014 to 2015 and other documents attached to the PPP.
         In the PPP, the elements that indicate student participation are generally stated without an
explanation of the students’ involvement in the elaboration process or suggestions for their
engagement in the project’s implementation and evaluation stages. In the opening elements of the
PPP, the creation form attests that the student representation was present in the project’s
development process, alongside with other segments of the school and local community
representatives. In the document’s specific objectives and the justification section, the commitment
to democratic management and the participation of all members of the school community is also
affirmed and it is supported by a part of the justification sector. (AMAZONAS, 2015). (AMAZONAS,
2015).
         In Amazonas School’s Pedagogic Political Project an annex entitled “Standard Teacher” can
be found. Its objective is to reward the teacher that displays the best behavior daily. Attendance,
punctuality, and meeting of deadlines are its judging criteria. Monitoring and evaluation are carried
out by the management team, but it is believed that it would be interesting to enable students’
participation in this project.
         In general, not envisioning the student's contribution to the evaluation process of teachers
or even of the institution is an action that reflects disbelief about the youth's participation capacity.
It is astonishing that even in an educational institution, it seems easier to exclude teenagers from
participation rather than enabling them to it. Nardi (2015), highlights the importance of learning
how to participate and reinforces the procedural condition of engagement, as “the path made while
walking” (NARDI, 2015, p. 658).
         The school's PPP presents an Activity Calendar for the year 2015. In this document, it is
observed that student participation is effective in two types of activity: festivities and the delivery

                                                                                        P á g i n a | 13

of monthly reports from class representatives. On festive dates and events such as the school
anniversary, student’s day, teacher’s day and science fair, student participation is restricted to the
cultural presentations of dances, theater, music, etc. There is no student involvement in the event's
management.
           The 2014 and 2015 Management Plans were also examined. The 2014 Management Plan has
11 goals. For each goal, action challenges, objectives, strategies, leader, deadlines status (whether
it has been reached or is in progress) are presented. For this study, the challenges and responsible
people described in the 2014 Management Plan are significant for analysis.
           The student segment is not expected to participate in any of the management plan
challenges. The involvement of the School Council or other collegiate bodies that could count on
the representation of the different segments is not even foreseen. This data unveils a vulnerability
in the understanding of the support that the School Council could and should provide to school
management.
           By excluding students from responsibility for these goals, the school misses the opportunity
to enable the participation of a fundamental segment in the alignment between pedagogical
practices and the needs of the school. Students could, for example, present the main obstacles
encountered in admission exams preparation or suggest the school to enable more significant
participation of parents and guardians. A School Council that effectively fulfilled its role could be a
space for students to express themselves about these different aspects that make up the school
reality.
           The 2015 Management plan is also silent as for the School Council participation in
implementing the established goals. In the 2015 version, the Management Plan includes the
involvement of Parent Teachers and Community Association (APMC) among those responsible,
under the representation of its presidency.
           The dialogue with the school's student body would assist the mediation and resolution of
some problems faced by the institution. One can think, for example, on young people's contribution
to solving the school dropout issue, which is one of the challenges listed in the Management Plan
2015. Thus, relationships, coexistence, and experiences that young people share in the school
environment makes them able to understand the reasons why their classmates leave school from a
perspective that is not tangible to teachers and other professionals.
           The choice of class presidents is a consolidated practice at school. Monthly class
representatives deliver reports for evaluating the management team. The Report is presented in a

                                                                                       P á g i n a | 14

standard form, made available by the school. It is a survey with questions that concern discipline,
teacher-student relationships, interpersonal relationships, physical space, materials, and
equipment, etc. The assignments and the class president profile are also provided for in the Form.
          It is noteworthy that Amazonas School builds its work structure with the collaboration of
class presidents, which demonstrates a strengthening in the relationship and dialogue between the
school manager and the student body. Apparently, the delivery of monthly reports by the class
presidents makes it possible to monitor classroom routine, teachers- student interaction and other
events.
          Through the work carried out with the class presidents, the school also contributes to the
personal development of the students involved in this work, as it favors the acquisition of
responsibilities in a job that involves the common good. This generates significant learning
experiences for life in society, creating in these students a sense of feeling of belonging to their
school.
          A lack of records on the School Council performance was verified. According to the Elections
Minute Book (from 2009 to 2018), the Council was instated in 2009, having gone through three
formations until 2014. From 2009 on, the school's commitment to the implementation and
permanence of this entity in the institution was observed, as well as the notable participation of the
school community in the election processes of council representatives.
          There are some records of School Council meetings. Nevertheless, the student segment
Council representatives did not attend these gathering.
          The school maintains a habit of hosting pedagogical meetings, many of which directed at
student affairs. These meetings records demonstrate a dialogue between the institution's
management and students. Students are mostly represented by their class presidents during these
gatherings. On these occasions, different matters are addressed, such as students' role in organizing
festive events, the presentation of participatory management processes, among other subjects.
          Data collected at Amazonas School reveal the institution's care in passing on information
about its functioning to students, as well as the strong presence of class presidents in school
meetings. It is evidenced that the School has projects and activities in which student’s leadership
could be triggered.


4 FINAL REMARKS

                                                                                         P á g i n a | 15

       This research reinforces the relevance of educational management studies in the context of
student participation, considering that the circumstances of Brazilian educational institutions reveal
many challenges when it comes to materializing the principle of democratic management in public
education. Although the creation and strengthening of institutional spaces is not the only possibility
to encourage student participation in decision-making, it proves to be one of these important
challenges.
       Amazonas School data related analysis reveals that there are few and fragile forms of student
participation in educational management foreseen in the pedagogic political project. It is also
observed that some actions in which student participation occurs are not envisioned or highlighted
in the PPP.
       Amazonas School’s General Regulations and its Pedagogic Political Project reinforce the
principle of democratic management of public education, highlighting the importance of student
participation in collegiate bodies and of a critical and citizen formation, articulated with the
principles that govern a democratic society.
       Despite these highlights on the importance of democratic management, the documents and
practices experienced at school lack better defined proposals, envisioning ways to reach the
valuable constitutional principle of public education democratic management. As a necessary
development to achieve this goal, the school should insist and invest in means of strengthening
student participation in meetings, collegiate bodies activities and also in the process of discussing
and evaluating the Pedagogic Political Project, in addition to encouraging its organization in the
Student Union.
       The records made available by Amazonas School to this study reveal an incipient student
participation in the drafting of the Pedagogic Political Project, but a strong relationship with
students in cultural activities, class representation and dialogue on different topics of interest to the
School. These results indicate a certain mismatch between the expected engagement in the PPP,
the School Rules and Regulations and the actual student participation practices registered in
schools. However, it is also noticeable that the observed potentials can be explored in order to take
student participation at Amazonas School to another level.
       The realities of public school institutions in the State of Amazonas are manifold. Therefore,
studying the existence and functioning of collegiate bodies that promote student participation in
more teaching intuitions and listening to secondary school students aiming to discuss possible paths
for their participation in school management would be a good way to extend this research.

                                                                                     P á g i n a | 16



                                           REFERENCES


AMAZONAS. SECRETARIA DE EDUCAÇÃO E QUALIDADE DO ENSINO DO ESTADO DO AMAZONAS.
Regimento Geral das Escolas Estaduais do Amazonas. Manaus: CEE, 2010.

AMAZONAS. Projeto Político-Pedagógico. Manaus: SEDUC-AM, 2015.

ARROYO, Miguel Gonzáles. Repensar o Ensino Médio: por que? In: DAYRELL, Juarez Tarcísio;
CARRANO, Paulo, Carrano; MAIA, Carla Linhares (orgs). Juventude e Ensino Médio: sujeitos e
currículos em diálogo. Belo Horizonte: Editora da Universidade Federal de Minas
Gerais, 2014. p. 53-73.

ARAÚJO, Adilson César de. A gestão democrática e os canais de participação dos estudantes.
Retratos da Escola, Brasília, v. 3, n. 4, p. 253-266, jan./jun. 2009. Disponível em:
http://www.esforce.org.br/index.php/semestral. Acesso em 10 de abr. 2015.
BRASIL. Constituição da República Federativa do Brasil – 1988. Disponível em:
http://www.planalto.gov.br/ccivil_03/constituicao/constituicaocompilado.htm. Acesso em 08 abr.
2015.

BRASIL. Lei n. 9.394, de 20 de dezembro de 1996, Lei de Diretrizes e Bases da Educação Nacional
- LDBEN. Disponível em: http://www.planalto.gov.br/ccivil_03/leis/l9394.htm. Acesso em 08 de
abr. 2015.

BRASIL. Lei n. 13.005, de 25 de junho de 2014, Aprova o Plano Nacional de Educação – PNE e dá
outras providências. Disponível em: http://www.planalto.gov.br/ccivil_03/_ato2011-
2014/2014/lei/l13005.htm Acesso em: 16 dez. 2015.

DAYRELL, Juarez Tarcísio. A escola “faz” as juventudes? Reflexões em torno da socialização juvenil.
Educação & Sociedade, Campinas, vol. 28, n. 100 - Especial, p. 1105-1128, out. 2007. Disponível
em: http://www.scielo.br/pdf/es/v28n100/a2228100. Acesso em: 20 dez 2019.

DAYRELL, Juarez; CARRANO, Paulo. Juventude e Ensino Médio: quem é este aluno que chega à
escola. In: DAYRELL; CARRANO; MAIA (orgs). Juventude e Ensino Médio: sujeitos e currículos em
diálogo. Belo Horizonte: Editora da Universidade Federal de Minas
Gerais, 2014. p. 101-134.

INSTITUTO NACIONAL DE ESTUDOS E PESQUISAS EDUCACIONAIS ANÍSIO TEIXEIRA - INEP. Resumo
Técnico: Censo da Educação Básica 2018, Brasília: Instituto Nacional de Estudos e Pesquisas
Educacionais Anísio Teixeira, 2019. 66 p.

LÜDKE, Menga; ANDRÉ, Marli. – Pesquisa em educação: abordagens qualitativas. São Paulo: EPU,
1986.

MARIANO, Cynara Monteiro. Emenda constitucional 95/2016 e o teto dos gastos públicos: Brasil
de volta ao estado de exceção econômico e ao capitalismo do desastre. Revista Investigações

                                                                                       P á g i n a | 17

Constitucionais. Curitiba, vol.4 n.1, p. 259-281, jan./abr. 2017. Disponível em:
http://www.scielo.br/scielo.php?script=sci_arttext &pid=S2359-
56392017000100259&lng=en&nrm=iso&tlng=pt. Acesso em: 19 dez. 2019.

MARQUES, Luciana Rosa. Gestão democrática da educação: os projetos em disputa. Revista
Retratos da Escola, Brasília, v. 8, n. 15, p. 463-471, jul./dez. 2014. Disponível em:
http://www.esforce.org.br/index.php/semestral/article/view/453/584. Acesso em: 28 jan. 2016.

MARTINS, Ângela Maria; SILVA, Vandré Gomes. Estado da arte: gestão, autonomia da escola e
órgãos colegiados (2000/2008). Cadernos de Pesquisa. v. 41, n. 142, p. 228-245. jan/abr, 2011.
Disponível em: http://www.scielo.br/scielo.php?script=sci_arttext&pid=S0100-
15742011000200017. Acesso em: 25 jan. 2017.

MARTINS, Francisco André Silva; DAYRELL, Juarez Tarcísio. Juventude e Participação: o grêmio
estudantil como espaço educativo. Educação & Realidade, Porto Alegre, v. 38, n. 4, p. 1267-1282,
out./dez. 2013. ISSN 2175-6236. DOI 10.1590/S2175-62362013000400014. Disponível em:
http://www.scielo.br/scielo.php?script=sci_arttext&pid=S2175-
62362013000400014&lng=en&nrm=iso. Acesso em: 20 dez. 2019.

MINAYO, Maria Cecília de Souza. Ciência, Técnica e Arte: o desafio da pesquisa social. In: MINAYO,
M. C. S (org). Pesquisa Social: teoria, método e criatividade. 23. ed. Petrópolis/RJ: Vozes, 1994.

NARDI, Elton Luiz. Itinerários da participação na gestão de escolas públicas de educação básica.
RBPAE - v. 31, n. 3, p. 649 - 666 set./dez. 2015. Disponível em:
https://seer.ufrgs.br/rbpae/article/view/59089. Acesso em: 01 set. 2019.

PINHEIRO, Maria das Graças Sá Peixoto; CALDAS, Edla Cristina Rodrigues. Políticas Públicas e
Gestão Escolar: a Participação da Comunidade em Escolas do Ensino Fundamental – Zona Leste de
Manaus. In: XXIV Simpósio Brasileiro e III Congresso Interamericano de Política e Administração
da Educação, 2009, Vitória. Cadernos ANPAE, 2009.

PIRES, Ennia Débora Passos Braga; MORORÓ, Leila Pio. O papel do projeto pedagógico escolar na
política educacional: entre o legal e o instituível. Revista Tempos e Espaços em Educação. São
Cristóvão, Sergipe, Brasil, v. 11, n. 01, Edição Especial, p. 335-350, dezembro, 2018. ISSN 2358-
1425 DOI 10.20952/revtee.v11i01.9535 Disponível em:
https://seer.ufs.br/index.php/revtee/article/view/9535. Acesso em: 05 jan 2020.

RIBEIRO, Eliane; MACEDO, Severine. Notas sobre políticas públicas de juventude no Brasil:
conquistas e desafios. Rev. Cien. Soc. vol.31 n.42, p. 107-126. Montevideo, jun. 2018. ISSN 1688-
4981. DOI 10.26489/rvs.v31i42.5 Disponível em:
http://www.scielo.edu.uy/scielo.php?script=sci_arttext&pid=S0797-
55382018000100107&lng=es&nrm=iso. Acesso em: 12 dez 2019.

SOUZA, Angêlo Ricardo de. As condições de democratização da escola pública brasileira. Ensaio:
aval. pol. públ. Educ., Rio de Janeiro, v. 27, n. 103, p. 271-290, abr./jun. 2019. ISSN 0104-4036. DOI
10.1590/s0104-40362018002601470. Disponível em:
http://www.scielo.br/scielo.php?script=sci_abstract&pid=S0104-
40362019000200271&lng=en&nrm=iso&tlng=pt. Acesso em 28 ago. 2019.

                                                                                         P á g i n a | 18


SPOSITO, Marília Pontes. Educação, Gestão Democrática e Participação Popular. In: BASTOS, João
Baptista (org). Gestão Democrática. 2. ed. Rio de Janeiro: DP&A, 2001.
SPOSITO, Marília Pontes; CARRANO, Paulo César Rodrigues. Juventude e políticas públicas no
Brasil. Revista Brasileira de Educação, N 24, Set /Out /Nov /Dez 2003. p. 16-39. ISSN 1809-449X
DOI 10.1590/S1413-24782003000300003. Disponível em:
http://www.scielo.br/scielo.php?script=sci_arttext&pid=S1413-
24782003000300003&lng=en&nrm=iso. Acesso em 24 jan. 2020.

VEIGA, Ilma Passos Alencastro. Projeto Político-Pedagógico da Escola: uma construção coletiva. In:
VEIGA, Ilma Passos Alencastro (org.). Projeto Político-Pedagógico da Escola: uma construção
possível. 29 ed. Campinas/SP: Papirus, 2013.

VEIGA, Ilma Passos Alencastro. Conselho Escolar e Projeto Político-Pedagógico. In: VEIGA, Ilma
Passos Alencastro. (org.). Quem sabe faz a hora de construir o Projeto Político-Pedagógico.
Campinas/SP: Papirus, 2007.


AUTHOR’S BIOGRAPHIES


Nádia Maciel Falcão has a PhD in Education from Fluminense Federal University (UFF) and a master’s degree
in Education from the Education Graduate Program at the Federal University of Amazonas. She is a member
of the Education, cultures and Amazonian challenges Research Group and a professor at the Federal
University of Amazonas. E-mail: nadiafalcao@ufam.edu.br ORCID: https://orcid.org/0000-0002-3196-0341

Sara dos Santos da Silva has an undergraduate degree in Pedagogy from the Federal University of Amazonas
(UFAM). She is a member of the Education, cultures and Amazonian challenges research group and a teacher
at Manaus’ Municipal Office of Education. Email: sarinha1993-2012@hotmail.com ORCID:
https://orcid.org/0000-0001-6841-6430


                                                                                Received on: 09-20-2019
                                                                               Approved on: 01-10-2020
                                                                               Published in: 02-29-2020.