International Journal of Educational Dynamics
                                             Vol. 6 No. 2 (pp. 560-568) June 2024
                                             p_ISSN 2655-4852
http://ijeds.ppj.unp.ac.id/index.php/IJEDS   e_ISSN 2655-5093




     Communication Strategies of School Principals for Effective School
                  Management: A Literature Review
                                  *
                                      Umy Nadrah Simatupang, Sufyarma Marsidin, Sulastri

                                              Universitas Negeri Padang, Indonesia
                                              *
                                              E-mail: umysimatupang@gmail.com

                        Received: 12 Dec. 2023, Revised: 12 May. 2024, Accepted: 30 May. 2024

                                                            ABSTRACT

Education is a multifaceted process encompassing cognitive, affective, and physical-motor development
crucial for individual and societal advancement. The quality of education relies heavily on esteemed school
institutions that guide educational initiatives toward positive outcomes. However, Indonesia's current
educational landscape reveals diverse perceptions of educational quality, exposing a gap between community
expectations and expert evaluations. In response to these challenges, school principals play a pivotal role in
promoting effective school management through adept leadership and strategic communication. This
literature review examines the attributes of effective school management, emphasizing the leadership
responsibilities of school principals in Indonesia. Key components include defining educational objectives
clearly, implementing structured learning approaches, and fostering inclusive stakeholder engagement.
Additionally, the study highlights communication as pivotal in enhancing organizational coherence and
achieving educational goals. Through an analysis of existing literature, this paper advocates for customized
communication strategies by school principals to enhance school management effectiveness, contributing to
the discourse on educational leadership and management practices in Indonesia.

Keywords: Education Quality, School Management, School Principals, Communication Strategies.




                                                    INTRODUCTION

   Education is a process in which individuals acquire knowledge, including three main
components: cognitive, affective, and physical-motor. Education is expected to help
individuals develop this knowledge to provide benefits not only for themselves but also for
society in general (Nurhayati & Kusyani, 2022). Quality education is closely related to
school institutions with a good reputation and can direct education in a better direction.
Education is not only a symbol of formality but also a great hope and ideal for every nation
to increase the level of human thinking, thereby producing individuals who are civilized,
advanced, modern, prosperous, and prosperous.
   Schools are formal institutions that have duties and responsibilities to guide students to
gain knowledge and develop attitudes to become quality human beings. This is done
through detailed and systematic programs. This systematic planning will not be
implemented well without the role of the school principal, who has the right and authority
to lead the school. Various school principal leadership concepts can be adapted to the
situations faced in the field (Fatimah et al., 2015).




                                                                  560

   Quality schools have clear characteristics and can be recognized by the community.
Some of these characteristics include 1) having good and adequate work guidelines, which
are directed towards students; 2) directing activities to develop student potential; 3) giving
roles and responsibilities to students to learn and behave well; 4) have guidelines for
evaluating and assessing academic achievement; 5) apply structured learning methods
based on educational research; 6) organizing school institutions and classes to create a
conducive learning atmosphere; 7) make concrete policies and in line with targets; 8)
create and build a comfortable, respectful and efficient environment; 9) achieve success by
employee abilities; 10) involving stakeholders, such as parents, to support schools in
achieving success; and 11) collaborate with stakeholders within its scope (Rolan, 2020).
   The quality of formal learning programs in Indonesia is currently a concern for many
parties, not only from education experts but also from the general public. Seeing that the
condition of education in Indonesia still needs a lot of improvement, this raises hopes that
there will be significant changes to improve the quality of education. Facts on the ground
show that the quality of education in Indonesia currently does not meet general
expectations. Views and perceptions regarding the quality of education vary greatly.
Parents often think that quality education is reflected in inadequate school facilities, such
as large buildings, complete facilities, and a beautiful school environment. Meanwhile,
education experts consider that quality education is characterized by outstanding school
achievements, both at the national, regional, and international levels (Arief, 2023).
   Apart from that, the leadership concept of school principals is often not able to carry out
their roles and responsibilities optimally. This includes the ability to make decisions, build
good communication with subordinates, and manage various aspects of the school. It
cannot be denied that every leader has a big responsibility. All of this can be overcome
with good strategies that are adapted to the conditions in the field (Hermawati & Sayroji,
2023). The role of the school principal is very important because it is directly related to the
implementation of educational programs in schools. The success of this program depends
on the leadership of the school principal (Mahmud et al., 2021). Therefore, school
principals need to develop effective communication as a basis for implementing good
management for the progress of the school. Leadership is not just position and status, but
something that is born from a systematic flow within the individual (Arief, 2023). The
school principal must be able to create a conducive atmosphere and develop innovative
ideas in carrying out activities at school. School management is a concept that involves
managing an institution through well-designed processes and stages. This management
involves various activities for each school component, both human resources and other
components, to achieve the set goals (Faturrochman, 2022).
   The problems mentioned above are not something new, because they are often found in
the field. To resolve this problem, the focus needs to be given to effective leadership,
especially in building harmonious communication with all parties in the school. Good
communication is one of the advantages given by God to humans. With this ability,




                                             561

humans are not only able to transfer information but can also transform knowledge, effort,
and expertise from generation to generation.
   Communication is often considered trivial, even though communication errors can lead
to bad relationships. Communication is the process of conveying information from the
sender to the recipient of the message, creating a good reciprocal relationship between the
two. Everyone has a different way of communicating, but not everyone can communicate
effectively. The effectiveness of communication can be seen from the impact it has,
especially in changing a person's attitude after communication occurs (Rolan, 2020). Based
on the facts and problems that have been reviewed, it is important to examine school
principal communication in building effective school management. This article is expected
to provide insight and understanding regarding communication strategies by school
principals to improve the effectiveness of school management.


                                        METHODS

    The research method used in this article is a literature study. Literature study is a
method of collecting data through searching various sources, starting from books, and
research journals both national and international, as well as other sources that support and
are relevant according to the title discussed by the author. After the writer obtains relevant
sources, the writer will process them by reading, analyzing, and putting them into writing.
In library research, there are at least four characteristics that are very close and can be used
as reference material for researchers. First, the writer or researcher has direct contact with
literature, both in written form and digital data. Second, library data is always ready to be
used as a reference and the amount is very large, so researchers do not need to go directly
into the field, because data can be obtained from books, journals, and other trusted
references. Third, literature studies often obtain results from secondary data, not through
sources in the field. Fourth, there are no restrictions on place and time in obtaining an
effective literature review (Supriyadi, 2017).



                                         RESULT

3.1 Building Good Communication between Principals and Subordinates
   A school is a place that functions to form a generation that is faithful, intelligent, and
has good morals. Within a school, various components work together to achieve
predetermined goals. Each component, such as the principal, teachers, staff, students, and
parents, has different roles and responsibilities. The principal must be able to carry out his
role well to take the school in a more advanced direction because the principal has a very
important authority and role (Dewi & Poernomo, 2022). Schools as formal organizations




                                              562

have the function of forming students into individuals with character and ethics, as well as
providing knowledge to increase intelligence. This cannot be achieved instantly and
requires good management from the school principal. One important element in effective
school management is communication built by the school principal (Dewi & Poernomo,
2022). In everyday life, humans are required to build social relationships with other people.
As social creatures, humans need interaction to fulfill daily needs and motivate themselves
to make changes. Organizations look for individuals who can follow instructions, provide
useful feedback, get along with coworkers and customers, build networks, and work with
high commitment (Atmaja & Dewi, 2018).
    Effective communication is very important in human life, including in the context of
educational organizations such as schools. Good communication can help improve
relationships between organizational members and ensure that duties and responsibilities
can be carried out well. By building organized communication, schools can achieve the
desired goals effectively and efficiently. Effective communication in schools does not only
depend on technology but also motivation and a supportive environment (Lestari, 2019).
    Communication activities in organizations aim to create caring relationships and a sense
of equality between organizational members. If communication goes well, the organization
can achieve the expected success. On the other hand, if communication does not run
smoothly, this can disrupt organizational performance. Therefore, communication carried
out by the school principal is very important because the principal plays a role as a leader
in the school organization (Zahara, 2018).
    Communication in education is an activity that helps people relate to each other to better
achieve educational goals. The principal must use organizational communication to convey
his messages to subordinates. Organizational communication includes sending and
receiving messages both formally and informally. Informal communication is
communication that occurs naturally in personal and organizational relationships, using
everyday language. Meanwhile, formal communication is related to organizational
management and is usually carried out through official instructions or orders (Lestari,
2022). Improving equity, quality, and overall goals is important in maintaining effective
communication between principals, teachers, and school staff. One way to achieve this
goal is to create an organizational environment that is conducive to effective
communication between leaders and subordinates. In this process, management
expectations and employee expectations will be combined during the exchange of
information between leaders and subordinates (Asri, 2022).
    Effective communication in schools requires an understanding of several important
elements, such as messages, processes, relationships, environments, and networks.
Suryanto stated that a good message is a message that can be well received by the
recipient. A good communication process ensures that messages can be passed on
effectively. Good relationships between departments are also important to ensure optimal
communication function. The organizational environment must support physical and social




                                             563

development that influences decision-making. Lastly, the network in an organization must
function like a chain that connects individuals who occupy certain positions to ensure
effective communication (Jaya, 2021).

3.2 Good Management Effectiveness Planning in Schools
   The managerial leadership of the school principal has an important role in ensuring
management that is appropriate to the circumstances, conditions, and needs of the school to
achieve school goals. The principal is responsible for creating and supporting a school
culture that supports positive attitudes in all aspects related to the school. In carrying out
management, school principals must pay attention to elements of school life, including
informal, symbolic, and intangible elements (Raharjo & Yuliana, 2016).
   The process of managing a school is known as school management, which includes
planning, organizing, leading, and supervising the school to achieve predetermined goals.
As the highest leader of the organization, the school principal has a position appropriate to
his placement and carries out tasks according to his main duties and responsibilities
according to school regulations. This is a priority for schools in the hope of creating good
quality education and good synergy (Harun et al., 2016). Several existing indicators can be
used to determine effective school management standards, such as 1) student learning
facilities; 2) management and student services; 3) facilities and infrastructure; 4) economic
funding programs for education; 5) contribution from the community; and 6) school
culture. Efforts to improve the quality of education are a task that cannot be taken lightly
but are a heavy responsibility. Therefore, it is hoped that schools, communities, and the
government can work together to create effective education services (Hadziq, 2016).
   Regarding school quality, school quality has an important role in increasing the
attractiveness of school customers in the form of public trust in sending their children to
schools that are considered to be of good quality. Leadership commitment, school
development team functions, program implementation, strategy, training, member
participation, continuous improvement, implementation of quality standards, and customer
satisfaction are some examples of management implementation (Sabariah, 2021).
   Building a quality educational institution requires a lot of effort. This cannot be
separated from the efforts or steps that can be taken by schools. Some of these steps are: 1)
school organizations must develop quality and systematic learning as part of educational
services for students; 2) supporting the quality of teaching and education personnel as a
form of contribution in determining and implementing the quality of educational services;
3) building collaboration and cooperative relationships as an effort to develop educational
organizations with national level institutions; 4) develop pedagogical creativity and
employees working in school organizations to support strengthening school organizations;
and 5) developing places and other supporting services (Zahri et al., 2023). The quality of
education in schools is acceptable if the school produces quality learning as a product of
effective management carried out by the school. This cannot be separated from the




                                             564

responsibilities of school principals, teaching staff, and other staff in supporting school
success. Therefore, school principals must provide maximum services based on the needs
of the school community. If school principals provide the best service for their school,
employees will also feel the impact by participating in the school's progress (Salam, 2017).

3.3 Principal Communication in Improving School Management Effectiveness
   The principal's communication ability in leading subordinates is the first step in the
strategy for building organizational communication (Romadona & Setiawan, 2020).
Communication is very important for school management, both internally and externally.
These two types of communication greatly influence the smoothness, ease, and comfort in
carrying out tasks.

Internal Communications
   Internal communication is communication that occurs between school members and
must be well-developed by the principal and teachers. This effort to improve
communication is not only aimed at creating harmonious relations between internal school
parties but is also expected to have a positive and meaningful impact on the school.
Internal communication can be linked to professional ties, which must comply with the
teacher's ethics and code of conduct. If relationships are based on formality, then
interpersonal relationships will automatically polarize into a professional form of
communication.

External Communications
   External communication includes communication that occurs between schools and
students' parents, as well as between schools and society as a whole, both institutionally
and individually. The types of communication above can be conceptualized well because
of the principal's role as a leader in the organizational structure. Leadership is a very
important component in the school management system because it is a supporting factor
that can move the school organization through management and changes carried out by the
school principal. The principal is not only present symbolically but can also make a
positive contribution to organizational development. Leadership can also be defined as a
person's ability to encourage other people to work together and achieve common goals
(Sari et al., 2021).
   Success in an organization or institution cannot be separated from the presence of a
leader. A person's leadership spirit must always be honed through the demands of
conditions in the organizational environment (Sukataman et al., 2022). Three types of
leadership that are considered relevant for building effective schools are as follows:
 Transactional leadership, which emphasizes the responsibilities carried out by members
   or subordinates.




                                            565

 Transformational leadership, where both leaders and subordinates motivate each other
   to increase morale and work enthusiasm.
 Visionary leadership, where a leader can look forward and beyond the current time
   (Huda, 2019).
   Building good communication by the school principal can be implemented to increase
the effectiveness of management in schools, including implementing optimal supervision
and monitoring. Apart from planning well, a good school principal must also implement
and guide teachers well. Theoretically, principals have many plans to supervise classroom
teachers. However, because of the many tasks outside their work, school principals
sometimes do not focus on supervision. These reasons are sometimes acceptable, and
sometimes unacceptable. What is certain is that the principal has a role in providing
supervision for every teacher in the school. School principals are required to monitor,
evaluate, and report educational programs by standard operating procedures, namely:
 Attempt to develop guidelines for measuring and evaluating the effectiveness of
   programmed education.
 Strive to monitor and evaluate the effectiveness of educational programs using
   appropriate educational techniques.
 Strive to write reports by the instructions for the monitoring and assessment reporting
   process.
   All of these things will not be achieved well without the role of the principal as a leader
and the role of subordinates, namely teachers, who work together. Not only must the role
of the school principal be maximized, but teachers must also be fully committed to
carrying out their duties.



                                    CONCLUSIONS

   Every school hopes for better integrity because this will have a positive impact on the
school's progress as an added value that can attract public attention. Moreover, the intense
level of competition forces schools to compete in improving their quality. However, this is
not always achieved even though the school principal has carried out good management to
create synergy and effectiveness. This responsibility does not only lie with the school
principal, but it is also an important task for all school personnel, such as teachers, to
contribute and participate systematically in efforts to improve school quality. A good
school principal must have good leadership skills, in line with their roles and
responsibilities in carrying out the main duties and responsibilities that apply based on
school regulations. School principals are also required to be professional and fair in
making decisions because this has a direct influence on school management. One
important element in ensuring a good relationship is communication. Without effective
communication, a school organization can't run well. Therefore, school principals must




                                             566

build good, effective, and targeted communication to create a dynamic and innovative
work culture. Based on insight into the importance of communication in school leadership
to increase management effectiveness, school principals must evaluate the communication
that has been running so far and replace it with better communication strategies to be
implemented in the school organization.


                                   REFERENCES

Arief, M. (2023). Konsep Sekolah Yang Bermutu. Jurnal Ilmiah Ilmu Pendidikan Dan
      Kedakwahan, 15(30), 29–36.
Asri, I. (2022). Strategi Komunikasi Organisasi Dalam Membangun Semangat Kerja
      Pegawai Pusdiklat Tenaga Administrasi Kementerian Agama Ri. IKON Jurnal Ilmu
      Komunikasi , 27(3), 267–285.
Atmaja, S., Dewi, R. (2018). Komunikasi Organisasi (Suatu Tinjauan Teoritis dan Praktis).
     Jurnal Komunikasi, 3(2), 192-206.
Dewi, I.B.M., & Poernomo, M. I. (2022). Peran Komunikasi Organisasi Kepala Sekolah
     Dalam Meningkatkan Kinerja Guru Di SMK Bina Rahayu Depok. Jurnal Mahardika
     Adiwidia, 2(1), 48.
Fatimah, F., Djailani, A. R., & Khairuddin, K. (2015). Komunikasi Kepala Sekolah Dalam
     Meningkatkan Kinerja Guru Pada SMA Negeri 1 Geumpang Kabupaten Pidie.
     Jurnal Administrasi Pendidikan Program Pascasarjana Unsyiah, 3(4), 74023.
Fathurrochman, I. (2022). Pengelolaan Manajemen Sekolah yang Efektif. Jurnal
     Pengabdian Kepada Masyarakat, 91(5), 328–341.
Hadziq, A. (2016). Implementasi Manajemen Berbasis Sekolah (School Based
     Management) Dalam Mewujudkan Sekolah Efektif (Studi Kasus Di MTS Nu Sabilul
     Muttaqin Jepang Mejobo Kudus). Quality, 4(2), 351–371.
Harun, C. Z., Nur, M., & Ibrahim, S. (2016). Manajemen Sekolah Dalam Meningkatkan
     Mutu Pendidikan Pada Sdn Dayah Guci Kabupaten Pidie.Jurnal Administrasi
     Pendidikan, 11(1), 93–103.
Hermawati, N., & Sayroji, A. (2023). Konsep-Konsep Kepemimpinan dalam Organisasi.
    4(1), 109–116.
Huda, M. N. (2019). Membentuk sekolah yang efektif. Ta’dibi : Jurnal Prodi Manajemen
     Pendidikan Islam, Volume VII, 43–63.
Jaya, S. (2021). Strategi Membangun Komunikasi yang Efektif untuk Meningkatkan
      Kinerja Guru Di Sekolah. Pendidikan, 10(2), 20–36.
Lestari, I. D. (2019). Implementasi Komunikasi Efektif Kepala Sekolah dalam
      Meningkatkan Motivasi Kerja Guru di SDN Mekarjaya 30 Depok. SAP (Susunan
      Artikel Pendidikan), 3(3).




                                           567

Mahmud, H., Yusuf, M., & Masâ, L. P. (2020). Peran Kepala Sekolah dalam
    Meningkatkan Motivasi Guru untuk Menggunakan E-Learning pada Masa Covid 19
    Jurusan Teknik Komputer di Sekolah Menengah Kejuruan Negeri 2 Palopo. Journal
    of Teaching dan Learning Research, 2(2), 45-54.
Nurhayati, & Diah Kusyani. (2022). Implementasi Komunikasi Organisasi dalam
     Meningkatkan Mutu Pembelajaran. Jurnal Ilmiah Pendidikan Profesi Guru, 5(1),
     108–116.
Raharjo, S. B., & Yuliana, L. (2016). Manajemen Sekolah Untuk Mencapai Sekolah
     Unggul Yang Menyenangkan: Studi Kasus Di Sman 1 Sleman Yogyakarta. Jurnal
     Pendidikan Dan Kebudayaan, 1(2), 203–217.
Rolan, R. (2020). Membangun Karakter Sekolah Bermutu Melalui Komunikasi Yang
     Efektif. JUPE : Jurnal Pendidikan Mandala, 5(6).
Romadona, M. R., & Setiawan, S. (2020). Communication of Organizations in
    Organizations Change’s Phenomenon in Research and Development Institution.
    Journal Pekommas, 5(1), 91.
Sabariah, S. (2021). Manajemen Sekolah dalam Meningkatkan Mutu Pendidikan.
     Edukatif : Jurnal Ilmu Pendidikan, 4(1), 116–122.
Sukataman, S., Maghfuri, M. A., & Asnawi, R. I. (2022). Konsep Umum Tentang
     Kepemimpinan. IBTIDA- Jurnal Kajian Pendidikan Dasar,2(1), 57–61.
Salam, E. S. (2017). Manajemen Sekolah Ideal melalui Pendekatan Sastra ( Sebuah Kajian
     Tentang Buku “ Sekolah Cinta ” Karya Edi Sutarto ). DIdakti Jurnal Kependidikan,
     11, 63–80.
Sari, E., Sihaloho, R., Sutomo, S., & Arum, W. S. A. (2021). Meningkatkan Komitmen
      Guru melalui Optimalisasi Kepemimpinan Kepala Sekolah. Jurnal Jendela
      Pendidikan, 1(04), 250–264.
Supriyadi, S. (2017). Community of Practitioners: Solusi Alternatif Berbagi Pengetahuan
     antar Pustakawan. Lentera Pustaka: Jurnal Kajian Ilmu Perpustakaan, Informasi
     Dan Kearsipan, 2(2), 83.
Zahara, E. (2018). Peranan Komunikasi Organisasi Pimpinan Organisasi. Jurnal Warta,
     1829–7463.
Zahri, C., Nasution, H, U., Sopang, I, F., Junaldi, D, L. (2023). Pembenahan Manajemen
      dan Tata Kelola Penyelenggaraan Pendidikan. Jurnal Pengabdian kepada
      Masyarakat, 4(1), 576-585.




                                          568