Egalita : Jurnal Kesetaraan dan Keadilan Gender            Volume 15, No 2, Tahun 2020




    WOMEN IN EDUCATIONAL LEADERSHIP FROM ISLAMIC
                   PERSPECTIVES

                                  Devi Pramitha
                         UIN Maulana Malik Ibrahim Malang
                           devipramitha@uin-malang.ac.id


Abstract
      The capacity of women to become leaders has always been the main question
      questioned by various groups when the discourse on women's leadership
      develops in public, especially when debates are related to an Islamic
      perspective. For women who lead educational institutions, they must be able
      to lead the institution, be responsible for the achievement of the institution,
      and are also expected to become leaders and innovators in the institution.
      Besides that, one must also have leadership skills and human relations and
      leadership skills that are good to apply the model according to its
      characteristics, because the real success of an institution lies in the efficiency
      and effectiveness of the appearance of a leader. This study uses a qualitative
      approach to literature study methods. From the results of the author's
      analysis, it can be concluded that: (1) Women have the spirit, skills, and
      qualities that are not less than men; (2) Requirement for an educational leader
      is that the educational leader must be able to lead the organization/
      institution, is responsible for the achievement of the organization/ institution,
      is also expected to be leaders and innovators in organizations/ institutions;
      and (3) both one's biological factor that men and women are not the main
      requirements in educational leadership.

      Keyword: Educational Leadership, Islamic Perspective, Women’s Leadership


INTRODUCTION
       In the book Megatrends 2000, there is a chapter entitled "The I990's"
Decade of Women in Leadership" written by John Naisbitt and Patricia
Aburdene, they predict that in the 1990s and away into the 21st century, the
women’s role increases. The most interesting thing is that opportunities for
women to become leaders are greater. Although Naisbitt and Aburdene are
making predictions based on the realities and historical experiences of
women in the United States, it does not mean that Indonesian will not be
affected since, in this globalization era, the world society is affected each
other. Several phenomena that occurred in the Western will affect Indonesia
(Al-Hibri, dkk, 2001).
       When we talk about leadership, it is associated with the power aspect,
whereas the sense of leadership can be interpreted more widely and not
limited to the power in the political area. Marwah Daoed suggests that
leaders should be available in various fields and levels. There are leaders in



                                          15

Egalita : Jurnal Kesetaraan dan Keadilan Gender       Volume 15, No 2, Tahun 2020




the world of ideas, and some are in the real world (Tan, 1991). Furthermore,
leadership sources are more diverse so that more opportunities for women
to achieve it.
       Nowadays, women’s leadership became a public issue that is always
discussed and has provoked polemics and debates between the pros and cons
to women as state leaders, despite the recognition of basic human rights that
appears to already have a significant increase in various parts of the world.
This recognition is applied also for the rights to be equal to men. Moreover,
the presence of women leaders in education is still a minority, as evidenced
by the lack number of female Principals, female chiefs, or heads of Islamic
Education Institute, the small number made the effectiveness of women in
education remains a question. Even though the leadership and active role of
women in the public sphere is one of the main ideas in the discourse of
equality and gender justice (Naily, 2008).
       The majority of the population in Indonesia is Moslem, but as
recognized from the past until today, the implementation of democracy in the
true teaching in Islam was still quite daunting. It is seen from the inequality
of women’s social position as still widespread. Although Megawati Soekarno
Putri has been elected to lead this country, it is still even generated a lot of
controversies. Parties disagreeing with thinking in cultural aspects were not
willing to accept a woman as a leader. On the other hand, the sympathizers
claim that the event indicating a consciousness of the nation towards gender
consciousness regardless of the quality of the woman is raised after the
election of Megawati.
       he mission of Islam is to free human beings, both men and women
from the shackles of oppression, backwardness, and injustice. There are
many texts of Al-Quran and Hadith that proclaim these. However, it often
misleads to refraction gender as if the text is to favor a particular gender.
Moreover, religious texts are only partially understood, so that distortion of
interpretation as if Islam discriminates against a particular gender (Diana,
2008). Wahbah Al-Zuhaili says that men as a condition of a leader are the
consensus of Fiqh scholars. It is based on the hadith of The Prophet that
narrated by Abiy Bakrah, who outwardly showed that a nation will not
prosper if led by a woman.
       This Hadith is understood as a sign that women should not become a
leader in any matters. Therefore many scholars view women as not allowed
to lead. They responded to this Hadith as the Shari’a of Islam that becomes a
universal standard, regardless of the aspects related to the Hadith. Such is the
capacity of the Prophet when he said the Hadith and condition of the
background of Hadith as well as the social setting that surrounds a Hadith
(Diana, 2008).



                                         16

Egalita : Jurnal Kesetaraan dan Keadilan Gender        Volume 15, No 2, Tahun 2020




        In the history of al-Bukhari that marfu 'and authentic quality no. 2232
stated that:
        From 'Abd Allah ibn' Umar that he heard Rasulullah. said, ”You all are
        leaders and will be questioned about his leadership, a man is a leader in
        his home and his leadership will be questioned, a woman is a leader in
        the home of her husband and his leadership will be questioned, an aide
        to the leader of the common property of his master, and will be
        questioned leadership”, 'Abd Allah ibn Umar said, all that I heard from
        the Prophet, and I think the Prophet also said, "and a man was the
        leader of his father's treasure, and he will be questioned his leadership,
        all you are the leader and his leadership will be questioned.

        Hadith above that is on the historical context of the Arab community
divides the domestic duties for women and the public for men. Each part
must take responsibility for his dependents. But in modern society, these
roles are not evolving, as women and men alike are demanded to be equal in
both domestic and public domains. Responsibilities of the two domains are
flexibly located at both. The development of science and technology can
support a shift domestic role of public-together between men and women.
Thus, whoever it is either male or female even eligible to become a leader
(Anwar, dkk, 2010).
        For example, in education, the leader of educational institutions has a
very big role because he is a coordinator, determine the direction and
policies towards educational institutions at large. As a manager of
institutional education units, leaders are required to always improve the
effectiveness of their performance. To achieve effective quality education,
officials and all stakeholders must work together with the full cooperation of
cohesion in all respects.

DISCUSSION
Leadership from The Islamic Perspective
        Educational leadership is an essential part of an educational
organization, even a very urgent matter in the course of educational
organizations to achieve educational goals that are institutional and national
levels. Bush (2008) Bush in this framework states that outstanding leadership
has invariably emerged as a key characteristic of outstanding schools. There
can no longer be a doubt that those seeking quality in education must ensure its
presence and that the development of potential leaders must be given high
priority.
        Also in the world of education ‘like or dislike’ to know the advantages
and disadvantages of educational leadership figure. Therefore, education is a
social institution that offers services that are intellectual, affective,




                                         17

Egalita : Jurnal Kesetaraan dan Keadilan Gender                                                             Volume 15, No 2, Tahun 2020




psychomotor, emotional, and even spiritual self-learners fostered in
existence for the survival of human civilization. Thus, the ideal leadership is
leadership that exemplified the Prophet Muhammad as the leader of
multidimensional, religious leaders, warlords, and also as a leader in
education (Baharuddin dan Umiarso, 2012).
       Islam is a religion that is concerned about leadership. This is because
Islam considers man as basically the leader, which is the representative of
Allah on earth, or what we refer to as khalifatullah fi al-ard, as written in the
Qur'an. Al-Baqarah: 30, namely:

ُ ‫ض َخ ِي ۡيفَت ؕ قَاىُ ۡ ٰٓىا اَت َ ۡجعَ ُو فِ ۡي َها ٍَ ِۡ ي ُّۡف ِسد‬        ِ ‫َوا ِۡذ قَا َه َزبُّلَ ِى ۡي ََيٰٓ ِٕٮ َن ِت اِ ِّّ ًۡ َجا ِع ٌو فًِ ۡاۡلَ ۡز‬
            َُ ‫ً ا َ ۡعيَ ٌُ ٍَا َۡل ت َعۡ يَ َُ ۡى‬
                                                  ٰٓ ۡ ِّّ ِ‫ِّس ىَـلَ قَا َه ا‬                           َ ُّ ُِ ‫فِ ۡي َها َويَ ۡس ِفلُ اى ِد ّ ٍَا ٰٓ َء َوّ َۡح‬
                                                                           ُ ‫س ِبّ ُح ِب َح َۡدِكَ َوُّقَد‬
              “And when your Lord said to the angels: "That I am making in the earth
              a leader ." They said: "Do you make in it, who corrupts in it and sheds
              the blood, and we praise with Your praise and we holiness to You." He
              said: "I know what you do not know”.

        In the authentic hadith, the Prophet also emphasized that every
person is a leader: "Every time you are a leader, and be responsible for the
people he leads; an imam (head of state) is the leader and be responsible for
the people they lead." (Narrated by Bukhari from Ibn Umar companions).
        In the Islamic concept, leadership can be defined as a concept of
interaction, relationships, authority, influence activities, directing and
coordinating both horizontally and vertically. Which then in management
theory, functions as a leader of planners and decision-makers (planning and
decision-maker), organizer (organization), leadership and motivation
(leading and motivation), monitoring (controlling), and others (Fakih, dkk,
2001). It can be concluded that the leadership in the Islamic perspective is an
activity or the ability of others to direct and motivate the behavior of others,
and there is a corporation following the values of Al-Quran and Al-Hadith to
achieve the desired objectives together.
        Some terms are commonly used in Islamic literature in terms of
leadership, namely: the caliph, ulul amri, priests, and malik. Caliph as defined
by Ibn Khaldun had two lawsuits that benefit the world and the hereafter. On
one hand, the leader in the replacement of leadership gets a mandate from
heaven after the Apostles died. While on the other hand, leaders who set the
man on earth, of course, rationality leaders must walk the objective
conditions on earth (Baharuddin dan Umiarso, 2012).
        The term of ulil amri can be interpreted as the powers and rights
owners to order something. Someone who has the power to order something




                                                                               18

Egalita : Jurnal Kesetaraan dan Keadilan Gender                                                   Volume 15, No 2, Tahun 2020




meaningful in question has the power to regulate and control the situation
(Salim, 2004). In the Qur'an Surah an-Nisa ': 83 identifies the existence of
leadership that is strongly associated with the leadership of God and His
Messenger so that after the Prophet's death ulil amri as a reference in dealing
with the problem as well as the duty to always be obeyed.
        Furthermore, the priest said that the roots of the
letter hamzah and mim, both the letter has many meanings, among them is
the principal, where again, prayers, time and. The scholars define the word
priest as any person can be followed and displayed next to the various
problems. As for the term, al-Malik means a person who has the authority to
order something and ban something in connection with a government
(Zakariyya, 1989).
        Differences in terms of leadership in Islam and that proposed by the
theorists of leadership is that leadership in Islam is to carry out the functions
of the human as a vicegerent on earth. It also runs a foundation in leadership
in Islam must be based on the Qur'an and hadith. So the core of the
leadership of the terms above equation on the domain containing lead or
mobilize many people to achieve a common goal which is blessed by Allah
SWT. That is, these terms lead to the devotion of a man to his Creator in the
world and reaching happiness hereafter. In this case, the direct leadership of
the Islamic leadership principles of Islam, which is trustworthy, fair, shura
(consultation), and amr doing good and avoiding evil that must be applied in
leadership behavior.

Women’s Leadership from An Islamic Perspective
       The discourse of women in Islam has always received a very serious
concern. The role and function of women become an emphasis. Basically,
women and men seated in the view of Islam are the same in law. This
description is very apparent in surah An-Nisa 1:
                ‫احدَةٍ َّو َخيَقَ ٍِ ْۡ َها شَ ۡو َج َها‬ِ ‫ِي َخيَقَ ُن ٌۡ ِ ٍّ ِۡ َّّ ۡف ٍس َّو‬                                ُ َّْ‫ٰۤيـاَيُّ َها اى‬
                                                                                               ۡ ‫اس اتَّق ُ ۡىا َزبَّ ُن ٌُ اىَّر‬
                 َ ‫سا ٰٓ َءىُ ۡىَُ بِ َو ۡاۡلَ ۡز َح‬
     ‫اً ؕ ا َُِّ ه‬
   َ‫ّٰلل‬                                                  ۡ ‫ّٰللَ اىَّر‬
                                                   َ َ ‫ِي ت‬         ‫سآٰء َواتَّقُىا ه‬       َ ِّ‫ث ٍِ ْۡ ُه ََا ِز َجاۡل َمثِ ۡيسا َّو‬     َّ َ‫َوب‬
                                                                                                                    ‫عيَ ۡي ُن ٌۡ َزقِ ۡيبا‬
                                                                                                                                         َ َُ‫َما‬

          “You, you the people, fear and obey your Lord who created you from
          oneself and He created from it its spouse, and He scattered from them
          many men and women, and fear and obey God who you ask each other
          to each other with Him, and the uteruses, that God is on you observing”

       However, in the other perspective, women are objects that should be
led by men, as it is written in An-Nisa: 34. However, it does not mean women
do not get a decent position. Women within certain limits instead become a



                                                                       19

Egalita : Jurnal Kesetaraan dan Keadilan Gender       Volume 15, No 2, Tahun 2020




milestone in the State, with its participation in educating their offspring.
Besides the agent role in the intellectual and glory, women also play an
important role in the process of proselytizing Islam. Women like Asma bin
Abu Bakar are an example of how a woman can give a very significant
contribution to the prophet’s move strategy.
        Women's capacity to be a leader has always been the main things
questioned by various groups when women's leadership discourse develops
in public, especially when the debate is linked to the Islamic perspective.
Whereas in the discourse of leadership, men capacity issues are never raised
as a key issue. As there is already an image that has identified the 'leadership'
with 'men'. The image is then formed in a society based on religious beliefs
and cultural influences that make women weak leadership image, as well as
building the image of women as being 'led' and not 'leading'. As a result,
many women have become increasingly alienated from leadership positions
in the various public domain because it was already imaged that they cannot
lead.
        Women's leadership is a hot issue today. The scope of the discussion
stems from the order of Shariah that gives barrier signaled a hadith which
says that society will not prosper if given to women's leadership. According
to Qardhawy (1997), this hadith is authentic because it is narrated by Abu
Bakrah which was later quoted by Bukhari. While the hadith narrated by
Bukhari is included the authentic hadith. While considerations of honor,
there is a textually understood, or understood contextually. Textual
understanding would conclude that the law of women being head of
government is haram. While contextual understanding, that the hadith
relating to the appointment of a woman to be a leader even though the
surrounding Persian there are many adequate leaders, simply because the
law requires such royal.
        Jumhur scholars agree on the prohibition of women holding power
in al-wilayatul-kubra or al-imamatul-uzhma (supreme          leader).     Where
women's role as supreme leader in government affairs. Because in the hadith
matan includes the word "Wallu Amrahum" (The Reign You All), which is
interpreted as the Caliph of Islam in the political system. Thus giving scholars
jumhur prohibition on women. Almost classical scholars consider it
necessary to draw attention to become caliph rights are the rights of men, not
women. This is expressed both by Al-Ghazali, Al-Mawardi, Ibn Taymiyyah,
Ibn Khaldun. But within the limits of leadership in a particular field, who are
not thorough in society, women are entitled to it, as the prosecutor,
education and even become ministers (Qardhawy (1997).




                                         20

Egalita : Jurnal Kesetaraan dan Keadilan Gender                                                     Volume 15, No 2, Tahun 2020




       Whereas the aspects related to the Prophet and the conditions of
background the Hadith have an important position in the understanding of
Hadith. Allah says in QS. An-Nisa’: 34


 ِۡ ٍِ ‫ض َّوبِ ََ ٰۤا ا َ ّۡفَقُ ۡىا‬
                                   ٍ ۡ‫عيً بَع‬      َ ٌۡ ‫ض ُه‬َ ۡ‫ّٰللُ بَع‬ ‫ض َو ه‬                      َ ِّْ ‫عيًَ اى‬
                                                                                 َّ َ‫سا ٰٓ ِء بِ ََا ف‬               َ َُ‫ىس َجا ُه قَ َّىا ٍُ ۡى‬
                                                                                                                                               ّ ِ َ‫ا‬
 َِّ ُ‫ش ۡىشَ ه‬ ُ ُّ َُ‫ّٰللُ َواىه ِٰ ًۡ ت َخَافُ ۡى‬ ‫َ ه‬   َ ‫ِ ِب ََا َح ِف‬ ِ ‫ُ ِىّ ۡيَ َۡي‬ ٌ ٰ‫ُ ح ِف‬                     ‫اٍَۡ َىا ِى ِه ٌۡ فَاى ه‬
                                                                                                          ٌ ِْٰ ‫ّٰ ِيحُُ ق‬
 َِّ ‫عيَ ۡي ِه‬                               َ َ ‫اض ِسبُ ۡىهُ َِّ فَا ُِۡ ا‬
             َ ‫َ ۡعَْ ُن ٌۡ فَ ََ ت َ ۡبَُ ۡىا‬                            ۡ ‫اج ِع َو‬     ِ ‫ض‬َ ََ ‫اه ُج ُس ۡوهُ َِّ فًِ ۡاى‬ ۡ ‫ٰ ۡىهُ َِّ َو‬   ُ ‫فَ ِع‬
                                                                                                    ‫ع ِيياا َمبِ ۡيسا‬          ‫سبِ ۡيَ ا َُِّ ه‬
                                                                                                                    َ َُ‫ّٰللَ َما‬                 َ
            “The man is a leader for women, because God has preferred some of
            them (men) over others (women), and because they (men) has spent
            most of their possessions. Because it is so virtuous woman, who is
            obedient to God again when her husband did not maintain themselves
            there because God has been to maintain (them). Women that worried
            about nusyuz, so advice them and be separate them in their beds and
            beat them. Then if they follow you, so don’t be looking for a way to
            troubling. Surely Allah is most high, most big”

       The verse is often used as an excuse so women shall not be allowed to
take the lead. The classic mufassir uses this verse as the legality of normative
leadership of men over women in the household or in the broader aspects
with the reason women not being able to maintain their honor. This becomes
a question of whether the woman could keep her honor as a Principal and
even giving a positive impact in advancing the educational institutions. In a
patriarchal society, leadership is always identified with men, while women
are not allowed to serve as a leader in any field, even in the field of education
such as being a Principal. The fact remains that the effectiveness of
leadership is not determined by the gender of the ruling, but largely
determined by the characters, quality, and behavior of the leader. In nature,
the essence of leadership lies in the moral, qualities, and capabilities.
       In terms of women's leadership maybe we should reflect on thoughts
expressed by Toety Herati Noerhadi that there is a need for a redefinition of
the meaning of leadership. They said: "The concept of leadership style is
gaining more understanding that man must be ready to experience such
redefinition of leadership by women is perceptively possible." Furthermore,
Toety said that the Indonesian people who give a high place on the image of
motherhood will also sustain female leadership (Tan, 1991). If so in the
future of Indonesia can be expected to have a woman leader with wisdom
and prudence




                                                                        21

Egalita : Jurnal Kesetaraan dan Keadilan Gender      Volume 15, No 2, Tahun 2020




Women In Educational Leadership
       Women as a formal leader at first many doubted, given the
appearance of different women to men, but these doubts can be overcome
with skill and achievement. In the leadership well done by women and men
have the same goals just different in terms of purely physical, as told Kimbal
Young (in Kartono, 1983: 40) that:
       “Leadership is a form of domination that is based upon personal
       capabilities that could encourage or invite others to do something;
       based on acceptance by the group, and has special expertise appropriate
       for the situation”

        Leaders who are in the formal organization will have power
management based on the principles of management as well so that its power
is not connected with the institutional and personal traits, for example, a
woman who became head of the school, then subordinates either teachers or
administrative staff is not subject to her personally but to her leadership, on
because she was as formal leaders. It is important to assess that the
leadership of an emerging and can align themselves with men if the person
concerned requires the achievement.
        In education, Goldring and Chen (1994) reported that women in the
United Kingdom and wherever most women only take part in the teaching
profession, but there are relatively few and far who have important positions
authorities in many secondary schools, colleges, and local administration
education. So that the phenomenon of women's leadership in education has
been the main attraction for further inspection. Studies conducted by
Coleman (2000) suggest that the principal and the other female senior
managers in England and Wales indicated they are likely to behave
transformative and participatory leadership model. Other studies
headteachers and principals and women in the United States, United
Kingdom, Australia, New Zealand, and Canada showed that women managers
perform work in a cooperative and empowering colleagues and teamwork
effectively functioning (Blackmore, 1989; Hall, 1996; Jirasinghe and Lyons,
1996). Another result of the study conducted by Jirasinghe and Lyons, (1996)
describes the personality of women leaders as someone more outgoing,
democratic, caring, artistic, be kind, careful and conscientious, compassionate
and cautious. Besides, they tend to be team worker figures, complete and
perfect. They also identify themselves and perceive themselves as being more
rational, relaxed, tough-minded, active, and competitive.
        The obstacles for women to become education leaders there are two
parties, namely the individual women who engaged in the world of education
and the educational institution itself. The first constraint, there is the human




                                         22

Egalita : Jurnal Kesetaraan dan Keadilan Gender      Volume 15, No 2, Tahun 2020




resources and social structures in the educational institutions that have a
gender perspective. There is an impression 'on the average' that could
compete only men. Besides, there is also a culture that is put men in
leadership. So sometimes it is not because women do not want to be a leader,
but a culture that makes it difficult for women to lead forward. Therefore, if
the social structure and culture in the world of education is not modified to
provide greater opportunities to women then it is difficult for women to
become leaders in education.
       Other constraints exist in most individual women who lack confidence
due to raised in a patriarchal society, which is a social system that places men
as the primary authority figure is central to social organization. The women
much earlier had the mindset that has been established that women do not
need to lead and improvise career. So they tend to give up and do not want to
seem pushy or 'begging' position. However globally, acknowledged there
were some obstacles in women's leadership issues in education. Glass ceiling,
the restrictions for women in academic promotion, the chilly climate in the
process of academic women feel discomfort in the academic environment,
and leaking pipelines or declining representation of women in some areas of
academic life.
       What about the professional identity of women in educational
leadership? At the annual conference of the Australian Association Forum for
Education Research (AARE Annual Conference), May 3-7, 2000, Jill
Blackmore and Judyth Sachs, conduct research by exploring new issues
concerning women and leadership in an era of restructuring throughout the
1990ies. From the interview that they did with a group of women who
occupy leadership positions or have aspirations to occupy such a position,
also with the woman who became the informal leader at school, university or
college found some interesting phenomena, such as 1). There are individual
differences (distinct differentiation) of the sense of belonging, commitment
to the organization, and motivation depends on the presence in the
organization. 2). Studies at many universities, colleges, and schools continue
to prove that women are moving into the world of leadership at middle
management and executive levels are mainly due to coincidence rather than
deliberate design, and more based on collateral rather than potential
performance. Their entry into the world of leadership is based on substantive
professional expertise as an educator and the emotional aspects of labor-
management as change agents.
       Women's leadership in professional education institutions work is
guided by the properties of professionalism. Professionalism operates as an
occupational strategy, defines the input and has negotiating power, and gain
reward for his expertise. Those who fall into this category were able to



                                         23

Egalita : Jurnal Kesetaraan dan Keadilan Gender        Volume 15, No 2, Tahun 2020




implement the organization's strategy, sharpen the pattern of authority, able
to position themselves and create a coordinated relationship at their
institution (Danim, 2003). Shoya Zichy a woman who researched women's
leadership, in her book Women and the Leadership Quotient, try to peel eight
types of women's leadership, namely: the type of trustees (the trust), the type
of conservator (which maintains), type tactician (which prioritizes tactics),
the type of realistic (which prioritize realistic reality on the ground), the type
of strategic (that promotes rational steps to control the situation), the type of
innovator (that promotes innovations in solving the problem), the type of
mentor (who put pressure on the motivation given to followers), and type
advocator (which focuses on efforts to motivate followers with ideas or hints
brilliant (Tilaar dan Widarto, 2003).

CONCLUSION
        Women have the spirit, skills, and qualities that are not less than men.
The only exception lies in the opportunities they get. When the opportunity
came which was then combined with a fighting spirit, will bring women
leaders are reliable because there is no difference of principle between the
educational leadership abilities between men and women. The image of
women as a person who also has the leadership capacity can be revitalized to
bring back the gait struggles women figure very inspiring leadership. Islam is
the most robust basis in pursuit of improving the condition of subordination
of women, and not as a barrier to the advancement of women.
        Educational leadership term containing two senses at once, which
explains the nature of the leadership traits or how to organize, influence, and
direct a person. While the object which explains the educational leadership is
done. So the leadership of Islamic education is an activity guide, guide, guide
and show the way towards reaching educational purposes pleasing to Allah
SWT. So in this case, very clear orientation and goals to be achieved by the
Islamic educational leadership towards the achievement of educational goals
based on and the pleasure of Allah (Mardhatillah).
        The requirement for an educational leader is that the educational
leader must be able to lead the organization/ institution, is responsible for
the achievement of the organization/ institution, is also expected to be a
leader and innovator in organizations/institutions. It also must have the
leadership skills and human relations skills and good leadership to
implement the model following the characteristics of her, because the real
success of an organization/ institution essentially lies in the efficiency and
effectiveness of the appearance of a leader. Thus, in this case, both one's
biological factor that men and women are not the main requirements in
educational leadership.



                                         24

Egalita : Jurnal Kesetaraan dan Keadilan Gender      Volume 15, No 2, Tahun 2020




REFERENCES

Ahmad, Abi al-Husain Ibn Faris Zakariyya. 1989. Mu’jam Maqayis al-Lughah
    Juz II. t.tp: Dar al-Fikr.

Al-Bukhari, Shahih al-Bukhari, "fi al-Istiqrad wa Ada' al-Duyun wa al-Hijr wa
     al-Taflis, al-'Abd Ra'a fi Mali Sayyidih wa lam Ya'mal illa bi-Iznih", no.
     2.232, juz II. hlm. 848.

Al-Hibri, Azizah, dkk. 2001. Perempuan dalam Masyarakat Indonesia.
     Yogyakarta: Sunan Kalijaga Press.

Anwar, Marzani, dkk. 2010. Modul Membangun Relasi Setara Antara
    Perempuan dan Laki-Laki Melalui Pendidikan Islam. Jakarta: Direktorat
    Jenderal Pendidikan Islam Kementrian Agama dengan dukungan AIBEP.

Bush,Tony & Coleman, Marianne. 2006. Manajemen Strategis Kepemimpinan
     Pendidikan (Terj. Fahrurrozi). Jogjakarta: IRCiSoD.

Danim, S. 2003. Menjadi Komunitas Pembelajar: Kepemimpinan
    Transformasional dalam Komunitas Organisasi Pembelajaran. Jakarta:
    Bumi Aksara.

Diana, Ilfi Nur. 2008. Islam dan Kepemimpinan Perempuan di Ranah Politik:
     Egalita Jurnal Kesetaraan dan Keadlian Gender. Malang: PSG UIN
     Malang.

Fakih, Aunur Rahim, dkk. 2001. Kepemimpinan Islam. Yogyakarta: UII Press.

Kartono, Kartini. 1983. Pemimpin dan Kepemimpinan. Apakah Pemimpin
     Abnormal Itu?. Jakarta: CV. Rajawali.

Mc. Clelland, David. Tt. Dorongan Hati Menuju Modernisasi. Dalam Weiner
     Myron. Modernisasi: Dinamika Pertumbuhan. New York: Voice of
     America Forum Lecture.

Naily, N. 2008. Nyai and Gender Awareness in Pesantren and Traditionalist
      Muslim Community in East Java. Australia: Unpublished thesis
      Australian National University.

Qardhawy, Yusuf. 1997. Fiqh Daulah Dalam Perspektif al-Qur'an dan Sunnah.
    Jakarta: Pustaka Al-Kautsar.

Salim, Abd. Muin. 2004. Konsepsi Kekuasaan Politik dalam al-Qur’an. Jakarta:
     Raja Grafindo Persada.




                                         25

Egalita : Jurnal Kesetaraan dan Keadilan Gender   Volume 15, No 2, Tahun 2020




Tan, Melly G. 1991. Perempuan Indonesia Pemimpin Masa Depan. Jakarta:
     Pustaka Sinar Harapan.

Tilaar, M. dan W.T. Widarto. 2003. Perempuan Pemimpin Indonesia. Jakarta:
      Gramedia Widiasarana.

Umar, Nasaruddin. 2001. Argumen Kesetaraan Gender Perspektif Al-Quran.
    Jakarta: Paramadina.




                                         26