This may be the author’s version of a work that was submitted/accepted
for publication in the following source:

Ehrich, Lisa C. & English, Fenwick W.
(2020)
’Leading beautifully’: A phoenix arises in new research in educational lead-
ership.
Leading and Managing, 26(1), pp. 16-22.

This file was downloaded from: https://eprints.qut.edu.au/206418/


© © Australian Council for Educational Leaders

This work is covered by copyright. Unless the document is being made available under a
Creative Commons Licence, you must assume that re-use is limited to personal use and
that permission from the copyright owner must be obtained for all other uses. If the docu-
ment is available under a Creative Commons License (or other specified license) then refer
to the Licence for details of permitted re-use. It is a condition of access that users recog-
nise and abide by the legal requirements associated with these rights. If you believe that
this work infringes copyright please provide details by email to qut.copyright@qut.edu.au


License: Creative Commons: Attribution-Noncommercial 4.0


Notice: Please note that this document may not be the Version of Record
(i.e. published version) of the work. Author manuscript versions (as Sub-
mitted for peer review or as Accepted for publication after peer review) can
be identified by an absence of publisher branding and/or typeset appear-
ance. If there is any doubt, please refer to the published source.

https:// search.informit.com.au/ documentSummary;dn=
437763045366603;res=IELHSS

    Leading Beautifully: A Phoenix Arises in New Research in Educational Leadership




Lisa C. Ehrich
Adjunct Associate Professor
Faculty of Education
Queensland University of Technology,
Kelvin Grove, QLD
Australia
l.ehrich@qut.edu.au




Fenwick W. English
Professor and Department Chair
Educational Leadership
Ball State University
Muncie, Indiana, USA
fwenglish@bsu.edu




                                                                                      2

Leading Beautifully: A Phoenix Arises in New Research in Educational Leadership


                                             Abstract
During the period 2012-2016 field research was conducted in Australia and America which led

to a different conceptualisation of educational leadership with an entirely new metaphor, that of

“leading beautifully” instead of either “effectively” or “successfully.” This new image of

leadership emanated from a two-pronged inquiry that side-stepped the dominant business and

economic models in which leadership logic and practice were situated in both countries.

       In a quest to expand the vision of the nature of leadership in an area where success and

attainment are not only as complex, but arguably more creative, the researchers turned to the arts

and the concept of “performance” as the indicator of attainment. They were especially influenced

by the work of Elliot Eisner and his notion of the construct of connoisseurship, a term that

included not only competence and skill development, but advanced considerably beyond those

indices to include the acquisition of fine-grained distinctions rendered by a “discerning eye.”

       The empirical base for the study included interviews with ten artists (painters, sculptors,

dancers, choreographers, theatre directors and musical composers) and a similar number of

educators who were school principals, a community arts educator and a school superintendent in

America and an equivalent position in Australia. The results were presented in refereed papers at

AARE and AERA. The study revealed how artists and leaders develop a “discerning eye” and

seven attributes of both groups of how this ability was developed and nurtured. The research also

revealed ten core dimensions of connoisseurship. The final outcome was a book published by

Routledge (2016) Leading Beautifully: Educational Leadership as Connoisseurship.



                                                                                                     2

Leading Beautifully: A Phoenix Arises in New Research in Educational Leadership


                                          Introduction
Over a half century ago at the beginning of the “theory movement” in educational

administration, Andrew Halpin (1960), one of the prime movers of that movement, presciently

observed:

       I suggest that if we are to learn how to observe, how to see what is ‘out there,’ we
       had better avail ourselves of a rich heritage which superintendents and scientists
       alike have studiously ignored: the heritage of the humanities. For what else is the
       function of the poet, the playwright, the novelist than to examine and describe the
       ineffable ambiguity of the human condition? What other than the creative artist is
       better equipped to describe man [sic] ‘in the round?’ But the man [sic] of ‘letters’
       has been discredited by the market place, and to such extent that we as educators
       have adopted the standards of the market place we too, have discredited him (pp.
       17-18).
     As long time researchers, teachers, and supervisors of post-graduate students in the

field of educational leadership, we had become not only weary but also jaundiced about

“new” research in our field. As academics we’d taught all the extant theories and

traversed the familiar models of leadership. Too much of it was repetitive. We were not

able to find any new significant breakthroughs that added to an understanding of the

phenomenon of leadership. Surely we believed there had to be more about leadership

than our approaches explained. We took heart from a statement by Marcel Proust that,

“the voyage of discovery lies not in bringing old eyes to new landscapes … but rather in

having new eyes” (in Conord & Conord, 2002, p. 171).

     We therefore determined that the problem of the lack of new understandings of

leadership began with us, the researchers. Perhaps it was our “old eyes” that needed a

change. So we began by taking a step outside the immediate boundaries of our field. We


                                                                                              2

put aside educational leadership for the moment. We were not going to start there. In

search of a fresh start we began by looking at leaders in the arts and humanities, fields

much older than ours and with an incredibly rich heritage as Halpin had observed.

      Our initial effort produced our first research paper, a conceptual analysis in which

dance and the dancer were compared to leadership (Ehrich & English, 2013). As we

expanded our vocabulary and understanding we began to explore the whole range of

aesthetic activity regarding leadership (English, 2008; Ehrich & English, 2017; English &

Ehrich, 2019; Hansen, Ropo & Sauer, 2007; Samier & Bates, 2006).

      We finally felt comfortable enough to propose a two-year research study supported

by the Office of Research Ethics of our two respective universities to examine creative

leadership in the arts and humanities and then educational leadership. The final

culmination of that research were several refereed papers at AARE, AERA and UCEA,

and finally our 2016 book published by Routledge, Leading Beautifully: Educational

Leadership as Connoisseurship.

                            The empirical work: artists and leaders
We began our study by focusing on artists first. This was a deliberate decision as we wanted to

investigate how artists were able to arrive at their own understandings of art making in the face

of constraints and barriers. We were also interested in how they developed their “discerning

eye”. Interviews were conducted with either former or current artists working across a variety of

artistic fields including sculpture, ceramics, visual arts, dance, choreography, theatre directing,

writing, and musical composition and singing. Nine artists were based in Australia and one came

from the United States. After interviewing artists, we then turned our attention to school leaders.

We conducted interviews with four leaders from Australia and six from the United States. Eight

                                                                                                      2

leaders were current or former school principals, one was a superintendent, and one was a

community arts educator.

      Our interviews with artists and leaders yielded some interesting insights. We observed both

similarities and differences in the ways in which they talked about their work, how they worked

with others, and how they dealt with barriers and constraints.

      One important similarity was the place and value of relationships with significant others

(such as colleagues, mentors, friends). This was particularly the case for artists who worked

closely with others such as the choreographers and the theatre director. All of the artists talked

about the importance of mentors and colleagues who provided important support and feedback to

them. The leaders also referred to the centrality of relationships and these were relationships

with parents, students, staff, and colleagues. Both artists and the leaders referred to the joy or

reward inherent in their work. Joy for the school leaders was understood in terms of staff and

children who were happy to be at school and who were engaged in learning.

      There were two main differences between the artists and the leaders and these related to the

way the parties viewed constraints and barriers affecting them and actual work environment in

which they worked. Unlike the educational leaders, the artists viewed constraints in a more

positive way as they saw them not as insurmountable challenges but as opportunities that often

posed alternatives for them that led to better outcomes. The educational leaders viewed

constraints as problems that created anxiety and stress. The second important difference related

to the work environment and the roles that both sets of participants played. For the artists, their

role was not linked to an organisation or to a specific role but was more fluid. A number of the

artists referred to working for and with others on commissions and other projects. In contrast, the



                                                                                                      2

educational leaders’ work was bound up in the formal role they were required to play in their

organisation.

                            The development of a “Discerning Eye”
In the study we were keen to learn how both artists and leaders developed their discerning eye,

which lies at the heart of understanding “connoisseurship”. We borrowed the concept of

connoisseurship from the arts more generally and Elliot Eisner’s (1979, 2002)work more

specifically. Connoisseurship is “the act of knowledgeable perception” (Eisner, 1979, p. 193) and

is the ability to make fine-grained judgements by using one’s discerning eye.     Based on the

interviews with participants, we arrived at seven key themes that indicated how they had

developed their discerning eye:

   1. It is developmental, evolutionary and dependent on others
   2. It can begin in early childhood and the early environment
   3. It emerges from hard work and it influenced by factors of serendipity
   4. It is the result of personal efforts to attain competency
   5. It is an outcome of the respondent’s increasing differentiation of his/her work
   6. It is helped by feedback via public recognition
   7. It is helped by the process of benchmarking

      For the artists and the leaders, developing a discerning eye was something that evolved

over time, was developmental in nature, and required support from others such as family and

friends. The discerning eye began in their early years and was nurtured when they were

children. Both sets of participants referred to hard work as enabling them to get better at what

they were doing and sometimes factors of serendipity came into play (i.e. chance meetings with

others that led them along a certain path). Related to this was their desire and motivation to attain

competency. Developing expertise based on experience enabled the participants to increasingly

differentiate their work and benchmark it against others. For both artists and leaders, there were

significant others (mentors, colleagues, fellows along their life’s trajectory) who provided

                                                                                                     2

guidance, support and feedback. Feedback for leaders came from colleagues, staff, students,

parents and others in the community while for artists it was mainly from the public.

      It became apparent to us during the interviews with both sets of participants that

connoisseurship is not absolute but falls on a continuum of development. Both the artists and

leaders viewed themselves in the process of becoming; there was still much more to achieve.

Even though many of the leaders and artists were accomplished, experienced and respected by

their colleagues, they were acutely aware that they had more to learn and they need to improve

and continue to grow. We arrived at four stages of developing connoisseurs. The first is when a

leader comes to an awareness of the potentiality for connoisseurship. The second is a conscious

movement towards expertise and early career accomplishment. The third is marked by

substantive accomplishment and the fourth is advanced accomplishment and public recognition.

                                        Connoisseurship
From our interviews and based on our extensive readings of biographies of leaders from history,

politics, literature and the arts, we put forward a typology of connoisseurship of leadership of

which we identified three types. A connoisseur of leaders is a person who has a keen eye for

differences and is able to make qualitative judgements about others but is not a leader him or

herself. Examples of connoisseurs of leaders from history include Plutarch, Vasari, Machiavelli

and Edward Said. The second type of connoisseur is the connoisseur of leadership performance.

This is a leader who is a master of leadership because they can influence others due to their well-

developed insights. Examples we provided from history included St Mary MacKillop and artist,

Frido Kahlo; both of whom had far-reaching influence on others. The final category of

connoisseurship is leader connoisseurs. These are leaders who are both connoisseurs of leaders

and connoisseurs of leadership performance. Examples provided from history include Paul


                                                                                                   2

Keating, Winston Churchill and Nelson Mandela. Of these three types we were most interested

in were connoisseurs of leadership performance, i.e. those leaders who are master leaders and

able to draw upon their feelings, perceptions and emotions when making fine-grain judgements

in their daily work.

      From the fruits of this work, we were able to arrive at ten core dimensions of

connoisseurship. Each is presented here:

Ten core dimensions of connoisseurship
1. Knowledgeable perception refers to a special type of sensory memory which enables
    a person to make very high quality differentiated judgments about concepts, objects,
    or practices.
2. Experience is highly important because it takes time to develop fine-tuned
    observations and judgments. This dimension is not just seniority. It refers to the
    quality of the time spent.
3. Competence refers generally to being able to perform at a certain standard or level.
    However, for connoisseurs, it transcends skills and techniques by embracing passion
    and emotion (Barenboim, 2008).
4. Framing refers to a practice, process or interaction that represents types of choices
    and decisions about how, when and where to use them.
5. Desire is about the passion to know, to understand, to achieve and to strive. It is a
    kind of restless spirit to always become better.
6. Understanding practice refers to being able to see the linkage between theory and
    practice
7. Aesthetic vision couples imagination with agency and includes morality, passion and
    aesthetics. A connoisseur is at home with and values these dimensions.
8. Cultural awareness and reflexivity refers to the fact that substantive knowledge is
    always co-constructed within a specific cultural context.
9. Discipline refers to both dedication to the task and hard work in becoming more
    competent and skilled, and it refers to the notion that all work is bound by traditions,
    logic and has a distinctive body of knowledge
10. Identity refers to being comfortable in one’s own skin and having good self-
    knowledge and awareness.


      In our study we provided portraits of a selection of the artists and leaders whom we saw as

demonstrating the dimensions of connoisseurship. We used portraiture following the work of

Lawrence-Lightfoot and Hoffman Davis (1997) as a way of narrating the artists’ and leaders’


                                                                                                2

stories in order to capture the richness of their human experience. We then benchmarked each

portrait against the ten dimensions of connoisseurship. In the final part of our study, we sought

to explore connoisseurship from a different perspective. Here we contrasted connoisseurship to

corporate managerialism. We chose corporate managerialism as it is the dominant economic

model which is pervasive in education policy and practice in Australia, the United States and

many other countries.

                         Connoisseurship VS Corporate Managerialism
Connoisseurs are concerned with values and beliefs that provide them with a moral compass that

direct their decisions about life and professional practice. Connoisseurs are people who are able

to see or to use their “discerning eye” to determine what is value-driven and ethical. In contrast,

managerialist values are about efficiency. As an ideology centred on the tenets of neo-liberalism,

managerialism “is predisposed to conserve what exists, to resist change, and to support the

community or societal traditional ways” (Wallace, 2008, p.229).

      Connoisseurship rests on the understanding that “leadership is a type of bodily practice or

performance” (Sinclair, 2005, p.403) that involves not only the head but also the heart. It is

based on the idea that human behaviour involves emotion, intuition, vision and passion, all of

which are embodied in artful performance. In contrast, corporate managerialism comes from

rational choice theory which erases any vestiges of emotion or intuition. It does not require

aesthetic understandings or sensitivities because what is valued is standardization, conformity

and a limited range of skills. To be a connoisseur elevates leadership from mere effectiveness to

leadership as artistry. It enables leaders to lead beautifully.

                                      Contribution to the field



                                                                                                      2

We believe the major contribution of our research thus far is providing a conceptual alternative

to the current discourse of leadership which is deeply anchored in business and economic models

and which are heavily reliant on overly rationalistic and mechanical input-process-output

calculations to determine administrative effectiveness. What we have tried to re-capture about

leadership from the arts and humanities are the more “subjective” aspects of it, especially as it

pertains to leader identity and performance by indicating that “leading beautifully” is a more

accurate and whole view of the process (English & Ehrich, 2019).

      We see an aesthetic view of leadership as restoring to its definition the elements of

emotion, intuition and even playfulness that have always been part of the equation, but which

have been all but erased by a heavy-handed, deterministic behaviourism set within sociological

theories which remove or miniaturise people. Chris Argyris (1972) said it best when he observed,

      The ‘variable human’ seems to be minimally variable and minimally human. Concerning
      the former there is no place … for individual differences. Concerning the latter, feelings,
      defenses, needs, self-concept, self-esteems etc. are not included … The concept of the
      ‘human variable’ is only slightly enlarged from economic man [sic] and satisfying man
      [sic] (p. 33).
      We are hopeful that as the limitations of researching leader effectiveness continue to fall

short of learning anything substantially new about it, researchers will seek to enlarge their

definition of it and explore an expanded view of it as proffered and prevalent in the arts and

humanities. The phoenix is rising.



                                            References
ARGYRIS, C. (1972) The applicability of organizational sociology (Cambridge, UK: Cambridge
    University Press).
BARENBOIM, D. (2008) Everything is connected: The power of music (Great Britain: Phoenix).
CONORD, B. & CONORD, J. (2002) Costa Rica. (Edison, NJ: Hunter Publishing).

                                                                                                    2

EHRICH, L.C. & ENGLISH, F.W. (2013) Leadership as dance: A consideration of the
      applicability of the “mother” of all arts as the basis for establishing connoisseurship,
      International Journal of Leadership in Education, 16(4), 454-481.
EHRICH, L.C. & ENGLISH, F.W. (2017). The leadership identity journey: Franz Schubert and
      Winterreise in T.N. Watson, J.S. Brooks & F.D. Beachum (Eds), Educational
      leadership and music: Lessons for tomorrow’s school leaders (Charlotte, NC:
      Information Age Publishing Inc), pp.101-114.
EISNER, E. (1979) The educational imagination: On the design and evaluation of school
      programs (New York and London: Macmillan Publishing Co and Collier Macmillan
      Publishers).
EISNER, E. (2002) The arts and the creation of mind (New Haven, CT: Yale University Press).
ENGLISH, F.W. (2008) The art of educational leadership: Balancing performance and
      accountability (Los Angeles: Sage).

ENGLISH, F.W. (2013) Educational leadership in the age of greed: A requiem for res publica
      (Ypsilanti, Michigan: NCPEA).

ENGLISH, F.W. & EHRICH, L.C. (2016) Leading beautifully: Educational leadership as
      connoisseurship (New York and London: Routledge, Taylor & Francis).
ENGLISH, F.W. & EHRICH, L.C. (2019) Re-examining the philosopher’s stone of
      Leadership, International Journal of Educational Management, 34(4), pp. 653-663.

HALPIN, A. W. (1960) Ways of knowing, In R.F. Campbell & J.M. Lipham (Eds),
      Administrative theory as a guide to action (Chicago: Midwest Administration Center:
      Interstate Printers and Publishers), PP. 6-20.

HANSEN, H., ROPO, A. & SAUER, E. (2007) Aesthetic leadership, Leadership Quarterly, 18,
     pp. 544-560.
LAWRENCE-LIGHTFOOT, S. & DAVIS, J. HOFFMAN (1997) The art and science of
     portraiture (San Francisco: Jossey Bass Publishers).
SAMIER, E.A. & BATES, R.J. (eds) (2006) Aesthetic dimensions of educational administration
      and leadership (London: Routledge).
SINCLAIR, A. (2005) Body possibilities in leadership, Leadership. 1(4), pp. 387-406. doi:
      10.1177/1742715005057231

WALLACE, J. (2008) At the service of the (restructured) state: Principal’s work and neoliberal
     ideology, In E.A. Samier & A.G. Stanley (Eds), Political approaches to educational
     administration and leadership (London: Routledge), pp. 223-239.




                                                                                                 2

2