Pak. j. life soc. Sci. (2024), 22(2):18863-18872              E-ISSN: 2221-7630;P-ISSN: 1727-4915
                          Pakistan Journal of Life and Social Sciences
                                               www.pjlss.edu.pk

                               https://doi.org/10.57239/PJLSS-2024-22.2.001383


RESEARCH ARTICLE

Data-Driven Decision-Making in Educational                                             Leadership:             A
Systematic Literature Review (2019-2023)
Goh Kok Ming1*, Mahaliza Mansor2, Dayang Rafidah Syariff M. Fuad3
1,2,3 Sultan Idris Education University, Tanjong Malim, Perak, Malaysia




 ARTICLE INFO                ABSTRACT

                             Data-Driven Decision Making (DDDM) has emerged as a key focus in educational
 Received: Oct 22, 2024
                             research and practices, gaining attention globally, including in Malaysia, where it
 Accepted: Dec 8, 2024       is being used to refine educational strategies and policies. Despite its importance,
                             the implementation of DDDM in schools frequently requires attention and
 Keywords
                             improvement. However, the understanding of the implementation of DDDM
 Data driven decision        needed to be clarified. The gap between theory and practice highlights the
 making                      necessity of improving the decision-making skills of school leaders. Therefore,
 School leadership           this study aimed to explore the DDDM in educational leadership and identify its
 School improvement          challenges and strategies. This study employed the Systematic Literature Review
                             (SLR) method on the existing literature from 2019-2023. A total of 13 articles
                             were selected and analyzed to answer the research questions. The study found
 *Corresponding              that successful implementation requires strong leadership, professional
 Author                      development, and a commitment to data literacy to ensure that data is used
                             effectively and ethically to improve educational outcomes. The findings of this
 kokming888@gmail.com        study pave the focus of future research directions. In conclusion, DDDM holds
                             great promise for transforming school leadership and improvement.

INTRODUCTION
In a BANI (Brittle, Anxious, Nonlinear, and Incomprehensible) environment, leaders are continually
confronted with complex and unpredictable challenges. To navigate these effectively, leaders require
robust administrative skills, including problem identification and resolution capabilities. These skills
are crucial for understanding and addressing the unique problems that arise in such dynamic
settings, where traditional linear approaches may fall short. Effective decision-making, a core
element of leadership, is essential in this context. Leaders have to select appropriate actions from
multiple options, balancing individual and team decision-making processes. Their choices, especially
in educational leadership, are reflected in tangible actions like the development and implementation
of School Improvement Plans (SIP) (Bickmore, Roberts, & Gonzales, 2020).
SIPs are instrumental in enhancing both school and student outcomes. They embody a strategic
approach to educational leadership, where leaders play a pivotal role in shaping policy and practice
(Bickmore et al., 2020). Through these plans, leaders assess and improve school performance,
focusing on quality education and student success. This necessitates a holistic view of leadership,
blending administrative competencies with a deep understanding of the educational landscape and
its inherent complexities. Key to navigating these complexities is the effective use of data to inform
practices. Data-Driven Decision Making (DDDM) is central to this approach, involving the systematic
collection and analysis of various data types, including achievement test results and other indicators,
to guide decisions aimed at improving student and institutional success. DDDM is the application of
an inquiry process that uses multiple schools and student-level data sources to develop plans of
action that lead to improved school and student performance (Bickmore et al., 2020).
Data-Driven Decision Making (DDDM) has emerged as a key focus in educational research and
practices, gaining traction globally, including in Malaysia, where it is being used to refine educational
                                                     18863

Ming et al.                                              Data-Driven Decision-Making in Educational Leadership


strategies and policies. DDDM in educational settings involves more than mere data collection and
reporting; it encompasses a deep analysis of various data types, such as achievement test results, to
aid in formulating informed decisions on complex educational issues. This approach has shown
promise in enhancing outcomes in the educational sector. Mandinach and Gummer (2013)
emphasize the necessity for educators to be data literate to engage effectively in DDDM. Data literacy
encompasses various dimensions, including declarative knowledge (understanding what the data is),
schematic knowledge (comprehending why the data is important), procedural knowledge (knowing
how to use the data), and strategic knowledge (understanding when, where, and how to apply data
effectively). These components are vital for educational leaders to use data efficiently and effectively.
Despite the recognized value of data in influencing decisions about curriculum, instruction, policies,
and school practices, the practical application of DDDM in schools often needs to be improved. This
discrepancy between theory and practice highlights the need for developing and enhancing DDDM
skills among school leaders, as noted by Mandinach and Gummer (2013) and Bowers et al. (2014).
Addressing this gap is critical for realizing the full potential of data-driven approaches in improving
educational outcomes. Data-driven decision-making is increasingly recognized as a fundamental shift
in school leadership and educational practices. The critical analysis of DDDM indicates that it
requires school leaders to gather and use various types of data effectively to make informed
decisions. This approach moves away from traditional educational leadership methods, focusing
instead on using data to drive improvements in teaching methods and educational outcomes
(Simmie, 2021). While DDDM presents a paradigm shift with potential benefits, it also brings
challenges and tensions, especially in aligning it with existing educational practices and objectives.
Thus, this study aims to understand the data-driven decision-making, its challenges, and strategies.
MATERIALS AND METHODS
A Systematic Literature Review (SLR) is a valuable method for identifying existing research gaps in
a certain field of study and evaluating the extent of work conducted by other researchers on the
subject (Kraus et al., 2022). Watson et al. (2018) utilized the Systematic Literature Review (SLR)
methodology in their research and followed a three-step process. This study employs three
processes, as described by Hossain et al. (2020), which include planning, screening, and reporting.
Firstly, the researchers looked for comprehensive information from the literature.
The initial phase involved utilizing one of the widely used databases, Scopus, to gather relevant
research papers. These papers were then subjected to thorough reviews. The researchers entered
keywords for searching data-driven decision-making and educational leadership. A number of 20
papers were discovered when searching using the specified keywords on June 20, 2023. In the second
phase, 5 papers, which accounted for approximately 25% of the total, were eliminated due to the
absence of published publications prioritizing book chapters and conferences. During the third step,
over 10% (2) of the total papers were excluded because they were not relevant to the subject areas.
This was achieved by applying filters to include only articles and journal papers in the management
and leadership field, written in English, and with appropriate titles. After carefully examining the
individual abstracts, duplicate papers and those that did not align with the study's context were
eliminated. After a thorough screening process, a total of 13 research publications were chosen as
depicted in Figure 1.




                                                 18864

Ming et al.                                              Data-Driven Decision-Making in Educational Leadership


              Figure 1: Steps involved in the SLR Process employed by this study
RESULTS
Overview of Data-Driven Decision Making (DDDM)
In elementary education, Data-Driven Decision Making (DDDM) has been an emerging field of
research and practice. Researchers devoted numerous efforts to developing theoretically sound and
evidence-based frameworks that may inform principals and teachers (Mandanich, 2012; Marsh &
Farrell, 2014). For example, a series of studies have focused on K-12 teachers’ DDDM at the
classroom level, or so-called instructional leadership (Gummer & Mandinach, 2015; Mandanich,
2012; Mandinach et al., 2011; Mandinach et al., 2008; Marsh & Farrell, 2014). Marsh et al. (2006)
stated that data-driven decision-making (DDDM) involves systematically collecting and analyzing
various types of data to guide decision-making that helps improve student and institutional success.
Bickmore (2014) defined DDDM as “the application of an inquiry process that uses multiple schools
and student-level data sources to develop plans of action that lead to improved school and student
performance”. Dodman et al. (2023) defined DDDM as a process encompassing various iterations and
components, including systematic collection, analysis, and application of data to make informed
decisions. Therefore, Data-Driven Decision Making (DDDM) is a dominant practice in schools that
focuses on using data to identify problems, seek solutions, examine consequences, and determine the
next steps (Wang, 2021). It involves valuing and utilizing data to make influential decisions about
curriculum, instruction, policies, and practices within schools (Wang, 2021).
Evolution of Data-Driven Decision Making (DDDM) in Educational Settings
The approach to decision-making in educational settings has undergone significant evolution over
time. Traditionally, educational decisions were often made based on hierarchical leadership, with
school leaders and administrators relying on their experience and intuition to guide their choices.
This method was less systematic and often lacked a rigorous evidence base. As the field of education
progressed, there was a shift towards more collaborative and consultative decision-making
processes, where the insights and opinions of teachers and other stakeholders began to be valued
and incorporated (Jimerson, et al., 2020). With the advent of the accountability movement and the
increasing availability of educational data, there has been a substantial shift towards data-driven
decision-making (DDDM) in schools (Murakami & Hernandez, 2019). This approach emphasizes the
use of data to inform and guide decisions about curriculum, instruction, and student support services
(Wang, 2021). The current literature indicates that educators are now expected to interpret data at
both macro and micro levels, connecting student performance to instructional strategies.
Researchers have developed frameworks to support school leaders and teachers in adopting DDDM
in instructional practices, highlighting the need for data to be organized, analyzed, and transformed
into actionable information (Abrams et al., 2020).
Moreover, recent iterations of school improvement planning emphasize the continuous and cyclic
nature of using data for the ongoing refinement of educational practices (Bowers & Krumm, 2021).
For example, Bernhardt (2017) suggests that school improvement planning should be cyclic,
mimicking elements of the organizational change model popularized by Deming (2018) as Plan, Do,
Study, Act (PDSA). This reflects a broader trend in organizational management, where data is used
not only for immediate decision-making but also for long-term strategic planning and improvement.
The role of leadership in supporting DDDM is crucial, as leaders must facilitate the use of data while
also ensuring that professional development and capacity building are in place to enable effective
data analysis and interpretation (Murakami & Hernandez, 2019; Schildkamp et al., 2019; Park &
Desimone, 2019; Gonzales et al., 2020). In summary, the historical trajectory of decision-making in
educational settings has moved from a reliance on traditional, experience-based methods to a more
structured, data-driven approach that leverages empirical evidence to improve educational
outcomes and institutional success.
DDDM holds great promise for transforming school leadership and ultimately teaching and learning.
Applying real-time data to shape school and classroom interventions has the potential to allow
schools to calibrate their interventions to their school context and to help with the identification and
reduction of inequalities in schools (Bryk et al., 2015; Finnigan et al., 2013), in a way other reforms

                                                 18865

Ming et al.                                               Data-Driven Decision-Making in Educational Leadership


do not. Integrating data into decision-making processes can significantly enhance school
improvement efforts and the effectiveness of educational leadership. By turning vast volumes of data
into a resource, schools can develop a more comprehensive understanding of their successes and
challenges, which is crucial for informed decision-making. Leaders who effectively use data can drive
changes in core program elements, ensuring that instructional strategies are aligned with student
needs. Moreover, data-driven decisions can foster a shared understanding among stakeholders,
which is essential for collaborative school improvement (Bowers & Krumm, 2021). In line with that,
Bernhardt (2017) suggests that school improvement planning should be cyclic, mimicking elements
of the organizational change model popularized by Deming (2018) as Plan, Do, Study, Act. Therefore,
educational leaders, educators, and practitioners across all institution types must emphasize the
DDDM issues in their daily practice.
However, the application of DDDM in schools can be problematic if it promotes deficit thinking and
overlooks the historical and contemporary forces that shape educational outcomes (Schildkamp et
al., 2019). Today, districts, administrators, and teachers are inundated with various forms of data and
increased expectations for using data-driven practices. However, there is mixed and inconsistent
evidence demonstrating data use is associated with improved student outcomes (Carlson, Borman,
& Robinson, 2011; Konstantopoulos, Miller, & van der Ploeg, 2013; Lai & McNaughton, 2016; Oláh,
Lawrence, & Riggan, 2010). This disconnect between data use practice and improved student
learning has been attributed in part, to limited teacher preparation and professional development to
understand, interpret, and apply data-based information to decisions about instruction (Mandinach
& Gummer, 2016). To address this, there is a need for leaders to be data literate. By being data literate,
leaders can ensure that their decisions are not based on assumptions or biases, but on solid evidence
that can be communicated and justified.
Role of Educational Leadership in DDDM
Educational leadership plays a pivotal role in the implementation and success of data-driven
decision-making (DDDM) in schools. Educational leadership is shaped by (1) leaders’ decisions,
which are made by individual leaders, and (2) organizational decisions, which are made by
organizational members who are subject to the influence and authority of leaders in terms of how
organizational members collect and process information for decision-making. Endowed with power,
decisions made by leaders have higher stakes than other organizational members. Leaders’ decisions
are influenced by an array of factors, including individual predispositions (e.g. risk-averse vs. risk-
seeking), leaders’ core values (e.g. group interest over self-interest), data and information available
at the moment of making decisions, and social influence (e.g. an aggressive, demanding school board
or a deferential board).
Leaders are responsible for setting the vision and creating an environment that values and effectively
uses data to inform decisions about curriculum, instruction, and school policies. They must be adept
at facilitating data use by scheduling time for accessing, analyzing, and reflecting on data, as well as
providing training related to data use. A transformational leadership approach is particularly
beneficial in this context, as it involves behaviors and strategies that support teams in achieving
organizational goals, such as implementing data-use practices and solving specific educational
problems. Leaders must also be capable of stimulating the intellectual growth of teachers by
challenging their beliefs and assumptions and modeling data use practices. This includes engaging
teachers in discussions about data and encouraging them to reflect on how their assumptions may
affect their daily work. Moreover, leaders should demonstrate intellectual stimulation by
collaborating with teachers, being role models for data use, providing access to data, and distributing
leadership roles within the data team. To survive in this digital age, leaders have to be data literate.
By being data literate, leaders can navigate complex organizational systems and process massive
amounts of information, which is essential for making informed decisions in today's educational
landscape.
In implementing and sustaining data use in schools, school leaders initiate constant communication
of school management’s beliefs about data use, related goals, and the approach to achieving these
goals with educators. By committing to these goals, school leaders provide direction for teachers to
participate in data use. Transformational school leaders facilitate data use through scheduling time

                                                  18866

Ming et al.                                               Data-Driven Decision-Making in Educational Leadership


(including accessing, analyzing, and reflecting on data) and providing training related to data use
(Schildkamp & Kuiper, 2010). Leaders can also show that they recognize and are trying to satisfy
teachers’ learning needs related to the implementation of data use by establishing structures that
promote regular, consistent, and collaborative data use in schools (Schildkamp & Kuiper, 2010).
Furthermore, school leaders could challenge teachers’ beliefs and assumptions about their daily
practice, for example, by modeling data use practices (Wayman et al., 2012). A skilled and data-
literate school leader who acts as a role model for data use can stimulate teachers to use data, lead
discussions about data and data use, and engage teachers in meaningful discussions. Moreover,
school leaders actively participate in the school improvement plans, and share and develop
knowledge with the teachers will form a sense of togetherness among teachers.
Besides practicing transformational leadership, instructional leadership is also a critical aspect of
educational leadership that focuses on guiding teachers toward improving their pedagogical
practices through the use of data. School leaders, as instructional leaders, are expected to go beyond
administrative tasks and engage in activities that promote teacher professional development and
school improvement. This involves documenting teacher performance for accountability and
providing feedback to improve teaching skills. Instructional leaders are also tasked with
understanding and using data to inform school improvement efforts, integrating the educational
community with educational expectations. However, implementing organizational changes incurs
evolving relationships between teachers and school leaders. To ensure smooth implementation,
instructional leadership plays a pivotal role by embracing the dual impact of change (Murakami &
Hernandez, 2019). For example, in the Galapagos Islands, principals are transitioning from
traditional managerial roles to instructional leaders, fostering pedagogical improvements among
teachers amidst emerging accountability systems. This shift necessitates managing teacher
resistance and integrating performance documentation with constructive feedback, while also
learning to utilize data for school enhancement.
In the context of K-12 education, instructional leadership is closely tied to the adoption of DDDM in
classroom-level practices (Gummer & Mandinach, 2015; Mandanich, 2012; Mandinach et al., 2011;
Mandinach et al., 2008; Marsh, 2012). Theoretical models developed by researchers like Mandinach
and colleagues suggest that raw data collected at the classroom level must be organized, analyzed,
and transformed into information and knowledge before it can be used for instructional purposes
(Mandanich, 2012; Mandinach et al., 2011). This process is supported by leadership that emphasizes
the importance of building DDDM capacity among teachers and teachers can use their data literacy
skills to cope with organizational changes and a new wave of data-informed decision-making in
schools which is studied and implemented in numerous countries, including Belgium, Canada, New
Zealand, Norway, Germany, Sweden, England, South Africa, Trinidad and Tobago, the United States,
and the Netherlands (Schildkamp et al., 2019). Data is used in schools, not just for narrow academic
achievements but for a variety of educational goals. Therefore, transformational and instructional
leadership are important for successfully implementing and sustaining data use in schools.
Challenges of Implementing Data-Driven Decision-Making in Educational Leadership
Implementing Data-Driven Decision Making (DDDM) in educational leadership comes with several
challenges. One of the primary challenges is the reality that, despite its commonsense appeal, the
application of DDDM in schools has proven to be deeply problematic. Teachers and school leaders
may lack the necessary data literacy skills, which include the ability to understand, interpret, and
apply data to instructional decisions. This skill gap can lead to a disconnect between data use practice
and improved student learning outcomes. DDDM has its critics and its implementation challenges,
including the formatting of data, accessibility, perceptions of validity, self-efficacy regarding data, and
data analysis training for teachers (Dunn et al., 2013). Scholars warn that as educators are directed
to use data, in the absence of high-quality data and technical assistance, “data may become
misinformation or lead to invalid inferences” (Marsh et al., 2006). Jimerson et al. (2020) identified
factors that hinder or enable the implementation of an evidence-supported model for collaborative
data use through multiple case studies in Texas United States schools. They categorized those
enablers and hindrances into two: general/team-oriented factors and leadership factors. For
general/team-oriented factors, hindrances are made up of time, restricted process continuity, limited
data use capacity, and bias to action or accountability orientation.

                                                  18867

Ming et al.                                              Data-Driven Decision-Making in Educational Leadership


A significant challenge found in the study of Jimerson et al. (2020) is the lack of time for educators to
fully engage in the data use process, which includes learning how to use data effectively and then
applying interventions to see their impact. This concern is echoed by the need for more regular
collaboration time and the constant competition of the data use process with other important job
tasks. Additionally, structural and organizational issues such as national policies, and hectic
workload around the school day constrain the time available for school leaders and teachers to be
involved in the data use. Moreover, it can be particularly challenging for districts to engage school
leaders in efforts to build capacity for DDDM. District staff themselves may not have the capacity or
time to support leaders’ professional development (PD), particularly in DDDM (Darling-Hammond et
al., 2007). Recent literature supports that schools do not have adequate capability to locate, combine,
and analyze data from digital learning environments and learning management systems (LMS)
(Agasisti & Bowers, 2017; Farley-Ripple et al., 2020). Another significant hindrance is restricted
process continuity, where the data use model's process steps are not consistently followed due to the
lack of preparation and follow-through between meetings. This issue is compounded by leadership
challenges, such as a lack of depth in inquiry, where school leaders do not sufficiently challenge or
extend discussions around data use in schools.
For the leadership hindrances, there is a tendency for data use norms to devolve, with meetings often
going off-topic and lacking the necessary discipline to maintain a focus on data (Jimerson et al., 2020).
The lack of urgency from leadership to keep the data use work at the forefront of teachers' minds
between meetings also contributes to the challenges. The potential for data to become
misinformation or lead to invalid inferences if educators are not provided with high-quality data and
technical assistance is one of the challenges. The complexity of educational data, which often involves
multi-level, processual, contextual, and interactive factors, demands significant cognitive capabilities
from school leaders. Moreover, the need for professional development interventions that aid
educators in strengthening their data use for equity orientations and skills is critical. These
challenges highlight the need for organizational changes to support more effective and sustained data
use practices among school leaders and educators.
Strategies for Implementing Data-Driven Decision-Making

To effectively implement Data-Driven Decision Making (DDDM) in educational settings, several
strategies are essential. It is important to note that the role of leaders is important in the
implementation process because these strategies are connected to administrative aims of
encouraging effective instructional change and creating cultures of improvement. First, it is crucial
to develop a shared understanding of institutional successes and challenges, which can be achieved
through data-driven changes in core program elements. School leaders, for instance, should
emphasize DDDM strategies to promote student success and institutional effectiveness. Leaders
should constantly communicate with teachers to create a shared understanding by creating and
introducing protocols, modeling evidence-based decision-making, and participating in meetings as
strategies to grow an improvement and inquiry-based school culture. For example, one school leader
detailed how she developed a protocol to illustrate how to approach and discuss data, and model
expectations for teachers. principals connected their behaviors and actions with a desire to change
teachers’ beliefs and attitudes towards practices. Additionally, the integration of real-time data to
shape school and classroom interventions allows for the calibration of interventions to the specific
school context.
Furthermore, effective educational leadership behaviors and strategies are important for the
successful implementation and sustainability of data use in schools. This includes facilitating data
use by scheduling time for accessing, analyzing, and reflecting on data, as well as providing training
related to data use. For transformational leadership, school leaders can also apply intellectual
stimulation by collaborating with teachers, being role models in data use, providing access to data,
and distributing leadership by creating a special task force or data team (Schildkamp et al., 2019).
Teachers need to feel that the data team has enough autonomy to make decisions that will be
implemented. Additionally, teachers are social and emotional learners (Hargreaves, 1994). Leaders
are encouraged to provide individualized support for their teachers. Teachers need to know that they
can discuss and share their emotions related to data use in schools. Providing individualized support

                                                 18868

Ming et al.                                               Data-Driven Decision-Making in Educational Leadership


leads to relational trust among school leaders, teachers, and staff is essential for fostering a
collaborative environment where data can be used effectively to inform instructional practices and
improve student learning (Abrams et al., 2020). With trust, the emotions of teachers will be
supported especially when the relationship between leaders and teachers is evolving during the
process of organizational changes (Schildkamp et al., 2019). Teachers need to feel that they can
discuss their emotions, concerns, and frustrations with the school leaders so that they can perform
well in school.
Another strategy for implementing DDDM in education is knowledge-sharing management
(Schildkamp et al., 2019). Knowledge management, a vital aspect of modern educational practices,
involves the systematic capture, organization, sharing, and application of knowledge within an
institution or context. School leaders can contribute different types of knowledge to the teachers:
organizational knowledge, knowledge about data, statistics, and research, and pedagogical content
knowledge (PCK). School leaders often have different perspectives on organizational issues and can
contribute different types of knowledge teachers can use. Managing effective knowledge sharing will
improve organizational effectiveness in problem-solving, enhance collaboration, and stimulate
creativity and innovation vertically and horizontally in organizations. For example, shared lesson
planning was one way to improve and ensure the alignment of instruction, curriculum, and
assessments (Park & Desimone, 2019). Pedagogy expands its learning paradigm beyond individual
cognitive processes, encompassing dynamic interactional elements. This emphasizes the pivotal
significance of collaborative engagement of teachers within the learning milieu for instructional
changes.
Research suggests that how school leaders structure, frame, model, and engage in data use influences
the shape, scope, and effectiveness of the practice (Schildkamp et al., 2019; Jimerson et al., 2020).
School teams must be introduced to effective models for data use, as this can help teachers move
from data to action (Jimerson et al., 2020). For example, Jimerson et al. (2020) suggest an evidence-
supported model for collaborative data use. Further, Dodman et al. (2023) suggest a professional
development model in data use for equity had a positive impact on participants, enhancing their
sense of agency, perceptions of equity and data, and perceived multicultural capacities. Based on the
learning experiences of teachers, they suggest the use of scenarios to help them practice handling
difficult situations and enhance their data literacy and collaboration skills (Abrams et al., 2020). Thus,
it reflects a need for practical, hands-on training that would prepare leaders and teachers for real-
world challenges in their schools (Dodman et al., 2023). Along these lines, Chen (2019) suggests that
the DDDM area should be added as a new leadership competency area and the DDDM mindsets
should be cultivated. These should be conducted not only for senior leaders but mid-level leaders as
Chen (2019) found out that mid-level leaders thought this DDDM was only for senior leaders. This
discrepancy in leadership creates a need to further examine the perspectives of mid-level leaders in
DDDM.
Apart from implementing strategies for field school leaders, aspiring school leaders should be taken
into consideration. Another strategy involves engaging aspiring school leaders in field experiences
that are comprehensive, coherent, and relevant, connecting the school improvement plan with these
experiences (Bickmore et al., 2020). Schoolwide data should be organized into areas such as student
learning, demographics, school processes, and perceptual data to identify targeted groups for
additional support. Abrams et al. (2020) suggest that understanding these structural factors is crucial
for creating an environment that supports effective data use practices. In line with this, another
strategy is for districts to anticipate and prepare for additional technical requests and the need for
assistance from school leaders when new data systems or tools are implemented. This preparation
can facilitate smoother transitions, more effective use of data systems, and strengthen the
collaboration between districts and schools. In conclusion, promoting DDDM literacy and
implementation represents a process of organizational learning, which requires the involvement of
every member of the school organizations, including supporting staff and district officers. By
adopting these strategies, educational leaders can overcome challenges and harness the potential of
DDDM to improve educational outcomes.
DISCUSSIONS

                                                  18869

Ming et al.                                               Data-Driven Decision-Making in Educational Leadership


Integrating Data-Driven Decision Making (DDDM) into educational leadership has important
implications for both practical application and research. The challenges of integrating DDDM
highlight the urgent requirement for focused programs to improve data literacy among school
leaders and teachers. School leaders and teachers are required to have the necessary skills to
proficiently gather, analyze, and utilize data for making informed choices. To close the gap between
data utilization and student learning outcomes, it is crucial to address these deficiencies in skills.
Moreover, it is crucial to systematically tackle organizational and structural obstacles, such as limited
time availability, insufficient technical assistance, and conflicting priorities within educational
institutions. Effective leadership is pivotal in cultivating a life-long learning culture that places
importance on data utilization and assists educators in navigating these difficulties. Providing
opportunities for professional development and creating collaborative learning are the strategies to
maintain the progress of data-driven processes beyond the initial stages of implementation.
Furthermore, the importance of data systems' quality and accessibility cannot be overstated.
Educational organizations should allocate resources to develop a strong data infrastructure that
enables smooth integration and analysis of data in different educational organizations. Ensuring the
accuracy and reliability of data is essential to avoid spreading false information and to facilitate well-
informed decision-making at every level of the educational system.
Moving forward, several promising avenues for advancing DDDM in educational settings emerge
from current research and practice. Firstly, there is a need for continued exploration into effective
models and frameworks for collaborative data use. Research should focus on identifying best
practices that promote sustained engagement with data among educators, fostering a culture of
continuous improvement. Secondly, enhancing the role of educational leadership in DDDM remains
critical. Future research should delve deeper into the leadership behaviors and strategies that
optimize data utilization and empower educators. This includes investigating the impact of
transformational leadership styles, intellectual stimulation and distributed leadership models on
data-driven decision-making efficacy.
Additionally, advancing technological capabilities to support DDDM is pivotal. Innovations in data
analytics and visualization tools can enhance educators’ capacity to derive actionable insights from
complex datasets. Future studies should evaluate the effectiveness of these technologies in improving
educational outcomes and inform policymaking regarding resource allocation and infrastructure
development. Furthermore, promoting equity and inclusivity through DDDM represents a pressing
frontier. Research should explore how data-driven approaches can mitigate educational disparities
and ensure equitable access to quality education for all students. This includes examining the
intersection of DDDM with culturally responsive pedagogies and inclusive practices to foster
educational environments that support diverse student populations.
Lastly, longitudinal studies are needed to assess the long-term impact of DDDM on student
achievement, school performance, and organizational culture. By tracking outcomes over extended
periods, researchers can provide robust evidence of the efficacy and sustainability of DDDM
initiatives, informing evidence-based policymaking and continuous improvement efforts in
educational leadership. In conclusion, while the implementation of DDDM in educational leadership
poses significant challenges, it also holds immense potential to transform educational practices and
outcomes. By addressing current limitations and embracing future opportunities, stakeholders can
harness the power of data to drive meaningful change in educational settings worldwide.
CONCLUSION
Increasingly, Data-Driven Decision Making is getting attention in educational leadership. This study
conducted a systematic literature review (SLR) to analyze the existing publications on data-driven
decision-making. This SLR (Systematic Literature Review) aims to provide school leaders and
teachers with a comprehensive understanding of data-driven decision-making in educational
organizations. This study identified the challenges and strategies for implementing data-driven
decision-making in organizations. Furthermore, this study offers valuable insights for scholars.
Ultimately, this study has established a pathway for academics for future research.
Authors’ Contributions

                                                  18870

Ming et al.                                                 Data-Driven Decision-Making in Educational Leadership


Goh, Mahaliza, and Dayang Rafidah contributed to the design and implementation of the research, to
the analysis of the results and to the writing of the study.
Acknowledgements
I would like to thank Mahaliza and Dayang Rafidah for their invaluable guidance and support
throughout this study.
REFERENCES
Abrams, L. M., Varier, D., & Mehdi, T. (2021). The intersection of school context and teachers’        data
        use practice: Implications for an integrated approach to capacity building. Studies in
                  Educational Evaluation, 69, 100868. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.stueduc.2020.100868
Agasisti, T., & Bowers, A.J. (2017). Data analytics and decision-making in education:          Towards      the
        educational data scientist as a key actor in schools and higher education institutions. In Johnes,
        G., Johnes, J., Agasisti, T., López-Torres, L. (Eds.), Handbook of             Contemporary
        Education Economics (pp.184-210). Cheltenham, UK: Edward Elgar                 Publishing.
Bernhardt, V.L. (2017). Data Analysis for continuous school improvement (4th ed.). Routledge.
                  https://doi.org/10.4324/9781315101026
Bickmore, D. L., Roberts, M. M., & Gonzales, M. M. (2020). How aspiring principals applied             course-
        based learning to develop school improvement plans. Journal of Educational             Administration,
        59(2), 199–214. https://doi.org/10.1108/jea-06-2020-0139
Bowers, A. J. and Krumm, A. E. (2021). Supporting the initial work of evidence-based           improvement
        cycles through a data-intensive partnership. Information and Learning Sciences,             122(9/10),
        629-650. https://doi.org/10.1108/ILS-09-2020-0212
Bryk, A.S., Gomez, L., Grunow, A., & Le Mahieu, P. (2015). Learning to improve: How            America’s
        schools can get better at getting better. Cambridge, MA: Harvard Education             Publishing
Chen, S. (2019). Reform and practice of big data-driven higher education management and
                  decision.      Journal       of    Physics:     Conference      Series,   1345,      022020.
                  https://doi.org/10.1088/1742-6596/1345/2/022020
Deming, W. E. (2018). Out of the crisis. MIT Press.
Dodman, S.L., DeMulder, E.K., View, J.L. et al. (2023). I knew it was a problem before, but did        I
        really?: Engaging teachers in data use for equity. Journal of Educational Change, 24,          995–
        1023. https://doi.org/10.1007/s10833-022-09477-z
Dunn, K. E., Airola, D. T., Lo, W. J., & Garrison, M. (2013). Becoming data driven: The        influence     of
        teachers’ sense of efficacy on concerns related to data-driven decision making. The Journal of
        Experimental                          Education,                     81(2),                   222–241.
                  https://doi.org/10.1080/00220973.2012.699899
Farley-Ripple E., Tilley K., Sheridan S., Gallimore R. (2020). What improvement challenges do          schools
        face? Searching for ways research might help. Teachers College Record.
Finnigan, K.S., Daly, A.J., & Che, J. (2013). Systemwide reform in districts under pressure: The       role of
        social networks in defining, acquiring, using, and diffusing research evidence. Journal               of
        Educational Administration, 51(4), 476-497.            https://doi.org/10.1108/09578231311325668
Gonzales, M. M., Bickmore, D. L., & Roberts, M. B. (2020). Implementing school improvement             plans:
        Perceptions and implications of aspiring principals for educational leadership programs.
        Journal      of      Research      on      Leadership     Education,     17(2),   194277512096482.
                  https://doi.org/10.1177/1942775120964821
Gummer, E. S., & Mandinach, E. B. (2015). Building a conceptual framework for data literacy.
                  Teachers College Record: The Voice of Scholarship in Education, 117(4), 1–22.
                  https://doi.org/10.1177/016146811511700401
Hossain, M.A., Akter, S. & Yanamandram, V. (2020). Revisiting customer analytics capability            for
        data-driven retailing. Journal of Retailing and Consumer Services, 56, 102187.
Jimerson, J. B., Garry, V., Poortman, C. L., & Schildkamp, K. (2021). Implementation of a collaborative
        data use model in a United States context. Studies in Educational Evaluation,          69,     100866.
        https://doi.org/10.1016/j.stueduc.2020.100866
Kraus, S., Breier, M., & Lim, W.M. et al. (2022). Literature reviews as independent studies:
                  guidelines for academic practice. Review Managerial Science, 16, 2577–2595.
                  https://doi.org/10.1007/s11846-022-00588-8



                                                    18871

Ming et al.                                                  Data-Driven Decision-Making in Educational Leadership


Mandinach, E. B., Honey, M., Light, D., & Brunner, C. (2008). A conceptual framework for data-driven
          decision making. In Mandinach, E. B. & Honey, M. (Eds.), Data-driven          school     improvement:
          Linking data and learning (pp. 13–31). New York, NY: Teachers College Press.
Mandinach, E., Gummer, W., Northwest, E., & Muller, R. (2011). The complexities of              integrating
          data-driven decision making into professional preparation in schools of education: It’s harder
          than     you      think    report      from     an    invitational    meeting.     Retrieved      from
                  https://educationnorthwest.org/sites/default/files/gummer-mandinach-full-report.pdf
Mandinach, E. B. (2012). A perfect time for data use: Using data-driven decision making to              inform
          practice.               Educational               Psychologist,            47(2),              71–85.
                  https://doi.org/10.1080/00461520.2012.667064
Mandinach, E. B., & Gummer, E. S. (2013). A systemic view of implementing data literacy in
                  educator         preparation.        Educational        Researcher,        42(1),      30–37.
                  https://doi.org/10.3102/0013189x12459803
Marsh, J. A., Pane, J. F., & Hamilton, L. S. (2006). Making sense of data-driven decision making        in
          education: Evidence from recent RAND research. Santa Monica, CA: RAND                 Corporation.
          http://www.rand.org/pubs/occasional_papers/OP170/
Marsh, J. A., & Farrell, C. C. (2014). How leaders can support teachers with data-driven decision making.
          Educational        Management         Administration      &      Leadership,      43(2),     269–289.
                  https://doi.org/10.1177/1741143214537229
Murakami, E., & Hernandez, F. (2019). Schools in vulnerable contexts: Galapagos Islands’
                  principals and accountability. Revista Contemporânea de Educação, 14(31), 50–67.
                  https://doi.org/10.20500/rce.v14i31.30185
Pak, K., & Desimone, L. M. (2019). Developing principals’ data-driven decision-making capacity:
          Lessons      from      one     urban      district.   Phi     Delta    Kappan,       100(7),    37-42.
                  https://doi.org/10.1177/0031721719841337
Schildkamp, K., & Kuiper, W. (2010). Data-informed curriculum reform: Which data, what
                  purposes, and promoting and hindering factors. Teaching and Teacher Education, 26(3),
                  482–496. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.tate.2009.06.007
Schildkamp, K., Poortman, C.L., Ebbeler, J. et al. (2019). How school leaders can build effective data
          teams: Five building blocks for a new wave of data-informed decision making. Journal                 of
          Educational Change, 20, 283–325. https://doi.org/10.1007/s10833-019-09345
Simmie, G. M. (2021). Teacher professional learning: a holistic and cultural endeavour imbued with
          transformative               possibility.            Educational             Review,            1(16).
                  https://doi.org/10.1080/00131911.2021.1978398
Xiao, Y., & Watson, M. (2019). Guidance on conducting a systematic literature review. Journal           of
          Planning          Education         and        Research,        39(1),        93–112.        Sagepub.
                  https://doi.org/10.1177/0739456X17723971
Wang, Y. (2021). What is the role of emotions in educational leaders’ decision making? Proposing an
          organizing framework. Educational Administration Quarterly, 57(3), 372-               402.
          https://doi.org/10.1177/0013161X20938856
Wang, Y. (2021). Artificial intelligence in educational leadership: a symbiotic role of human-
                  artificial intelligence decision-making. Journal of Educational Administration, 59(3),
                  256-270. https://doi.org/10.1108/JEA-10-2020-0216.
Watson, R., Wilson, H.N., Smart, P. & Macdonald, E.K. (2018). Harnessing difference: a          capability-
          based framework for stakeholder engagement in environmental innovation.               Journal        of
          Product Innovation Management, 35(2), 254-279.
Wayman, J. C., Jimerson, J. B., & Cho, V. (2012). Organizational considerations in establishing         the
          Data-Informed District. School Effectiveness and School Improvement, 23(2), 159–              178.
          https://doi.org/10.1080/09243453.2011.652124




                                                     18872