RESEARCH ARTICLE


                       ▪ Vol. 5, No. 2 (Spring 2024)                               ▪ p-ISSN: 2791-0237                     ▪ e-ISSN: 2791-0202
                       ▪ Pages: 348 – 359                                          ▪ DOI: 10.55737/qjss.349319430


                         Open Access

                                                  The Role of Artificial Intelligence (AI) In Transforming
                                             Educational Practices: Opportunities, Challenges, and Implications

                                                  Mateen Iqbal 1 Najeeb Ullah Khan 2 Muhammad Imran 3


                       Abstract: The role of artificial intelligence in the field of education has garnered significant attention in recent
                       decades. Artificial intelligence has undergone significant advancements and has been applied in diverse areas of
                       education, including adaptive learning, school management, and educational accessibility. The objective of this study
                       is to examine the progression and utilization of artificial intelligence in the field of education, along with the
                       difficulties encountered in its adoption and implementation. The study effectively employed a qualitative research
                       approach, utilizing a literature review as a research design and approach, to successfully achieve the study's
                       objectives. This study assesses the beneficial influence of artificial intelligence on enhancing learning efficacy and
                       delivering personalized learning experiences. The obstacles were also recognized in the implementation of artificial
                       intelligence in the field of education. The findings of this study emphasize the significance of promoting the
                       integration of AI in education through the establishment of supportive policies, sufficient preparation, and a deeper
                       comprehension of AI usage among educators. AI enhances students' learning experiences by offering them practical
                       and experienced learning opportunities, especially when combined with other technologies like virtual reality, 3-D,
                       gaming, and simulation. Finally, a curriculum that is adaptive and similar to industrial developments should be
                       outlined.

                       Key Words: Artificial Intelligence (AI), Education, Opportunities, Challenges, Implications


                   Introduction
                   Artificial Intelligence has recently become a significant transformative force that has revolutionized
                   industries, economies, and societies across the globe, and education is no exception. The integration of AI
                   technology in the sector has the potential to redefine traditional practices of teaching and learning through
                   personalized instruction, adaptive learning experiences, and data-driven decision-making, among others.
                   Nonetheless, due to this potential, there are numerous challenges and ethical dilemmas that call for an
                   investigation of the use of AI in the sector. This work explores the various points of view of Artificial
                   Intelligence in education as well as possible outcomes for users and society. Artificial Intelligence has
                   rapidly transformed and revolutionized different sectors, from industries and economies to societal norms.
                   Considerably, in education, AI presents the potential to change traditional learning and teaching practices.
                   It presents a unique opportunity for personalized learning and instruction, transformative learning
                   experiences, and data-informed decision-making (Luckin et al., 2016). The realization of AI potential has
                   attracted educators, policy-makers, stakeholders, operators, and other scholars. Consequently, research
                   and interest in the incorporation of AI in education have sharply increased in the past decade.

                       Artificial Intelligence has become a necessary part of our lives and is occurring quickly as science and
                   technology develop. Obviously, the modern world is continuously changing and being modified by
                   knowledge, scientific and technical revolutions. Such amazing technologies as Artificial Intelligence, Cloud
                   Computing, and Big Data technologies and tools have contributed significantly to improving people’s
                   quality of life. (Ferruz et al., 2024). As a result, people have been able to generate knowledge, develop
                   technological solutions, change institutions, and apply knowledge in various fields. AI is a leading



                   1
                     PhD, School Education Department, Punjab, Pakistan.
                   2
                     PhD, School Education Department, Punjab, Pakistan. Email: najeebullahkhan69@gmail.com
                   3
                     M.Phil., School Education Department, Punjab, Pakistan. Email: connect2imran77@gmail.com

                       ▪ Corresponding Author: Mateen Iqbal (syedmateen92@yahoo.com)
                       ▪ To Cite: Iqbal, M., Khan, N. U. & Imran, M. (2024). The Role of Artificial Intelligence (AI) In Transforming Educational
                         Practices: Opportunities, Challenges, and Implications. Qlantic Journal of Social Sciences, 5(2), 348-359.
                         https://doi.org/10.55737/qjss.349319430

The Role of Artificial Intelligence (AI) In Transforming Educational Practices: Opportunities, Challenges, and Implications

technology that truly possesses the ability to change much of human life, including education, and the
country is among the first to adopt AI (Chen et al., 2020).

     However, Cantú-Ortiz et al. (2020) revealed that among the domains that witnessed the
implementation of AI is education. Education in the AI era has two goals: to prepare people to be
responsible workers and citizens in a world surrounded by AI systems and to transform how teaching and
learning are conducted. According to Ng et al. (2021), AI also has the potential to change the way teaching
and learning are conducted in education. AI, for example, can personalize learning by tailoring the material
to the student’s specific action plan or needs. AI can also automate tasks like grading and tabulation,
freeing up teacher’s time that may be utilized to teach. Additionally, AI helps determine the pattern of
behaviour of the students and helps the teacher whenever they notice any catch at the initial stage. The
teacher can easily intervene. The overall quality level of education is also good, and the student's
preference is also a priority with the integration of AI. In this regard, Dwivedi et al. (2021) noted that
education is a sector of society that is a source of income. That is, it is “the epicentre of the source,
meaning, and creation of impacts on all areas of society”. However, as a source sector, education has some
difficulties: it may be unavailable, there may be financial problems, and there may be difficulties in visiting
classrooms. Technology can be used to resolve this problem. It is a fact that modern artificial intelligence
makes a ringing revolution. It affects all sectors and education. Currently, many countries use the
technology in Singapore, Malaysia, and South Korea; more PAT (Portable Appliance Tester) machines will
allow the creation of new openings and resolve problems in the exercise system. However, AI applications
in education may raise questions. For example, it will be necessary for an AI system to make rational
decisions. An AI feign shall not have the right to appoint or gift a medal; there is still a question of privacy
for students who will inspect information systems with their data to train AI. Therefore, it is necessary to
study how it changes educational practices, particularly how it creates opportunities and problems. This
will provide insight into possible dangers and ensure that they are avoided.

Literature Review
Artificial Intelligence (AI) refers to software applications that can replicate human actions and think like
human beings. It is associated with human learning and problem-solving abilities. AI is capable of
performing tasks in a way that mimics human responses in problematic situations. AI is currently one of
the most discussed topics in technology, with a growing call for organizations to develop an AI strategy.
AI is the creation of computer systems with the ability to perform tasks that typically require human
intelligence (Aina et al., 2023).

    However, Chassignol et al. (2018) provide a dual definition and explanation of artificial intelligence. AI
is commonly referred to as both a discipline and a conceptual framework. Artificial intelligence (AI) is a
branch of computer science that aims to address many cognitive challenges linked with human intelligence
and IQ levels, such as learning, problem-handling, and pattern detection, and subsequently adjusting to
them. Artificial intelligence (AI) is commonly associated with computers. An analysis of multiple articles,
particularly those focused on the education sector, reveals that while computers have played a crucial role
in the advancement of artificial intelligence, there is a tendency to mistakenly label the computer itself,
including its hardware and software, as artificial intelligence. Embedded computers, sensors, and other
advanced technology have made it simpler to incorporate artificial intelligence into many devices and
structures, such as robots and buildings (Zhang et al., 2022).

    Furthermore, Chassignol et al. (2018) define artificial intelligence as a theoretical framework and a
meta-field with checklists that establish the development and use of computer systems endowed with
abilities that are characteristic of human, primarily intellectual, achievements in patterns and tasks
requiring human intelligence: speech recognition and generation, visual perception, intelligent language
translation, decision-making. According to various scientists, the definition of AI comprises similar
components or qualities. Sharma et al. (2019) define AI as machines that are capable of emulating human
cognitive processes. On the other hand, Pokrivcakov (2019) depicted that artificial intelligence is a product
of years of research and development by statisticians, cognitive scientists, psychologists, education
specialists, and other experts. Their goal is to create an education that is intelligent in specific ways and
capable of performing numerous functions. These systems should help teachers help students acquire

 Qlantic Journal of Social Sciences (QJSS) | Volume 5, No. 2 (Spring 2024)                                          349

Mateen Iqbal, Najeeb Ullah Khan, and Muhammad Imran

knowledge and learnable skills that will be critical in a challenging, rapidly evolving world. Artificial
intelligence requires creating sophisticated software and programming using algorithmic machine
learning to allow computers to perform tasks that necessitate knowledge and adaptability and other forms
of human-like learning from the context (Pokrivcakova, 2019). At the same time, Hwang et al. (2020)
explored artificial intelligence as the capacity of machines and other technologies to perform tasks that
require human mental and behavioural processes.

    The definitions and descriptions discussed herein are those of artificial intelligence, where one would
typically relate to the production of robots showing an amount of intelligence and engaging in jobs mostly
done by humans. Such jobs include thinking, learning, making decisions, and changing over time.
Therefore, some features and concepts are considered essential to AI. The first such crucial feature of AI is
intelligence, which implies how smart the machine appears and how many jobs it can do that frequently
require human intelligence. When artificial intelligence is suggested, the image of a supercomputer often
arises. These robots possess immense computational capabilities and can demonstrate adaptive behaviour
through the incorporation of sensors and other enhancements that grant them cognitive and functional
capacities akin to those of humans (Chen et al., 2020). Indeed, these characteristics further augment the
supercomputer's capacity to engage with individuals. Several films have been created to showcase the
capabilities of artificial intelligence. An example film showcases the application of artificial intelligence in
intelligent buildings, where the air quality, temperature, and music choices may be modified according to
the occupants' subjective emotional state. Artificial intelligence has gained significant traction in the
education sector, going beyond the conventional notion of AI as a supercomputer and extending to include
integrated computer systems. For example, the integration of AI, computers, and associated hardware with
robots enables the development of robots that improve student learning, particularly in early childhood
education (Chandiok & Chaturvedi, 2018). At the same time, Timms (2016) suggested that cobots, which
are robots that work along with teachers or other cobots, may be used to teach youngsters regular tasks
like spelling and pronunciation based on their abilities. Web-based and online education has advanced
significantly over time. Initially, it only offered students access to online resources for downloading,
studying, and completing assignments. However, it has now evolved to include intelligent and adaptive
web-based systems. These systems are capable of recognizing and adapting to the behaviour of both
learners and instructors. The purpose of this adaptation is to enhance the overall quality of the educational
experience (Latif et al., 2023).

Impact of AI on Education
Notwithstanding efforts to improve scientific instruction on both school and college levels, the quality of
the infrastructure and teaching-learning resources has not improved. For instance, although many schools
have labs, the equipment is not well maintained and does not support the required quality of investigation.
Additionally, while modern teaching aids and up-to-date textbooks are essential tools for enhancing the
quality of science education, many schools lack them. Moreover, few educators are qualified to teach
science and inspire students to seek careers in the field. As a result, access to quality materials is limited
in rural and underprivileged areas, where schools may have one or no science laboratory at all, and schools
have no access to the most recent information on basic scientific research. As a result of the deterioration
of the aforementioned, the quality of scientific instruction in schools has plummeted, affecting student
performance. Removing the obstacles that prevent students from receiving holistic and quality scientific
education is of utmost importance. This requires the allocation of adequate resources, provision of quality
infrastructure, and availability of competent educators to learners. The move will ensure that students
have the expertise and knowledge it takes to flourish and respond to a rapidly changing world and
contribute to innovation and scientific advances (UNESCO, 2021).

     According to Hwang et al. (2020), to write about how AI tools and technology, in general, could
revolutionize school science classrooms by fusing alternative teaching and learning strategies,
transmitting education as an enjoyable activity. On the contrary, Nguyen & Rasmussen (2016) explored
that the presented solutions are opportunities; they improve the educational process, and they are not just
solving the existing problem but also developing skills for students to deal with future ones. But, Wang et
al. (2023) revealed that the education sector is not an exception, as the research shows a 47.5 % increase
in the use of AI in education from 2017 to 2021. Even if AI could be utilized to automate administrative

  350                                      Qlantic Journal of Social Sciences (QJSS) | Volume 5, No. 2 (Spring 2024)

The Role of Artificial Intelligence (AI) In Transforming Educational Practices: Opportunities, Challenges, and Implications

responsibilities such as admissions and grading, this kind of education probably goes much beyond that.
Intelligent learning systems could be designed and developed to fulfil the learning requirements of
individual students. The future of education will be changed by AI in this method.

    However, Borenstein and Howard (2021) exposed that the utilization of AI in scientific education is
prevalent and diverse. This shows a groundswell of many other emerging and converging technologies by
pushing the educational landscape toward a completely student-centred pedagogical environment that is
adjustable for the notes of each student and supported by the latest technology. On the other hand,
Zawacki‐Richter et al. (2019) reflected that AI and automation are expected to substantially change this
sector in 2020. These technologies will be utilised in several ways, such as accessibility and remote
learning, more interactive and immersive learning, customized education, and school automation.
Moreover, Zawacki‐Richter et al. (2019) depicted that education is a fundamental right of everyone, but it
has always been difficult to provide, particularly with the help of remote learning programs. Nevertheless,
due to increasing connectivity online globally and with the assistance of AI, remote education is constantly
upgrading. In addition, AI-based language translation will help target third-world countries’ indigenous
people. Most often, interactive and immersive learning methods incorporating the concepts and ideas of
VR and AR are practised and applied to the interests of the students and the value of the learner.

    In addition, Al-tkhayneh et al. (2023) revealed the positive and negative aspects of applying AI use in
STEM education. They identified the positive issues as the accessibility of timely, personalized content
with added student engagement, while the negative aspects include the time-consuming training of
human teachers and the issue emerging from the algorithm’s ability to learn biases. As such, the study
suggests that the following factors should be taken into account by educators: necessary training and
support should be provided to the teacher’s needs, and the ethical and legal issues related to AI integration
into the education system should be detected and dealt with. Nonetheless, Corwin et al. (2017) identified
that attempting to use artificial intelligence in higher education. Eighteen participants were interviewed,
and the findings pointed to the positive impact of AI in the learning process and students’ engagement but
noted the heavy training that faculty and staff need to undergo to make effective use of AI and the problem
of bias that may arise from AI systems. Therefore, these aspects should be considered by institutions to
offer support and professional development for the utilization of AI-enriched educational platforms, along
with handling legal and/or ethical incidences.

        However, Chai et al. (2023) explored that artificial intelligence has a significant impact on the
learning process in Chinese schools. The quantitative research employed a sample of 364 teachers from
the more advanced provinces of China (Beijing, Shanghai, Guangdong, Jiangsu, Shandong, and Zhejiang).
Specifically, studies found that AI improvement comes with possibilities for technology to revolutionize
communication and learning while also creating possible threats of privacy and security infringement. On
the basis of the findings of the study, it was recommended that AI be adopted in Chinese schools while
legal and ethical concerns are being observed.

     This paper aims to establish the impact of artificial intelligence on education and related activities. AI
can offer immediate feedback to students and instructors, in theory, which would allow them to alter
methodologies immediately. Ross and Kim (2018) have explained that prior research has illustrated that,
if specified by the needs and preferences of the learners, AI can facilitate flexible learning experiences that
are unique to each learner. For instance, intelligent help in learning specific subjects like mathematics and
language arts in the classroom enhanced performance. Consequently, one can conclude on a high
possibility of interaction between the industry and the sphere of education.

Opportunities
One of the advantages of AI is that it can provide an immediate response to the students and instructors;
therefore, changes can be made in a short time. Ross and Kim (2018) pointed out one of the benefits of AI,
which is that it can help personalized content according to needs and styles of learning. This is well
illustrated by Intelligent Tutoring Systems, which have increased performance in math and language arts
when applied in these areas to incredibly high levels. It would, therefore, be apparent that synergy between
the education sector and the industry offered noteworthy benefits (Schueller et al., 2017). Specialized
industry advisory boards and Industry internships, campus educational programs, company sponsors for

 Qlantic Journal of Social Sciences (QJSS) | Volume 5, No. 2 (Spring 2024)                                          351

Mateen Iqbal, Najeeb Ullah Khan, and Muhammad Imran

academic programs and projects, guest speakers and appearances, and joint collaborative research projects
are all the key liaisons between academia and industry relevance. These partnerships ensure that the skills
taught in the classroom align with the demands of the business, enabling students to acquire practical
knowledge and enhancing their readiness for employment (Khanna et al., 2015). In the near future,
advancements in AI will allow for the creation of intelligent teaching programs that can accommodate and
support thousands or even millions of students simultaneously. Pearson, an education publishing
company, has proposed the development of a lifelong AI companion for students. This companion will be
capable of identifying students' strengths and weaknesses and providing recommendations for areas of
study and career paths based on the student's personality and academic abilities. Students who need
assistance will no longer have to wait days for a response from tutors via email. Instead, they will be able
to ask questions to a virtual teaching assistant and receive prompt answers (Singh & Hiran, 2022).

    However, Williamson & Eynon (2020) have reported that various technologies, such as plagiarism
detection, exam integrity maintenance, and student metrics analysis, are being used to evaluate students,
and they have proved to be extremely useful. According to Chen et al. (2020), AI users across different
countries indicate that artificial intelligence is being used in various industries, such as finance and
healthcare, to accomplish different goals. Khanna et al. (2015) stated that a highly efficient AI can perform
complex tasks just like humans. Implementing data-based educational policies is increasingly possible.
AI-produced data can facilitate evidence-based decision-making for focused strategies in scientific
education. Chen et al. (2020) illustrated that the quality of learning in higher education refers to the
methods and lessons provided to students. The education system must maintain high-quality teaching
methods so that students can achieve their future goals through their studies. Participating in online
classes is beneficial as it provides students with advanced teaching methods to better understand the
subject matter. Online teaching methods also enable students to ask questions and receive answers at any
time of the day, making it easier for them to study.

Challenges
One of the primary obstacles in education is accommodating diverse learning styles and paces. The
progress in artificial intelligence offers prospects for tailored and individualized instructional approaches.
The AI tutoring system known as Squirrel has achieved a lot, particularly in mathematics. It has attracted
a huge number of students due to the total of about $1 billion, which was first invested in 2019. This is
because the method goes through the current student’s level of knowledge, including what they
understand and do not understand. As a result, it results in the development of a curriculum that is tailored
based on the student’s proficiency and deficiencies. This curriculum is then updated based on student
progress, and the material is updated and adjusted based on the student’s level of proficiency (Borenstein
& Howard, 2020). Additionally, it goes through patterns and trends exhibited in multiple students,
following which the presentation of the subject is improved based on how effective it is. However, there
are other issues to deal with. First, the rapid development and implementation of AI based on a desire to
outperform competitors drives prototype testing of standardized learning systems. This situation
necessitates the creation of an artificial intelligence strategy for education. Second, AI use in education
faces major ethical issues, which include testing the development and preliminary prototyping of
sophisticated systems. AI uses large quantities of data to improve the system (Trattner et al., 2021). There
are concerns about the type of student data that needs to be collected and the safeguards that need to be
put in place to protect student privacy. Additionally, algorithmic bias occurs when human thinking
influences AI systems, leading to intrinsic bias (Arrieta et al., 2020).

Implications
Another critical development that can be expected in this regard is the increased and enhanced use of
personalized teaching tools. In this case, the introduction of robots and AI using more sophisticated data
analysis is going to change the way student’s learning progress is measured, learning patterns are
identified, and lessons are obtained for future modification. This innovation can ultimately support
educators and policymakers with the help of in-depth data analysis to ensure well-informed decisions are
made (Okunade, 2024). Learning experiences based on AI can provide students with cutting-edge



  352                                     Qlantic Journal of Social Sciences (QJSS) | Volume 5, No. 2 (Spring 2024)

The Role of Artificial Intelligence (AI) In Transforming Educational Practices: Opportunities, Challenges, and Implications

technology and the skills to solve all types of problems, which can create workforces that are more flexible
and innovative-savvy (Obi, 2022).


Statement of Problem
The integration of Artificial Intelligence into practice introduces a tremendous paradigm shift at all levels
and varies the way a lot of things get done in educational institutions. There are opportunities offered by
AI in teaching and learning, such as the customizing of learning, the way instruction is supplied to every
student, making schools and class administrators smart in decision-making, and raising the standards of
education, among others. However, the pros of adopting AI in practice also come with cons to publisher
learning. The other con relating to the use of AI in practice concerns the inability to ensure schools,
teachers, and students have access to the expensive digital equipment and tools that allow AI to complete
specific tasks. Additionally, worries about data privacy and safety technology raise concerns about the use
of AI. Further concerns on the dependability, accountability, and privacy of information for minors have
also been raised. Moreover, administrators companion AI and education technology and the serious
importance of educators knowing common every day able to apply AI to their teaching. It further examines
the use of AI as a danger to humans who are serious about the expectations of AI and adverse interests.
Transformational influences of AI on practice are no doubt disturbing, and as a consequence, it is difficult
to investigate them in an equivalent way. Therefore, this study tries to investigate the possibilities of AI in
the transformational influence of practice and the broad cons affecting interest influence.


Significance of the Study
This study seeks to offer insights into the role of Artificial Intelligence in melting educational practices,
hence educating stakeholders such as policymakers, educators, and educational leaders on the benefits and
challenges of integrating AI. Therefore, the study will provide knowledge on the impact of AI on teaching
methodologies, curriculum, and delivery approaches to ensure educators apply AI to improve student
learning experiences, facilitate personalized learning and enhance academic results. Moreover, the study
will address the possibilities of integrating AI in academics to help prepare future educators with the
knowledge and skills necessary for integrating AI in their academic content delivery and practice while
enhancing adaptation to the changes arising from technology. Furthermore, identifying the challenges and
barriers that hinder the implementation of AI in schools will provide a basis to curb the equity and access
disparities and thus will provide a basis for ensuring all students, regardless of their social or economic
backgrounds, access similar opportunities in benefiting from learning AI. The study will also be essential
in promoting innovation and collaboration in academics and, thus, will bring out the emerging issues, the
trends to watch out for, and a basis for academic research and development. Finally, the study will offer
more insights into the implications of AI integration for humans, thus enhancing policymakers' and
educators’ preparedness to help students fit into the workforce's future demands.


Theoretical Framework
One major theoretical framework that guides the incorporation of AI in the field of education is a
combinational framework of constructivist and cognitivist learning theories. Take, for example, the
constructivist theory, which discusses the importance of active involvement and practical exposure. This
theory maintains that people develop meaning as they construct their understanding of the world from
their experiences. However, AI in education still maintains this construct because it involves interaction
through simulations, virtual experiments, and immediate feedback, which enable learners to construct
meaning for themselves. The integration could also be based on cognitive theories, which focus on the
cognitive process of knowledge acquisition. This is significant because AI systems can examine learners’
cognitive processes by finding misunderstandings and adapting instructional techniques to focus on the
individual learning conditions of students. Therefore, integrating cognitive theories into the use of AI in
education allows educators to provide learning experiences that are more beneficial for cognitive
development.




 Qlantic Journal of Social Sciences (QJSS) | Volume 5, No. 2 (Spring 2024)                                          353

Mateen Iqbal, Najeeb Ullah Khan, and Muhammad Imran

Objective of the Study
To examine the issues of the advent, expansion, and application of AI in education and the challenges of
the integration and use of disruptive technology.


Research Question
How does Artificial Intelligence influence educational practices, and to what extent does the application
shape teaching approaches, student perceptions, and the academic environment?

Research Methods
A review of the literature was used as the research method. Gathering, examining, and analyzing literature
that is pertinent to and associated with the study topic constitutes the methodology for conducting a
literature review. It is a method of synthesizing and rearranging the body of knowledge derived from
several published sources. According to Hart (2018), the literature review procedure is "A systematic
process of collecting, evaluating, and synthesizing information relevant to a specific topic". Understanding
and describing the development of research that has already been completed, identifying accumulations
and gaps that still exist, and providing a strong theoretical framework for future research are the goals of
the literature review research process. The data collection method for this study was carried out in stages,
beginning with the definition of the subject and issue. Finally, with the help of the above-mentioned
keywords, artificial intelligence, education, opportunities, challenges, and implementations, researchers
conducted a literature search using Scopus and Google Scholar databases. The next step is the analysis and
interpretation of the information or literature found. According to Okoli & Schabram (2012), “a literature
review is a methodical, explicit, and repeatable process that interprets locating, assessing and synthesizing
the publications written by other scholars”.

Sampling
Initially, researchers selected a total of 139 papers that had been published after 2009. Those articles had
to comply with several requirements. Namely, had to contain the search keywords or search strings and
were published in journals with H-Index 20 and more. After a comprehensive review and profound analysis
of all the articles, researchers identified articles that provided insights into the meaning of artificial
intelligence and artificial intelligence's influence on education. Furthermore, H-Index helped researchers
to decrease the total number of articles to be analyzed to thirty. This sample size was sufficient to develop
an opinion or suggest a conclusion on the impact of artificial intelligence on education using a retrospective
approach. Furthermore, researchers focused on the articles that provided insights based on a qualitative
method that argued the influence of artificial intelligence on education and matched the specified criteria.
After a more thorough elimination process, researchers ended up with more than forty articles, including
journal articles, professional periodicals, and governmental and institutional reports.

Figure 1
Papers in Web of Science and Google Scholar in the last ten years with key words ``AI'' and ``Education''.

 200
 180
 160
 140
 120
 100
  80
  60
  40
  20
    0
          2019       2018      2017       2016       2015       2014       2013       2012       2011        2010


  354                                        Qlantic Journal of Social Sciences (QJSS) | Volume 5, No. 2 (Spring 2024)

The Role of Artificial Intelligence (AI) In Transforming Educational Practices: Opportunities, Challenges, and Implications

Results and Discussion
From the different articles and studies reviewed, it is evident that the developments and progress in
technological facets, mainly in computers and related aids, led to the birth and growth of artificial
intelligence. The content later had a general influence on a vast diversity of sectors and is on the path to
affecting industries where it was implemented immensely. Education is one of the industries in which AI
has been accepted and influenced heavily. Due to this hugely significant effect, it was necessary to first
understand and define AI to provide adequate information and knowledge of its effect on education. The
works assessed were able to offer insights into the different principles, traits, and meanings of AI. AI comes
with the characteristics of possessing intellect that was previously exclusive only to humans. The sources
that support this include Coppin (2004), describing intelligence and provides it with the feature of
possessing an intellectual factor by mentioning several core principles and persons who had first seen it.
The same is depicted by Timms (2016) about the various features and essences of AI. However, AI is the
branch of computer science dealing with creating machines and facilities such as robots with human
features. These include cognition, learning, adaptability, and decision-making processes. This
development and growth of the sector up to the creation and use of AI has given academic institutions, i.e.,
the education sector, a chance to incorporate and use the content. From the sources developed and
examined, one can infer that AI was accepted and used in various ways in education. The use of artificial
intelligence refers to the use of computers and auxiliaries for instruction, some administrative functions,
and promoting learners’ acquisition (Chassignol et al., 2018; Crowe et al., 2017; Rowe et al., 2011). The
specifics of technology to be used in aspects of AI were determined according to the descriptions and
content of the same discussed by Devedžić (2004), Mikropoulos and Natsis (2011), and Peredo et al. (2011).

    As the technology advanced further and was implanted in embedded systems, online platforms, and
robotics, AI for online platforms and the web has been developed and used. Such is the creation and use of
humanoid cobots and chat-bots that can work independently or collaboratively with human tutors to
achieve instructional roles, such as availing learning material to different academic education levels. The
platforms considered in the articles and their explanations allowed learners to have a more comprehensive
and enriching experience. This has been demonstrated in studies conducted by Peredo et al. (2011),
Surjandy et al. (2018), Murphy (2019), Chang et al. (2010), Jones et al. (2018), and Rowe et al. (2011).
Consequently, based on the data, it can be inferred that AI has significantly influenced the education
industry as a whole, namely in its implementation within educational institutions. Teachers or instructors
who utilize AI or harness the power of AI can enhance their efficiency and effectiveness in various tasks,
including the execution of administrative duties like evaluating, grading, and offering feedback to students
on their submitted assignments. Furthermore, by collaborating with AI, including web-based and online
intelligent systems, cobots, and chatbots, teachers can enhance the quality of instruction. Students benefit
from AI's utilization of machine learning, which enables a more enhanced and comprehensive learning
experience. Through machine learning, AI assesses students' abilities and requirements and, based on this
analysis, creates and shares personalized or customized content. This approach leads to increased adoption
and retention of knowledge, ultimately enhancing the learning process.

    Moreover, AI enhances students' learning experiences by offering them practical and experienced
learning opportunities, especially when combined with other technologies like virtual reality, 3-D, gaming,
and simulation. A study examined the negative consequences of AI, specifically focusing on the erosion of
academic integrity through the use of AI-powered paper churning and paper mill services that enable
cheating. The majority of the analyzed research provided a comprehensive examination and elucidation of
the various ways in which artificial intelligence (AI), including its integration, advantages, and influence
on administration, instruction, and learning, can be beneficial when applied in the field of education. The
benefits and advantages surpass the drawbacks or the adverse repercussions. AI learning is now regarded
as an educational aid in its early stages, but AI-enabled education will assume a more significant role as
learning demands evolve. Currently, the platform offers courses with varying difficulty levels determined
by basic rule-based assessment, but it has not yet achieved the highest level of intelligence in educational
technology. Education studies for AI systems often incorporate knowledge mapping and probability
modelling. As the educational process becomes more interactive, AI systems will generate a greater amount
of data. This data will help provide a more comprehensive understanding of teaching and learning,


 Qlantic Journal of Social Sciences (QJSS) | Volume 5, No. 2 (Spring 2024)                                          355

Mateen Iqbal, Najeeb Ullah Khan, and Muhammad Imran

allowing for more precise recommendations of content. Utilizing learner analytics, machine learning, and
data mining, AI systems will deliver superior educational materials to educators and students, facilitating
both instruction and learning while also enabling quantifiable assessment of the entire process. During
this stage, users will be provided with various methods to arrive at an accurate solution for every given
question. In the future, an ideal AI system will enhance students' imagination and creativity by assessing
their learning style, emotional state, and initiative. This analysis would then be used to enhance their
learning capacities, creativity, and subjective initiative. AI systems are expected to have a broader
application, encompassing various characteristics of students, such as their personal skills, mastery of
knowledge, learning abilities, and career growth. They will go beyond simply supporting students in
comprehending specific knowledge.


Conclusion
To summarize, AI has had a significant impact on various industries, including education. This is a
contemporary manner of tutoring or education that can be an effective way of combatting or eradicating
several issues related to studying. In this manner, it helps address the above-mentioned problems in their
entirety. Again, it pertains to content becoming comprehensible for students, as well as teachers being in
short supply like never before, yet it gives one no reason not to study easily and without such side
implications that this fact can have. The use and application of AI in the university business are destined
to occur. AI technologies worked with Virtual facilitators, online learning environments, learning
management systems, learning analytics, smart learning, tutoring systems, and social robots. All of these
technologies contribute a great deal to the industry.

Suggestion
Lots of advantages can be obtained through the use of artificial intelligence in teaching. Artificial
intelligence is used to make the learning process more effective, to create learning experiences tailored to
each student’s needs, and to enhance the efficiency of school management. When developing AI systems
for education, it is necessary to consider the issue of inclusivity and fairness. Think about the concerns
concerning the protection of student data, the reduction of students’ opportunities for face-to-face
engagement, and the shifting of teachers’ roles in the artificial intelligence era. The integration of AI in
education should be designed in accordance with human values and promote the important social
interactions fostered by the learning process. Further analysis is needed to understand how educators are
adopting artificial intelligence applications. Therefore, the increasing tendency of educators to employ
artificial intelligence in their work calls for further research. Analyze how teachers use artificial
intelligence in their teaching and how multimodal data aids in developing AI systems that better
understand the teaching and learning process. The change affecting industries and labour systems during
the fourth industrial revolution has called for new changes in the vocational education curriculum.
Therefore, a vocational curriculum that is comprehensive, interdisciplinary, and liberal is much needed. A
flexible and adaptive vocational curriculum must be designed for the future. Educational institutions must
be efficient in monitoring and analyzing students’ digital resource consumption during the digital age. Use
AI to track and analyze students’ digital resource usage. Optimization of the usage of digital resources in
the secondary and higher education system is essential for better educational outcomes and performance
evaluation. Through the utilization of AI, solving new challenges, and conducting advanced research,
Researchers believe we can improve our learning the quality of education, and prepare students for a smart
and sustainable future.

Future Work
The findings of this study were based on a theoretical analysis of previous studies that enabled the
provision of conclusive responses to the research questions that presented the goals of the inquiry. Other
AI systems in education, such as grading, assessment, and virtual reality, were beyond the scope of the
paper. More studies into these sides may be considered.




  356                                    Qlantic Journal of Social Sciences (QJSS) | Volume 5, No. 2 (Spring 2024)

The Role of Artificial Intelligence (AI) In Transforming Educational Practices: Opportunities, Challenges, and Implications

References
Aina, M. A., Gbenga-Epebinu, M. A., Olofinbiyi, R. O., Ogidan, O. C., & Ayedun, T. O. (2023). Perception and
        acceptance of medical chatbot among undergraduates in Ekiti State University, Nigeria. British
        Journal of Education, 11(11), 1-14. https://doi.org/10.37745/bje.2013/vol11n11114
Al-Tkhayneh, K. M., Alghazo, E. M., & Tahat, D. (2023). The Advantages and Disadvantages of using
        artificial intelligence in education. Journal of Educational and Social Research, 13(4),
        105. https://doi.org/10.36941/jesr-2023-0094
Arrieta, A. B., Díaz-Rodríguez, N., Del Ser, J., Bennetot, A., Tabik, S., Barbado, A., García, S., Gil-López, S.,
        Molina, D., Benjamins, R., Chatila, R., & Herrera, F. (2020). Explainable Artificial Intelligence (XAI):
        Concepts, taxonomies, opportunities and challenges toward responsible AI. Information Fusion, 58,
        82–115. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.inffus.2019.12.012
Borenstein, J., & Howard, A. (2020). Emerging challenges in AI and the need for AI ethics education. AI And
        Ethics, 1(1), 61–65. https://doi.org/10.1007/s43681-020-00002-7
Cantú-Ortiz, F. J., Galeano S´anchez, N., Garrido, L., Terashima-Marin, H., & Brena, R. F. (2020). An
        artificial intelligence educational strategy for digital transformation. International Journal on
        Interactive Design and Manufacturing, 14, 1195–1209. https:// doi.org/10.1007/s12008-020-00702-8
Chai, C. S., Liang, S., & Wang, X. (2023). A survey study of Chinese teachers’ continuous intentions to teach
        artificial intelligence. Education and Information Technologies, 1-20. DOI:10.1007/s10639-023-
        12430-z
Chandiok, A., & Chaturvedi, D. (2018). CIT: Integrated cognitive computing and cognitive agent
        technologies based on cognitive architecture for human-like functionality in artificial
        systems. Biologically              Inspired           Cognitive            Architectures, 26,            55-
        79. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.bica.2018.07.020
Chang, C. W., Lee, J. H., Chao, P. Y., Wang, C. Y., & Chen, G. D. (2010). Exploring the possibility of using
        humanoid robots as instructional tools for teaching a second language in primary school. Journal
        of Educational Technology & Society, 13(2), 13-24. https://www.learntechlib.org/p/75345/.
Chassignol, M., Khoroshavin, A., Klimova, A., & Bilyatdinova, A. (2018). Artificial Intelligence trends in
        education:         a      narrative        overview. Procedia       Computer         Science, 136,       16–
        24. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.procs.2018.08.233
Chen, L., Chen, P., & Lin, Z. (2020). Artificial Intelligence in Education: a review. IEEE Access, 8, 75264–
        75278. https://doi.org/10.1109/access.2020.2988510
Chen, X., Xie, H., Zou, D., & Hwang, G. (2020). Application and theory gaps during the rise of Artificial
        Intelligence       in     Education. Computers         and      Education.     Artificial     Intelligence, 1,
        100002. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.caeai.2020.100002
Coppin, B. (2004). Artificial intelligence illuminated. Jones & Bartlett Learning.
Corwin, L. A., Graham, M. J., & Dolan, E. L. (2015). Modelling Course-Based Undergraduate Research
        Experiences: An Agenda for Future Research and Evaluation. CBE Life Sciences Education, 14(1),
        es1. https://doi.org/10.1187/cbe.14-10-0167
Crowe, D., LaPierre, M., & Kebritchi, M. (2017). Knowledge-based artificial augmentation intelligence
        technology: Next step in academic instructional tools for distance learning. TechTrends, 61(5), 494-
        506. https://doi.org/10.1007/s11528-017-0210-4
Devedžić, V. (2004). Web Intelligence and Artificial Intelligence in Education. Journal of Educational
        Technology & Society, 7(4), 29–39. http://www.jstor.org/stable/jeductechsoci.7.4.29
Dwivedi, Y. K., Hughes, L., Ismagilova, E., Aarts, G., Coombs, C., Crick, T., Duan, Y., Dwivedi, R., Edwards,
        J., Eirug, A., Galanos, V., Ilavarasan, P. V., Janssen, M., Jones, P., Kar, A. K., Kizgin, H., Kronemann,
        B., Lal, B., Lucini, B., . . . Williams, M. D. (2021). Artificial Intelligence (AI): Multidisciplinary
        perspectives on emerging challenges, opportunities, and agenda for research, practice and
        policy. International             Journal            of           Information             Management, 57,
        101994. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ijinfomgt.2019.08.002
Ferruz, N., Zitnik, M., Oudeyer, P., Hine, E., Sengupta, N., Shi, Y., Mincu, D., Mann, S. P., Das, P., & Stella,
        F.      (2024).     Anniversary        AI    reflections. Nature     Machine      Intelligence, 6(1),     6–
        12. https://doi.org/10.1038/s42256-023-00784-5



 Qlantic Journal of Social Sciences (QJSS) | Volume 5, No. 2 (Spring 2024)                                          357

Mateen Iqbal, Najeeb Ullah Khan, and Muhammad Imran

Hart, C. (2018). Doing a Literature Review: Releasing the Social Science Research Imagination (Second Edition).
         University of Chester.
Hwang, G., & Chien, S. (2022). Definition, roles, and potential research issues of the metaverse in
         education: An artificial intelligence perspective. Computers and Education. Artificial Intelligence, 3,
         100082. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.caeai.2022.100082
Jones, A., Bull, S., & Castellano, G. (2017). “I Know That Now, I’m Going to Learn This Next” Promoting
         Self-regulated Learning with a Robotic Tutor. International Journal of Social Robotics, 10(4), 439–
         454. https://doi.org/10.1007/s12369-017-0430-y
Khanna, A., Pandey, B., Vashishta, K., Kalia, K., Pradeepkumar, B., & Das, T. (2015). A Study of Today’s A.I.
         through Chatbots and Rediscovery of Machine Intelligence. International Journal of U- and E-service,
         Science and Technology, 8(7), 277–284. https://doi.org/10.14257/ijunesst.2015.8.7.28
Latif, E., Mai, G., Nyaaba, M., Wu, X., Liu, N., Lu, G., Li, S., Liu, T., & Zhai, X. (2023). AGI: Artificial General
         Intelligence for Education. arXiv (Cornell University). https://doi.org/10.48550/arxiv.2304.12479
Luckin, R., & Issroff, K. (2018). Future of Education and Skills 2030: Conceptual learning framework Education
         and AI: Preparing for the future & AI, Attitude and values. Organisation for Economic Co-operation and
         Development
Luckin, R., Holmes, W., Griffiths, M., & Forceir, L. B. (2016). Intelligence Unleashed: An Argument for AI in
         Education. Pearson.
Mikropoulos, T. A., & Natsis, A. (2011). Educational virtual environments: A ten-year review of empirical
         research              (1999–2009). Computers                 &            Education, 56(3),              769-
         780. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.compedu.2010.10.020
Murphy, R. (2019). Artificial Intelligence Applications to Support K&ndash;12 Teachers and Teaching: A
         Review      of      Promising      Applications,       Challenges,      and      Risks. RAND      Corporation
         eBooks. https://doi.org/10.7249/pe315
Ng, D. T. K., Leung, J. K. L., Chu, S. K. W., & Qiao, M. S. (2021b). Conceptualizing AI literacy: An exploratory
         review. Computers               and               Education.             Artificial            Intelligence, 2,
         100041. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.caeai.2021.100041
Okoli, C., & Schabram, K. (2010). A Guide to conducting a Systematic Literature Review of Information
         Systems Research. Social Science Research Network. https://doi.org/10.2139/ssrn.1954824
Peredo, R., Canales, A., Menchaca, A., & Peredo, I. (2011). Intelligent Web-based education system for
         adaptive          learning. Expert         Systems          With        Applications, 38(12),          14690–
         14702. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.eswa.2011.05.013
Pokrivcakova, S. (2019). Preparing teachers for the application of AI-powered technologies in foreign
         language       education. Journal       of     Language       and     Cultural       Education, 7(3),     135–
         153. https://doi.org/10.2478/jolace-2019-0025
Rowe, J. P., Shores, L. R., Mott, B. W., & Lester, J. C. (2011). Integrating learning, problem solving, and
         engagement in narrative-centered learning environments. International Journal of Artificial
         Intelligence in Education, 21(1), 115–133. https://doi.org/10.3233/jai-2011-019
Schueller, S. M., Tomasino, K. N., & Mohr, D. C. (2016). Integrating Human support into Behavioral
         intervention Technologies: The Efficiency Model of support. Clinical Psychology, 24(1), 27–
         45. https://doi.org/10.1111/cpsp.12173
Sharma, R. C., Kawachi, P., & Bozkurt, A. (2019). The Landscape of Artificial Intelligence in Open, Online
         and Distance Education: Promises and concerns. Asian Journal of Distance Education, 14(2), 1-2.
         https://www.asianjde.com/ojs/index.php/AsianJDE/article/view/432
Singh, S. V., & Hiran, K. K. (2022). The impact of AI on teaching and learning in higher education
         technology. Journal       of    Higher       Education      Theory     and      Practice, 22(13),     135-148.
         https://articlearchives.co/index.php/JHETP/article/view/3553
Surjandy, N., Suparta, W., Trisetyarso, A., Kang, C. H., & Abbas, B. S. (2018). Warding off the plagiarism
         with the applications (Case study at Bina Nusantara University student and faculty member). 2018
         International        Conference      on        Information       and       Communications          Technology
         (ICOIACT). https://doi.org/10.1109/icoiact.2018.8350818
Timms, M. J. (2016). Letting artificial intelligence in education out of the box: educational cobots and smart
         classrooms. International      Journal     of    Artificial  Intelligence    in     Education, 26(2),    701–
         712. https://doi.org/10.1007/s40593-016-0095-y

  358                                         Qlantic Journal of Social Sciences (QJSS) | Volume 5, No. 2 (Spring 2024)

The Role of Artificial Intelligence (AI) In Transforming Educational Practices: Opportunities, Challenges, and Implications

Trattner, C., Jannach, D., Motta, E., Meijer, I. C., Diakopoulos, N., Elahi, M., Opdahl, A. L., Tessem, B., Borch,
       N., Fjeld, M., Øvrelid, L., De Smedt, K., & Moe, H. (2021). Responsible media technology and AI:
       challenges and research directions. AI And Ethics, 2(4), 585–594. https://doi.org/10.1007/s43681-
       021-00126-4
UNESCO. (2021). Artificial Intelligence in Education: Challenges and Opportunities. Paris: UNESCO.
       https://unesdoc.unesco.org/ark:/48223/pf0000366994
Wang, T., Lund, B. D., Marengo, A., Pagano, A., Mannuru, N. R., Teel, Z. A., & Pange, J. (2023). Exploring
       the potential impact of artificial intelligence (AI) on international students in higher education:
       generative AI, chatbots, analytics, and international student success. Applied Sciences, 13(11),
       6716. https://doi.org/10.3390/app13116716
Williamson, B., & Eynon, R. (2020). Historical threads, missing links, and future directions in AI in
       education. Learning, Media & Technology/Learning, Media and Technology, 45(3), 223–
       235. https://doi.org/10.1080/17439884.2020.1798995
Zawacki-Richter, O., Marín, V. I., Bond, M., & Gouverneur, F. (2019). Systematic review of research on
       artificial intelligence applications in higher education – where are the educators? International
       Journal of Educational Technology in Higher Education, 16(1). https://doi.org/10.1186/s41239-019-
       0171-0
Zhang, Z., Wen, F., Sun, Z., Guo, X., He, T., & Lee, C. (2022). Artificial Intelligence‐Enabled Sensing
       technologies in the 5G/Internet of Things era: From Virtual Reality/Augmented Reality to the
       Digital Twin. Advanced Intelligent Systems, 4(7). https://doi.org/10.1002/aisy.202100228




 Qlantic Journal of Social Sciences (QJSS) | Volume 5, No. 2 (Spring 2024)                                          359