Revista Educación
                                                               ISSN: 0379-7082
                                                               ISSN: 2215-2644
                                                               revedu@gmail.com
                                                               Universidad de Costa Rica
                                                               Costa Rica




Evolution of Educational Administration
in Chile and Professionalizing School
Administration in 2020
Yeomans Cabrera, María Mercedes
Evolution of Educational Administration in Chile and Professionalizing School Administration in 2020
Revista Educación, vol. 46, núm. 1, 2022
Universidad de Costa Rica, Costa Rica
Disponible en: https://www.redalyc.org/articulo.oa?id=44068165002
DOI: https://doi.org/10.15517/revedu.v46i1.44499



Esta obra está bajo una Licencia Creative Commons Atribución-NoComercial-SinDerivar 3.0 Internacional.




                                    PDF generado a partir de XML-JATS4R por Redalyc
                     Proyecto académico sin fines de lucro, desarrollado bajo la iniciativa de acceso abierto

María Mercedes Yeomans Cabrera. Evolution of Educational Administration in Chile and Professionali...



                                                                                                            Revisiones Bibliográﬁcas

Evolution of Educational Administration in Chile and Professionalizing School
Administration in 2020
Evolución de la administración educativa en Chile y la profesionalización de la gestión escolar al 2020
María Mercedes Yeomans Cabrera                                                 DOI: https://doi.org/10.15517/revedu.v46i1.44499
Universidad de Las Américas, Chile                                                  Redalyc: https://www.redalyc.org/articulo.oa?
mmyeomans@outlook.com                                                                                          id=44068165002
   https://orcid.org/0000-0003-2138-3007
                                                                                                   Recepción: 26 Noviembre 2020
                                                                                                    Aprobación: 04 Febrero 2021

Abstract:
As is in many other countries, educational administration in Chile has adapted to the emerging needs of the country. In 2020, a
new public school educational system was gradually implemented, thereby, ending the municipal educational model established 40
years before by the military government. School administration has become more complex given the rise in schoolwide coverage.
e objective of this study is to describe events that led to the current administration model using a timeline of policies pertaining
to the educational system and the evolution of a professional career path for public school principals. is study is based on
qualitative research using a descriptive approach based on a literature review. Public school administration eﬀorts initially focused
on school coverage and aerwards on improving the quality of education. e last few decades were characterized by educational
reforms and paradigm innovations with an emphasis on school inclusion with a focus on non-proﬁt education. Becoming a
principal in the Chilean public school system is not an easy feat. Currently, Chile is considered to be one of the countries with
the highest demands in accessing this position since it is based on merit with oversight based on the Law of Transparency. It is
concluded that the rigorous nature of Chile´s public educational administrative system should also extend to the private school
system to ensure that administrative decisions will, most likely, be based on academic criteria and respect for each institution´s
educational goals.
Keywords: Educational Administration, Education Policy, School Principals, Public Administration, School Administration.

Resumen:
En Chile, como en otros países, la administración de la educación ha tenido que adaptarse a las necesidades emergentes. En el año
2020 se está implementando gradualmente el nuevo Sistema de Educación Pública para terminar con la Educación Municipal
establecida por el Gobierno Militar hace alrededor de 40 años. El sistema administrativo se ha vuelto más complejo a medida que la
cobertura escolar ha aumentado. El objetivo de esta investigación fue describir el camino recorrido para llegar a la administración
actual. Como tareas especíﬁcas, se presentó una línea de tiempo de las normas que han conformado el sistema educativo y se analizó
la profesionalización de los directores en las escuelas públicas. Se trató de una investigación cualitativa con enfoque descriptivo,
basada en una revisión bibliográﬁca. La evolución de la administración educativa se ha centrado primero en la cobertura escolar
y luego en la calidad de la educación. En las últimas décadas, hubo un proceso marcado por reformas y novedades de paradigmas,
enfatizando la inclusión escolar y eliminando el lucro en la educación. En cuanto a la profesionalización de los directores de escuelas
públicas, el modelo chileno se encuentra actualmente entre los países con mayores exigencias en cuanto al acceso al cargo, apoyado
por la Ley de Transparencia, y centrado en el mérito. Como una oportunidad de mejora, se concluye que las demandas deben
extenderse a los colegios privados para asegurar que las decisiones administrativas se tomen siempre con criterios académicos,
respetando los proyectos educativos de cada institución.
Palabras clave: Administración educativa, Política educativa, Directores de escuela, Administración pública, Gestión escolar.


1. Introduction

In Chile, educational centers' administration has become more complex over time as school coverage has
increased. When there are more students, there are also more schools that need to be managed correctly. is
evolution has led to many adaptations of the scholar system in the country. Even there are many actions to

                                           PDF generado a partir de XML-JATS4R por Redalyc
                            Proyecto académico sin fines de lucro, desarrollado bajo la iniciativa de acceso abierto                 1

                              Revista Educación, 2022, vol. 46, núm. 1, Enero-Junio, ISSN: 0379-7082 2215-2644



take still, in 2016, Chile presented the best educational coverage rate in Latin America—almost universal
coverage in primary education (99.4%) and the best scores in standardized tests, such as PISA and TERCE,
not to mention that Chile has the highest graduation rate in Latin America (Banco de Desarrollo de América
Latina, 2016). However, public and private schools in Chile are very diverse. Moreover, parents have been
enrolling their children in private schools, more and more every year (Ministerio de Educación de Chile,
2015a, 2017).
   During the three past decades, Municipalities nationwide were the stakeholders of public schools. e
Military Government promoted municipal administration to have local management of schools and other
public services since a centralized model made all processes non-eﬃcient; though, the technology of the
time and the context of the country must be considered. e decision to transfer the establishments'
administration was organized under the subsidiarity principle that guided the Military Government's work.
According to this principle, it is desirable to allow private individuals' participation in activities where the
State should not necessarily be the sole provider. Private persons, natural or legal, were allowed to create
private subsidized primary and secondary education institutions; in higher education it was allowed for
privates to create and manage technical training centers, professional institutes, and universities (Dittborn,
2021; Ministerio del Interior de Chile, 1979). It is essential to keep in mind that at that time, due to the
economic diﬃculties the State was going through, it seemed convenient for individuals to contribute with
their eﬀort and resources, otherwise many urgent needs could have been impossible to assume. is was the
most important economic and social crisis that aﬀected the country in the 20th century (Dittborn, 2021).
   In 2015 the President introduced a bill to create a Public Education System (PES) and modify other
legal bodies associated with education. In 2020, aer more than thirty years of municipal administration of
education—since the government of Augusto Pinochet—a new type of administration is being implemented
by Law 21,040. Seventy Local Public Education Services (LPES) were created and linked to the executive
through the Ministry of Education, which covers all the municipalities in the country. e purpose of the
services is to provide the educational service through the establishments of their dependency and ensure
quality, continuous improvement, and equity with technical and pedagogical support, and management
support, while respecting their autonomy. e Direction of Public Education (DPE) answers the Ministry
of Education and supervises the LPES (Ministerio de Educación de Chile, 2017).
   Municipalization was an administrative decision to decentralize the management of education. Today,
demunicipalization is a mixture of municipalization and a new centralization of the system. It takes
municipalities out of the equation (Biblioteca del Congreso Nacional de Chile, 2018). e process of
demunicipalization started at the beginning of 2020, and, up to October 2020, seven out of seventy
LPES have been established in the national territory, and nearly 400 educational establishments in 25
municipalities have been transferred, with an approximate enrollment of 108,000 students (Ministerio de
Educación de Chile, 2020a). It is essential to analyze the characteristics of the Chilean educational system
and the educational policies' situation aer having a panoramic vision of the decisions that have been made.
   e main objective of this research was to describe the road traveled to reach the current administration.
e speciﬁc objectives were to present a timeline of the norms that have shaped the education system and
to analyze the school principals' professionalization in public schools. is was qualitative research with a
descriptive approach, based on a literature review. In order to understand the current school administration
and management in Chile, the next sections consist of a chronogram of the advances in school coverage,
the evolution of the State's administration of education, the current form of access to the position of school
principal in the country, and a comparison with other management models.




                                      PDF generado a partir de XML-JATS4R por Redalyc
                       Proyecto académico sin fines de lucro, desarrollado bajo la iniciativa de acceso abierto   2

María Mercedes Yeomans Cabrera. Evolution of Educational Administration in Chile and Professionali...




2. Evolution of the State Administration on Education

In Chile, education began to be considered a function of the State when the constitution of 1833 declared
that education was the government's preferential attention. It also declared that a national education plan
would be formed through Congress, that there would be a superintendency of education, and that existing
municipalities should promote education and take care of schools. At that time, education was under the
Ministry of Justice (Gobierno de Chile, 1888). Four years later, the functioning of the diﬀerent ministries
was decreed. e Ministry of Justice would be responsible for public instruction, educational establishments
promotion, the opening of schools and other educational institutions authorizations, and interaction with
educational institutions, oﬃcials and authorities of the republic in matters concerning public instruction.
It would also appoint and retire employees of this branch (Portales, 1837). When the Law of Elementary
Instruction was enacted—which identiﬁed two classes of school: elementary and higher—, convents and
monasteries would be obliged to create schools for men and women, separately, and would adhere to free
instruction. Schools—paid by the public treasury— would be created for training preceptors. In order to
take up the post, they would have to accredit a good life and costumes, and being certiﬁed in a normal school.
Failing that certiﬁcation, they would have to show the necessary aptitudes through an exam, university
degree, or certiﬁcate of a school principal. e preceptors could not be individuals that had been prosecuted
or convicted for crimes that merited a penalty of grief or infamy, nor persons who had been removed from
their posts for immorality or bad habits; the preceptors became public employees. A single-person post
was established for the general inspection, which directed visiting persons who supervised the educational
establishments. Finally, it was stated that private instruction was not subjected to this law, concerning
teaching and methods (Gobierno de Chile, 1860). Almost twenty years later, the Law of Secondary and
Higher Education was enacted, which secured State funds to ﬁnance higher education establishments, special
education establishments, and secondary education establishments. Furthermore, it was allowed that any
legal or natural person could establish secondary or higher education institutions, as long as the law did not
prohibit it. Having all the existing education levels free of charge, diversity in the educational oﬀer, and a ﬁscal
superintendence of secondary and higher education, the number of establishments and the school coverage
increased (Anguita, 1913).
   In 1920, the Compulsory Primary Education Law was passed, which established that primary education
was free but also a duty for the ﬁrst four years; this duty fell on the parents or persons in charge of the children
and must be fulﬁlled before the age of 13. It also established that the two ﬁrst years of primary education
could be carried out in the homes by giving an annual evaluation to measure the process. is would be
the ﬁrst regulation of the homeschooling system in Chile. e Direction of the Primary Education would
supervise the fulﬁllment of this law's norms through people who visited the educational establishments.
Besides each establishment's internal direction, the Board of Education of each commune was created to
help the supervision. is consisted of 10 people—ﬁve by cumulative vote, two by the Council of Primary
Education, and three by the pertinent municipality—, positions that had to be renewed every three years;
the person directing the communal school would serve as secretary of the Board of Education (Ministerio de
Instrucción Pública de Chile, 1920). Five years later, the Public Instruction's rules and internal functioning
were established for the ﬁrst time, determining its sections and departments through Law Decree No. 800
(Ministerio de Educación de Chile, 1995). Soon, the Ministry of Public Education was created and separated
from the Ministry of Justice. e new institution took on the challenge of planning and administering
education; it was also established that state education was free (Biblioteca Nacional de Chile, 2020). Almost
simultaneously, the Ministry of Public Education was organized in administrative aspects; positions were
created for ﬁve departments: a) Administrative, b) Primary Education, c) Secondary Education, d) Physical
Education, and e) Artistic Education and Cultural Extension (Ministerio de Educación Pública de Chile,


                                       PDF generado a partir de XML-JATS4R por Redalyc
                        Proyecto académico sin fines de lucro, desarrollado bajo la iniciativa de acceso abierto   3

                              Revista Educación, 2022, vol. 46, núm. 1, Enero-Junio, ISSN: 0379-7082 2215-2644



1928). In 1938 a particular focus was placed on expanding primary education; more than 500 schools were
built, and the number of enrolled students increased by nearly 600% (Revista de Educación, 2017).
   In 1965 the educational system was reformed to develop better quality, harmony, and integration of all
individuals' aspects (Ministerio de Educación Pública de Chile, 1965). To accelerate school coverage, the
Center for Pedagogical Improvement, Experimentation, and Research (CPEIP) was created, concentrating
all instances of teacher improvement that existed at that time (Ministerio de Educación Pública, 1967). e
institution's objective was to quickly instruct teachers in the pedagogical principles promoted by the recent
reform; it also aimed to reach teachers located in more remote areas with technical assistance from the center's
professionals (Revista de Educación, 2017). e CPEIP was also in charge of training the technical personnel
in the Ministry of Education (Mineduc). For this purpose, agreements were signed with the Organization
of American States, Unesco, and the United Nations Organization, among others. e importance of
having experts for the direction of education is recognized, so the CPEIP gave courses to prepare people in
educational planning, administration, supervision, and other specialties with the participation of students
and teachers from all over the continent (Revista de Educación, 2017).
   In 1973, during the Military Government, it was established to decentralize education with regional
coordinations (Ministerio de Educacio#n Pu#blica de Chile, 1973). e next year, territories were deﬁned
to divide the country for educational administration, and with this, the Regional Ministerial Secretariats
were created (Ministerio de Interior de Chile, 1974). At the end of the decade, a decree on Municipal
Revenues was enacted, which empowered municipalities to administer services that were centralized to date.
e Municipal Common Fund was also created, expressly establishing that the resources allocated to it
from that moment on should be consigned to develop, maintain, and provide them to the local community.
ose resources came from the national treasury, which had previously been given to the centralized public
distributions. Since then, the municipalities could take on beneﬁts that to date were only being provided by
central bodies in the public or private sector. Municipalities started administrating health care, public works,
citizen security, and administration of educational establishments, among others (Ministerio de Hacienda
de Chile, 1980).
   As it has been pointed out, this step required profound transformations in the legislation related to
municipal administration and other legal bodies that would make it possible to ﬁnance the municipalities'
establishments. e Subsidy Law was amended to extend the school grant to the city administration. At the
time of this change, the subsidies were substantially increased. ey began to be given to free private schools
and schools whose administration began to be transferred to the municipalities (Ministerio del Interior de
Chile, 1979). Municipalization had the purpose of decentralizing the educational administration's managing
tasks, bringing it closer to the communities. In summary, it meant maintaining the necessary staﬀ of
teachers, principals, and educational assistants for the schools' proper functioning during the year and
making maintenance and improvements in infrastructure eﬀectively. In the Ministry of Education, the
responsibilities for educational subjects were maintained. is refers to the deﬁnition of teaching content,
national curriculum, standards, school text delivery, teacher training, special program deﬁnition, national
standardized evaluations, and all the technical, pedagogical support, and supervision municipalities will
undoubtedly need. e Ministry's relationship with the municipalities was then carried out through the
Ministerial Secretariats of Education and their Provincial Directorates (Ministerio de Educación Pública,
1980). e municipalization of education was established; schools and high schools were transferred from
the Ministry of Education to the municipal administration of their geographical location (Ministerio del
Interior de Chile, 1979). Aer the municipalization process in the 1980s, public school management's
decentralized selection started (Núñez et al., 2010).
   Back in democracy, the Organic Constitutional Law on Education (LOCE) was published, establishing
minimum primary and secondary education requirements. e State's duty was to ensure compliance and



                                      PDF generado a partir de XML-JATS4R por Redalyc
                       Proyecto académico sin fines de lucro, desarrollado bajo la iniciativa de acceso abierto   4

María Mercedes Yeomans Cabrera. Evolution of Educational Administration in Chile and Professionali...



establish standards for the oﬃcial recognition of educational establishments and systematizing a process for
all existing levels (Ministerio de Educación de Chile, 1990).

3. The Current Administrative Model

In 2003, a Constitutional Reform was carried out that established free and compulsory schooling from the
ﬁrst year of primary education until the completion of secondary education, that is, 12 years (Ministerio de
Educación de Chile, 2003). In 2005, the managers’ position desirable requirements, and maximum duration,
were indicated as mandatory for municipal education, setting a gradual replacement schedule for the existing
universe (Ministerio de Educacio#n de Chile, 2005). e General Education Law (LGE), promulgated in
2009, insists on mandatory selection through competition in the public sector (Núñez et al., 2010).
   To enforce the results proposed by the Ministry, the Law on Quality and Equity in Education increases
the powers of municipal supporters through the municipal line of responsibility—heads of Municipal
Administration, managers of establishments, and school principals. e law is aligned with the school
system's decentralized design (Ministerio de Educacio#n de Chile, 2011). is same law professionalized the
system even more by installing a public and transparent procedure. Each stage of selection for the manager/
principal’s position is open from the municipality, which generates an ideal proﬁle for the position. To carry
it out, an independent qualifying commission is formed, which consists of three people: one who is a senior
public management advisor (ADP), one who is a teacher in the municipality, and the head of education;
aer evaluating the candidates, the commission presents a list of three to ﬁve people to the municipal
supporter, who ﬁnally chooses the principal (Ministerio de Educacio#n de Chile, 2011). e general proﬁle
establishes that the candidates must, obligatorily, have a teacher's diploma, except for those with another
bachelor's degree. ey also need at least three years of experience as classroom teachers, improvement in
school management areas, and at least ﬁve years of experience, ensuring their abilities, related studies, and
empirical knowledge of classroom teaching. e law also mentions, as desirable characteristics, experience
in management, coordination and/or leadership positions, and the demonstration of competencies, such
as pedagogical leadership, people management, and achievement, characteristics that point directly to
human resource management. Concerning implementation, the law dictated that, by 2016, all management
positions in municipal schools should be selected by this means. However, this policy's progress by 2016
was 65%, with the selection of management positions by ADP occurring in a more signiﬁcant proportion in
urban, less vulnerable, and large establishments (Agencia de Calidad de Educación, 2016). is irregularity
meant that the more vulnerable and smaller rural schools did not select their principals with the same rigor,
leaving them disadvantaged. Considering that this was a measure included in the law on Quality and Equity
in Education, it was expected to provide vulnerable and smaller rural schools with the best candidates.
   In the same year that the Law on Quality and Equity in Education was passed, 2011, Law No. 20,529
created the National System of Quality Assurance of Nursery, Basic and Secondary Education and its
Supervision. e four institutions that make up this system are the Agency for Quality in Education and
the Superintendent of Education—both created by this law—, the National Council of Education—which
replaced the Higher Council of Education—, and the Ministry of Education. e latter has the function
of governing body, develops the sector's policies, elaborates the curricular bases and standards on which
the Assurance System is based, and provides technical-pedagogical support to the institutions that need it
(Ministerio de Educación de Chile, 2011).
   In 2015, the Law on School Inclusion was enacted. It put an end to the misuse of public resources in the
educational system, presented an admission system for schools with regular contributions from the State, and
established progressive free education by increasing resources allocated to educational quality (Ministerio de
Educación de Chile, 2015b).


                                      PDF generado a partir de XML-JATS4R por Redalyc
                       Proyecto académico sin fines de lucro, desarrollado bajo la iniciativa de acceso abierto   5

                              Revista Educación, 2022, vol. 46, núm. 1, Enero-Junio, ISSN: 0379-7082 2215-2644



   Even though the municipalized administration is still working, some issues could not be overcome over
the years. Firstly, there are municipalities with more own resources than others, so it was foreseeable that
those with funds beyond school subsidies could improve their teachers' working conditions and the quality
of their infrastructure sooner. e Municipal Common Fund, created in 1979, is a mechanism that aims
at ﬁscal equity. All the municipalities make contributions. en, each municipality receives a proportion
of the fund collected, determined by a distribution formula that depends on the following components:
number of municipalities, population, the relative importance of exempt land, poverty, and income collected
(Bravo, 2014). e amount of the subsidy by region is sometimes not suﬃcient for those municipalities
with few children and little communal income in general. With municipalization, municipalities took charge
of delivering health, public works, and citizen security, among other responsibilities added to their chores
(Ministerio del Interior de Chile, 1979). erefore, education needs were not the only ones to be addressed.
Over the years, there has also been a signiﬁcant increase in subsidized private schools' educational oﬀerings
in all of the country's municipalities, which have attracted children and reduced municipal attention;
therefore, municipalities' income from this concept has been reduced (Ministerio de Educación de Chile,
2015a). For these reasons, the Public Education System (PES) was created, whose new organization is being
implemented gradually starting in 2020 and will put an end to municipal administration (Biblioteca del
Congreso Nacional de Chile, 2018). e principles of the new PES are (a) Integral quality, (b) continuous
quality improvement, (c) national coverage and guaranteed access, (d) equitable development and equal
opportunities, e) collaboration and networking, (f) inclusive and educational projects and citizen training,
(g) local relevance, diversity in projects and community participation, (h) citizen training and republican
values, and (i) integration with the environment and the community (Ministerio de Educación de Chile,
2017).

4. School’s Principals

In 2016, through Law No. 20,903, the Teacher Professional Development System was created (Ministerio de
Educación de Chile, 2016a). One of the main points of this law is the projection of an average increase of
30% in teachers and nursery educators' salaries from July 2017. Besides, in March of the same year started the
increase of 30% of the hours destined for planning—which involves preparing and evaluating classes—with
the goal of 35% of the hour destined for these purposes by 2019 (Agencia de Calidad de Educación, 2016).
In the case of teachers with a full schedule (44 hours), before this law, they only had 11 hours for planning,
preparing material, answering e-mails, and checking tests. For the year 2017, they could be assured 13 hours
and 15 minutes for work outside the classroom. en, in 2019, this time would increase to 15 hours and
30 minutes in an attempt to allow teachers to perform all their work in educational establishments without
using their unpaid personal time.
   is same law establishes that, from 2017, only those in the advanced section—teachers with four years of
experience who obtain the highest achievement in the portfolio instrument [A]—will access management
positions in the municipal sector. is section is characterized by achieving the skills indicated in the
Framework for Good Teaching, such as classroom teaching skills, pedagogical reﬂection, and participation
in mentoring roles and design of school improvement programs (Ministerio de Educación de Chile, 2016a).
Concerning the selection of the position of principal of particular establishments, the norm does not regulate
its operation. Principals' election is on the opinion of each establishment's stakeholders.
   e recruitment system for the principals of public establishments based on Law 20,501, which places
people's capacities beyond their seniority and experience in the system at the center, has represented a
tremendous advance for the country (Ministerio de Educacio#n de Chile, 2011). It is important to emphasize
that the data suggest that principals selected by ADP show signs of more excellent managerial and pedagogical
leadership than people who were not selected via ADP; this new policy's value, which allows people with

                                      PDF generado a partir de XML-JATS4R por Redalyc
                       Proyecto académico sin fines de lucro, desarrollado bajo la iniciativa de acceso abierto   6

María Mercedes Yeomans Cabrera. Evolution of Educational Administration in Chile and Professionali...



adequate skills and recruited transparent processes, is precisely generating relevant diﬀerences in the system
and should be strengthened by the meritocratic principle that upholds (Agencia de Calidad de Educación,
2016).
    Since 2014, the CPEIP has begun to update the Framework for Good School Leadership, born in 2005.
e document includes national and international advances in theoretical conceptualizations, research
ﬁndings, and school leadership. Many actors have constructed this framework: members of the School
Leadership Advisory Councils from all regions of the country, academic bodies from higher education
institutions in diﬀerent areas of the country, regulatory bodies, people in the coordination of programs that
participated in the Principals' Training Plan, Mineduc teams and—in its ﬁnal stage—the collaboration of
all the school boards from the 15 regions of Chile to evaluate the product. us, this document constitutes a
working instrument validated in its relevance, internal coherence, and centrality of the elements presented,
which guide the management task and strengthen the leadership of the country's management teams (Uribe
et al., 2015).
    According to the General Education Law, the entire educational community plays an essential
role in schools. is community consists of students, parents, guardians, educational professionals,
educational assistants, educational management teams, and educational supporters. ey must also develop
professionally and promote the necessary professional development in the teaching staﬀ to meet their
educational goals and comply with and respect their rules. On the other hand, educational institutions'
supporters have the right to establish and exercise an educational project with the educational community
(Ministerio de Educación de Chile, 2019).
    Considering that not all management teams are the same in the great diversity of existing establishments, it
is essential to point out the trend in forming these teams. ere is a signiﬁcant presence of principal positions
throughout the country, head of the Technical Pedagogical Unit (UTP), and general inspection. e larger
the establishment, the larger the management team's size, and, consequently, there are more positions
other than the triad of principal, head of UTP, and general inspection. Comparing the establishments'
size, it is shown that both general inspectors and guidance counselors are present in a more signiﬁcant
proportion in medium and large establishments than small ones. Deputy Principals are also present in a
more signiﬁcant proportion of large establishments (Ministerio de Educación de Chile, 2016b). According
to the Chilean Ministry of Education, management teams must be promoters of an organizational culture
based on collaboration, communication, commitment, and actions' institutionalization. ey must also
promote a sense of belonging and identity among all educational community members by involving them
in information, more signiﬁcant roles, functions, and responsibilities in the common objectives (Ministerio
de Educación de Chile, 2020b). All educational establishments must have a person in charge of school
coexistence. is person will be responsible for implementing the measures determined by the School
Board or the Committee for Good School Coexistence and included in a management plan (Ministerio de
Educación de Chile, 2018, 2019).

5. The Chilean Management Model, compared to other countries

When comparing the Chilean management model with the common European and United States
models, some similarities and diﬀerences can be found. To carry out this comparison, the classiﬁcation
of management models presented by Alvarez (1991) (Oﬃcial Centralist, Decentralized Market, and
Participatory Centralist) and current policies documentation concerning the Chilean educational system
were used; a total of eight papers (Alvarez, 1991; Agencia de Calidad de Educación 2016; Ministerio de
Educación de Chile, 2011; Ministerio de Educación, 2016a; Ministerio de Educación, 2016b; Ministerio de
Educación de Chile, 2018; Ministerio de Educación de Chile, 2019; Uribe et al., 2015). Considering that the
models just mentioned are mainly European, a comparative table has been constructed where the American

                                      PDF generado a partir de XML-JATS4R por Redalyc
                       Proyecto académico sin fines de lucro, desarrollado bajo la iniciativa de acceso abierto   7

                              Revista Educación, 2022, vol. 46, núm. 1, Enero-Junio, ISSN: 0379-7082 2215-2644



and Chilean models are included separately. e dimensions for comparison in Table 1 are 1) access to the
principal's position, 2) initial and continuing education of the principal, and 3) functions of the principal.




                                      PDF generado a partir de XML-JATS4R por Redalyc
                       Proyecto académico sin fines de lucro, desarrollado bajo la iniciativa de acceso abierto   8

María Mercedes Yeomans Cabrera. Evolution of Educational Administration in Chile and Professionali...



                                                        TABLE 1
      Comparison of the Chilean School Management Model with the Functional Centralist Model,
      Decentralized Market Model, Participatory Centralist Model, and the American Model, at 2020




                                    PDF generado a partir de XML-JATS4R por Redalyc
                     Proyecto académico sin fines de lucro, desarrollado bajo la iniciativa de acceso abierto   9

                              Revista Educación, 2022, vol. 46, núm. 1, Enero-Junio, ISSN: 0379-7082 2215-2644




   When comparing the Chilean model with the Oﬃcial Centralist Model, some similarities in initial and
permanent formation are found; these are in charge of the individual. Also, some similarities concerning
the functions related to persons, goods, and organization were identiﬁed. However, there are signiﬁcant
diﬀerences in access to the position. In the Chilean model, the selection is more complex, and the
requirements are more signiﬁcant.
   When comparing the Chilean model with the Decentralized Market Model, there are more diﬀerences
than similarities. Concerning access to oﬃce, the Chilean model is more complex, and the requirements
are more signiﬁcant. Concerning the formation of the principal, in Chile, the individual is in charge, and
in the Decentralized Market Model, it is in charge of the administration. Finally, it is evidenced that, in
the Chilean model, the principal has more functions within the organization. Simultaneously, the present
European model also has relationships and negotiations with external institutional and social forces.
   When comparing the Chilean model with the Participatory Centralist Model of European countries,
there were found more diﬀerences than similarities. Concerning access to oﬃce, the Chilean model is more
complex, focused on merit, and the requirements are more signiﬁcant; besides, this European model makes
its Principals' election by democratic vote. Regarding training, in both models, the individual is in charge.
Moreover, concerning functions, administration, and management are not covered by the principal, as in
the Chilean system.
   When comparing the Chilean model with the United States model, the results are similar to those
compared to the Decentralized Market Model. However, the U.S. model's requirements are higher, coming
closer to the Chilean model. In the United States, an academic degree and state certiﬁcation are required. In
Chile, a teacher's degree or academic degree and certiﬁcation from the Ministry of Maximum Qualiﬁcation
in Teaching Careers are required. Concerning training, in both countries, it is the responsibility of the
individual. Furthermore, concerning the functions, no diﬀerences are seen.
   Although all models tend to evolve based on society's needs, all models are perfectible based on permanent
change. Regarding access to the position, the Chilean model has a proﬁle bank, a greater demand in the
requirements, and a council that ﬁlters the participants before their election based on the law of transparency.
e only model that resembles the Chilean model concerning the management position's professionalization
is the American one. e furthest model from the professionalization of the principal is the Participatory
Centralist Model. Due to the access to the position by democratic vote, there is the possibility of a conﬂict
of interest that could distract the principal from their functions.
   In the training dimension, it can be seen that the Participatory Centralist Model is the only one in which
the administration is fully responsible for the permanent training of the management position. In all the
other models, the permanent formation is in charge of the individual. Suppose the administration were
to take charge of the permanent formation of the principals of all public institutions. In that case, one
could speak of more signiﬁcant equity by ensuring basic knowledge concerning curricular and social updates,
among others.
   Finally, only the Participatory Centralist Model leaves administration and management aspects outside
the principal’s functions. In all the other models reviewed, including the U.S. and Chilean models,
management includes the functions of administering and managing resources, which could lead to decisions
being made, always taking into account the academic aspects involved. Of course, the person in charge of
school leading must be trained in administration and management since it can be challenging to lead an
organization when others manage resources.




                                      PDF generado a partir de XML-JATS4R por Redalyc
                       Proyecto académico sin fines de lucro, desarrollado bajo la iniciativa de acceso abierto   10

María Mercedes Yeomans Cabrera. Evolution of Educational Administration in Chile and Professionali...




6. Conclusions

Responding to the ﬁrst speciﬁc objective, which was to present a timeline of the norms that have shaped
the education system, it is concluded that the administration of Chilean public education has become
more complex over the years as school coverage has grown. Since 1833, due to the national constitution,
education became a government priority. Signiﬁcant changes have been made by creating diﬀerent
departments, arriving at a Ministry of Education with an active Center for Improvement, Experimentation,
and Pedagogical Research, and a Quality Agency. In recent decades, a process marked by reforms and
paradigm shis has developed, emphasizing quality, school inclusion, and eliminating proﬁt in education.
Municipalization had a signiﬁcant role in the Chilean history of education. From a geographical, economic,
and administrative point of view, it responded to many needs of the time, promoting school coverage at all
educational levels and diversity of educational projects. In 2020 this administration model started changing
due to the new Public Education System and the need to focus mainly on quality, above any other scopes.
   Responding to the second speciﬁc objective, which was to analyze the school principals' professionalization
in public schools, it is concluded that the Chilean model is currently among the countries with the highest
demands in access to the position, supported by a Law of Transparency and focused on merit. As an
opportunity for improvement, it can be seen that all these demands point only to public establishments, even
though private establishments are working with the education of a signiﬁcant group of the Chilean society.
erefore, some minimum requirements should be considered in private education to assure that the centers'
administrative decisions are always considering an academic scope and respecting each of the institutional
educational projects.
   Finally, responding to this research main objective, which was to describe the road traveled to reach the
current administration, it is concluded that the evolution of educational administration has been focused
ﬁrst on school coverage and then on quality in education, responding to the contexts and resources available.
Chile has come to be a country with complex administration and leading Latin American indicators by
continuously adapting the system to emerging scenarios.

References

Agencia de Calidad de Educación. (2016). Directores municipales seleccionados mediante la ley N.° 20501. Santiago
      de Chile. https://bibliotecadigital.mineduc.cl/bitstream/handle/20.500.12365/4570/directoresmunicipales.p
      df?sequence=1&isAllowed=y
Alvarez, M. (1991). El panorama europeo. Cuadernos de Pedagogía, 189, (pp.16–19). https://www.scribd.com/docu
      ment/511560414/El-Panorama-Europeo
Anguita, R. (1913). Leyes Promulgadas en Chile. Santiago de Chile. https://obtienearchivo.bcn.cl/obtienearchivo?id
      =recursoslegales/10221.3/32755/1/anguita18790109.pdf
Banco de Desarrollo de América Latina. (2016, november 28th). Chile es uno de los pai#ses con mejor educacio#n en
      Ame#rica Latina, pero debe trabajar ma#s en calidad. https://bit.ly/33VHhNG
Biblioteca del Congreso Nacional de Chile. (2018). Historia de la Ley 21.040. https://www.bcn.cl/historiadelaley/n
      c/historia-de-la-ley/vista-expandida/7106/#h1_1_1
Biblioteca Nacional de Chile. (2020). Ministerio de Educación Pública. http://www.memoriachilena.gob.cl/602/w3
      -article-96125.html
Bravo, J. (2014, June). Fondo Común Municipal y su desincentivo a la recaudación en Chile. https://bit.ly/33SuqLY
Dittborn, P. (2021). El contexto histo#rico de la Municipalizacio#n. https://www.grupoeducar.cl/revista/edicion-194
      /contexto-historico-la-municipalizacion/
Gobierno de Chile. (1888). Constitución Política de la República de Chile. Pub. L. No. S/N, Biblioteca del Congreso
      Nacional. Chile: Biblioteca del Congreso Nacional. https://www.leychile.cl/N?i=137535&f=1888-08-10&p=

                                       PDF generado a partir de XML-JATS4R por Redalyc
                        Proyecto académico sin fines de lucro, desarrollado bajo la iniciativa de acceso abierto   11

                               Revista Educación, 2022, vol. 46, núm. 1, Enero-Junio, ISSN: 0379-7082 2215-2644



Gobierno de Chile. (1860). Instrucción Primaria. Lei Jeneral del Ramo. Biblioteca del Congreso Nacional de Chile. h
     ttps://www.leychile.cl/Navegar?idNorma=1022941
Ministerio de Educación de Chile. (1990). Ley 18.962. Biblioteca del Congreso Nacional de Chile. https://www.ley
     chile.cl/N?i=30330&f=2005-09-27&p=
Ministerio de Educación de Chile. (1995). Documentos, 1901-1995. http://www.patrimoniocultural.gob.cl/Recurso
     s/Contenidos/ArchivoNacional/archivos/MinisteriodeEducación.pdf
Ministerio de Educación de Chile. (2003). Ley 19.876. Biblioteca del Congreso Nacional de Chile. https://www.ley
     chile.cl/N?i=210495&f=2003-05-22&p=
Ministerio de Educacio#n de Chile. (2005). Ley 20.006. Biblioteca del Congreso Nacional de Chile. https://www.le
     ychile.cl/Navegar?idNorma=236496
Ministerio de Educacio#n de Chile. (2011). Ley 20.501. Biblioteca del Congreso Nacional de Chile. https://www.le
     ychile.cl/Navegar?idNorma=1022346
Ministerio de Educación de Chile. (2011). Ley 20.529. Biblioteca del Congreso Nacional de Chile. https://www.ley
     chile.cl/N?i=1028635&f=2019-04-25&p=LEYNÚM.20.529
Ministerio de Educación de Chile. (2015a). Variación de matrícula y tasas de permanencia por sector. https://centroes
     tudios.mineduc.cl/wp-content/uploads/sites/100/2017/06/Evidencias-final_julio_2015.pdf
Ministerio de Educación de Chile. (2015b). Ley 20.845. Biblioteca del Congreso Nacional de Chile. https://www.le
     ychile.cl/N?i=1078172&f=2019-04-25&p=
Ministerio de Educación de Chile. (2016a). Ley 20.903. Biblioteca del Congreso Nacional de Chile. https://www.le
     ychile.cl/N?i=1087343&f=2019-12-21&p=
Ministerio de Educación de Chile. (2016b). Estudio de Caracterizacio#n de los Equipos Directivos Escolares de
     Establecimientos Educacionales Subvencionados Urbanos de Chile. http://biblioteca.digital.gob.cl/handle/12345
     6789/405
Ministerio de Educación de Chile. (2017). Ley 21.040. Pub. L. No. 21040. Biblioteca del Congreso Nacional de Chile.
     http://bcn.cl/2eoy3
Ministerio de Educación de Chile. (2018). Consejo Escolar, pilar de la participación en la comunidad educativa. http:/
     /convivenciaescolar.mineduc.cl/wp-content/uploads/2019/04/Consejo-Escolar-2018.pdf
Ministerio de Educación de Chile. (2019). Ley General de Educación 20.370. Biblioteca del Congreso Nacional. http
     s://www.leychile.cl/N?i=1014974&f=2019-06-27&p=
Ministerio de Educación de Chile. (2020a). Educación Pública. https://educacionpublica.cl
Ministerio de Educación de Chile. (2020b). Equipos docentes directivos. http://convivenciaescolar.mineduc.cl/comun
     idad-educativa/equipos-docentes-directivos/
Ministerio de Educación Pública. (1967). Decreto 6.494. Pub. L. No. 6494. Biblioteca del Congreso Nacional de Chile.
     https://www.leychile.cl/N?i=140197&f=1969-02-07&p=
Ministerio de Educación Pública. (1980). Decreto 8144. Pub. L. No. 8144. Biblioteca del Congreso Nacional de Chile.
     http://bcn.cl/2haaj
Ministerio de Educación Pública de Chile. (1928). Decreto No 7500. Santiago de Chile. http://www.bibliotecanacio
     naldigital.gob.cl/visor/BND:86462
Ministerio de Educación Pública de Chile. (1965). Decreto 27.952. Biblioteca del Congreso Nacional de Chile. https
     ://www.bcn.cl/leychile/navegar?idNorma=19478&idParte=
Ministerio de Educación Pu#blica de Chile. (1973). Decreto 1.586. Biblioteca del Congreso Nacional de Chile. http
     s://www.leychile.cl/N?i=1045958&f=1973-11-08&p=
Ministerio de Hacienda de Chile. (1980). Traspaso de servicios Públicos a las Municipalidades. Manual de Consulta.
     Santiago de Chile. https://bit.ly/3eYIKc2
Ministerio de Instrucción Pública de Chile. (1920). Ley 3.654. Biblioteca del Congreso Nacional. Chile. https://ww
     w.leychile.cl/Navegar?idNorma=24146


                                       PDF generado a partir de XML-JATS4R por Redalyc
                        Proyecto académico sin fines de lucro, desarrollado bajo la iniciativa de acceso abierto   12

María Mercedes Yeomans Cabrera. Evolution of Educational Administration in Chile and Professionali...



Ministerio de Interior de Chile. (1974). Decreto de Ley 575. Biblioteca del Congreso Nacional de Chile. https://ww
      w.leychile.cl/N?i=6210&f=2002-10-15&p=
Ministerio del Interior de Chile. (1979). Decreto Ley 3063. Pub. L. No. 3063. Biblioteca del Congreso Nacional de
      Chile. http://bcn.cl/2euls
Núñez, I., Weinstein, J. & Muñoz, G. (2010). ¿Posición olvidada? Una mirada desde la normativa a la historia de la
      dirección escolar en Chile. Psicoperspectivas, 9, (pp.53–81). https://doi.org/10.5027/psicoperspectivas-Vol9-Iss
      ue2-fulltext-117
Portales, D. (1837). Decreto S/N. Pub. L. No. S/N. Biblioteca del Congreso Nacional de Chile. http://www.leychile
      .cl/N?i=1063940&f=1837-02-01&p=
Revista de Educación. (2017). Ministerio de educación: 180 años de historia, 180 años de servicio. http://www.revistad
      eeducacion.cl/ministerio-de-educacion-180-anos-de-historia-180-anos-de-servicio/
Uribe, M., Vanni, X., Pinares, C. & Rozas, J. (2015). Marco para la Buena Dirección y el Liderazgo Escolar (Vol. 3).
      República de Chile: Mideduc. https://liderazgoescolar.mineduc.cl/wp-content/uploads/sites/55/2016/04/M
      BDLE_2015.pdf


Información adicional

Cómo citar: Yeomans-Cabrera, M. M. (2022). Evolution of Educational Administration in Chile and
Professionalizing School Administration in 2020. Revista Educación, 46(1). Recuperado de http://
doi.org/10.15517/revedu.v46i1.44499




                                       PDF generado a partir de XML-JATS4R por Redalyc
                        Proyecto académico sin fines de lucro, desarrollado bajo la iniciativa de acceso abierto   13