Southeast Asia Early Childhood Journal, Vol. 9 (2), 2020 (82-96)
                                                                                                  eISSN 2821-3149
                                                                      http://ejournal.upsi.edu.my/index.php/SAECJ

     SCHOOL CLOSURE RESULTING FROM A BAD SCHOOL
  MANAGEMENT APPROACH: AN EARLY CHILDHOOD TEACHER
                     NARRATIVE

                                        Berat Ahi1, Hasan Tabak2
        1
            Depertmant of Preschool Education, Faculty of Education, Kastamonu University,
                                        Kastamonu, Turkey
  2
      Department of Educational Sciences, Faculty of Education, Aksaray University, Aksaray,
                                             Turkey

                          beratahi@gmail.com1, hasantabak@aksaray.edu.tr2

                         DOI: https://doi.org/10.37134/saecj.vol9.no2.6.2020

Received: 31 May 2020, Accepted: 24 November 2020; Published: 26 November 2020



                                               ABSTRACT
This research focused on the academic year of a preschool teacher in a school that was considered to have a bad
management approach. As narrative researchers, we acquired stories about the teacher's experiences by using
various narrative approaches such as long-term participant observations at the school, document reviews, and
interviews with relevant people. As a result of the research, we grouped the teacher’s stories about herself and
about bad school management throughout the course of one year under themes such as the teacher’s acceptance
of the school-a journey that began well but that developed problems such as a never-ending questioning process.

Keywords: bad school management approach, early childhood education, narrative research



INTRODUCTION

Theories are usually put forward according to the features needed. However, it is a common
belief in both management and school administrations that political processes play an active
role in determining the status hierarchy and the application of rules (Pfeffer, 1993).
Therefore, the effects of the changes and transformations taking place in the world are felt.
Education is an important agenda item in various countries entering the European Union
(Karip, 2005). Education for All (EFA) has set six goals to bring the benefits of education to
every citizen in every society. One of these goals has been identified as “Expand and improve
comprehensive early childhood care and education, especially for the most vulnerable and
disadvantaged children” (United Nations Educational, Scientific, and Cultural Organization
[UNESCO], 2007). Also, the “No Child Left Behind” discourse shows the effect that
globalization has on the field of education. Accordingly, the issue of learning-from early
childhood education to lifelong education-has been one of the issues on the agenda for
countries (Alvestad & Sheridan, 2015; Bakken et al., 2017). On the other hand, issues such as
who is the main actor in education, the quality of early childhood education (Campbell-Barr
& Bogatić, 2017; Sheridan et al., 2014), and school effectiveness and school management
(Alvesson & Sveningsson, 2003; Ball, 1997; Ghoshal & Moran, 1996; Leone et al., 2009;
Nachiappan et al., 2018) are just a few of the ongoing educational debates in this context.


                                                      82

                                            Southeast Asia Early Childhood Journal, Vol. 9 (2), 2020 (82-96)
                                                                          ISSN 2289-3156 /eISSN 2550-1763
                                                               http://ejournal.upsi.edu.my/index.php/SAECJ




School Effectiveness and Early Childhood Education

Changes and improvements may be necessary in many areas, including school organization,
teaching and learning processes, and the school culture itself. This can be said to be achieved
through an inclusive education approach (Intxausti et al., 2017). It shows that educational
goals should be centrally controlled and that methods of achieving goals should be in
schools’ hands (Sun et al., 2007). Therefore, the global-local paradox is about meeting global
expectations and finding culturally located solutions to local problems while developing a
versatile and dynamic relationship between the two (Campbell-Barr & Bogatić, 2017;
Cooper, 1996). Local school actors may have different visions and interests with respect to
how education should be improved; this, in turn, may affect how these actors assess and
respond to evaluations (Hanberger, 2016). The main features of synoptic planning, as a
prescriptive principle that promotes effective organizational functioning in education, include
the careful elicitation of proactive goals, concrete goals, operational goals, and assessment
tools; the creation of sequences in a way that systematically approaches intermediate and
final goals; the designing of teaching methods (i.e., the design of didactic situations); and,
preferably, the monitoring of students’ learning progress through the use of objective tests
(Scheerens & Demeuse, 2005). For the development of schools in general, and preschools in
particular, it is possible to cite the following: (i) Pressure to develop; (ii) Resources/support
for improvement and (iii) Educational objectives (Reezigt & Creemers, 2005).

       Social and academic activities provide early intervention and long-term benefits for
the minds, bodies, and emotions of preschool children. Also, it has been observed that skills
offer long-term benefits for young children (Bakken et al., 2017). In early childhood
education, older-children groups manifest such negative aspects as lack of time, limited
opportunities to give individual attention to students who need it, stress, and a sense of
inadequacy (Sheridan et al., 2014).

        From the perspective of teachers, leadership is about creating meaning, both
collectively and collaboratively. From the perspective of teachers, the ability of effective
school leaders to take responsibility for actions is related to leadership skills (Harris et al.,
2003). Empirical findings support the fact that preschool teachers struggle with similar
difficulties in terms of professional strategies (Masnan & Hashim, 2014). The most important
of these findings is that when an educational institution is transformed into a body focusing
on financial-gain-oriented activities, the teacher responsible for the activity is seen as a
commercial actor rather than as a person responsible for training (Löfdahl & Folke-
Fichtelius, 2015).

        The term “effective teaching” is used in a much broader sense than simply teacher
behavior or what teachers see in the classroom (Harris, 1998). It can be said that preschool
principals see the managerial position as an opportunity to develop effective leadership skills
that form in the mid-career period (Aizenberg & Oplatka, 2019). Studies focusing on the
difficulties experienced in schools—especially preschools—have found that determining
difficulties is a step that one can take towards becoming an effective leader (Kahila et al.,
2020; Msila, 2011). In their study, Öqvist and Cervantes (2018) focused on achieved the
following fundamental results: a) defining what preschool education is and offering a guide
on how to interpret and understand teaching in preschool education, b) organizing the
application so that the preschool teacher has a prerequisite for maintaining education, and c)

                                               83

                                            Southeast Asia Early Childhood Journal, Vol. 9 (2), 2020 (82-96)
                                                                          ISSN 2289-3156 /eISSN 2550-1763
                                                               http://ejournal.upsi.edu.my/index.php/SAECJ

reviewing the curriculum and improving the concept of teaching within the framework of the
curriculum. Therefore, schools that want to analyze their ability to successfully implement
school development programs and to develop their capacity to manage change must take into
account their individual cultural variables (Wikeley & Murillo, 2005). This can also allow
students to have the flexibility to adapt to their circumstances and contexts (Wikeley et al.,
2005).


Bad School Management Approach (BSMA)

Research on institutional strategy has dealt with wider social problems. It has been observed
that other theories and educational ideas do not find a response in practice to expand the
opportunity to discuss and influence public and social policy (Pfeffer, 2005). Cultural
antinomies lead to unstable interpretations due to the nature of social life, while economic
cycles cause social tensions that emphasize the contradictions of antinomies (Barley &
Kunda, 1992). When the approaches that determine management with its outlines are
analyzed, the changing roles of the executive image and ideals in organizational change
comprise the focal point (Gray, 1999; McNichols & Wilson, 1988).

         Schools are living organisms. To explain a particular feature or aspect of an organism,
one must simply prove that the feature or behavior increases the ability to reproduce
(Ghoshal, 2005). Therefore, instead of revealing what bad management is, the real challenge
is to reveal how to overcome it (Ghoshal & Moran, 1996). The components can be built using
complete criteria and mutually agreed-upon principles (Gioia & Corley, 2002; Mintzberg &
Gosling, 2002). As expected, the efforts of good school management to increase productivity
by improving business processes, creating standard procedures, increasing functional
expertise, and organizing around strategy may reduce adaptation. These management
practices reduce the organization’s flexibility and may make it difficult, in the future, to
change strategies and work processes in response to new threats and opportunities (Yukl &
Lepsinger, 2005). However, a more democratic attitude with a localization of cultural values
can eliminate BSMA by increasing the school’s strength (Maravelias, 2003; Williams, 2015).

        In schools with more difficulties, bad school management—involving parents,
teachers, principals, and members of the school board—weakens the potential of educators
and our youth. This type of ill-treatment eliminates opportunities for principals and teachers
to work together to reinvent schools (Blase & Blase, 2007). However, several micro-
discipline studies have been carried out in quality schools, allowing for the discovery of a
larger picture (Blase & Blase, 2006). This shows the paradox of the good school and the bad
school (Ball, 1997). Actions beyond the rationality of school management create a negative
working atmosphere in schools, thereby leading to the emergence of the practice of BSMA
(Carroll & Levy, 2008). From a management perspective, school development, the capacity
of school leaders to participate in a data recycling cycle, the capacity of researchers to take
management roles, and their efforts to supply data for the development of the school have all
been observed to improve due to the fact that they positively impact each other (Geijsel et al.,
2010).


Rationality of the Research



                                              84

                                                    Southeast Asia Early Childhood Journal, Vol. 9 (2), 2020 (82-96)
                                                                                  ISSN 2289-3156 /eISSN 2550-1763
                                                                       http://ejournal.upsi.edu.my/index.php/SAECJ

This research focused on the school year of a preschool teacher at a school where there is
considered to be BSMA. The study sought to learn about the general structure of the school
in question, based on the experiences of the teacher in that year. As a theoretical background,
the research was designed using the narrative research type, which is a form of qualitative
research. Narrative studies have different philosophical and theoretical bases. As researchers,
we found Dewey's (1938) philosophy of interconnectedness to be suitable for the theoretical
framework of the research. To support this theoretical background, throughout the course of
one year, we met with and interviewed the teacher at home, at school, and in various settings
that she found appropriate. Interviews were conducted with her and her family. The research
used the framework of a three-dimensional narrative inquiry space, which belonged to the
narrative research of Clandinin and Connely (2000). Accordingly, the school environment
constituted the spatial dimension and the relationship established by one of the researchers
with the teacher and her family formed the socio-personal dimension (Tranfield et al., 2003).
Stories helped discover the interaction of effects that contributed to an understanding of the
teacher's experiences at the BSMA school throughout the course of one year. The main
purpose of the narratives was to emphasize the extent to which these events could be
interpreted in understanding thoughts about a BSMA school (Connelly & Clandinin, 1999).


METHODOLOGY

Our choice of the teacher whom we would focus on in this research was coincidental. One of
the researchers was assigned to an exam organized for the purpose of hiring teachers for the
school that the university was opening. Eight teachers had applied for the related branch.
Three of these teachers passed the first stage and were taken to the practice exam. After the
practice exam, Seyma1, who participated in the research, was found to be eligible for the
position. Later, the researcher was assigned to the school’s scientific committee of the school.
In this way, the researcher and Seyma frequently met. The researcher had always wanted to
conduct research about what it meant to be a teacher in a newly founded school. Therefore,
based on this idea, the researcher started studying with Seyma in the fall of 2017. The
information, sharing, and experiences that came from Seyma soon turned in a different
direction. She began telling interesting stories that required more in-depth analysis.

        Seyma was a preschool teacher with 17 years of experience. Up to that time, she had
worked in the private sector. The private sector in Turkey had steadily increased its presence
in the field of education, particularly after 2010. To become a teacher in public schools in
Turkey, a candidate is expected to pass a nationally organized test. If they get an adequate
score on the test, they apply for a teacher position, indicate their school preference, and are
placed accordingly. Although Seyma succeeded in this exam, she could not get her family's
approval to start working in a public school, as the school district to which she had been
appointed was not safe due to terrorist acts. Therefore, she started working in private
educational institutions in the city where she lived with her family. Seyma was married and
had one child. She was positive about the institution where we were conducting the research,
as it was a public school. She dreamed that she would be in a better position in terms of
personal rights. During our final arrangements for the study, we realized that this study would
also benefit her in terms of both pedagogical and psychological dimensions. She was very
excited about this situation. We met with her often and observed that, after she provided us
with information, she was more relaxed. She spoke of this often, especially as mutual trust

1
    Name of the teacher with whom the narrative research was conducted.

                                                       85

                                             Southeast Asia Early Childhood Journal, Vol. 9 (2), 2020 (82-96)
                                                                           ISSN 2289-3156 /eISSN 2550-1763
                                                                http://ejournal.upsi.edu.my/index.php/SAECJ

developed over time, Seyma started talking more comfortably and stated that it felt good to
do so. In our interviews with her family members, they stated that these meetings gave her
the power to become stronger. All this feedback motivated us, as researchers, to go deeper
into the subject.

       As narrative researchers, we learned about Seyma's experiences (Connelly &
Clandinin, 1988) using various narrative approaches such as long-term participant
observations at school, document reviews, and interviews with relevant people (i.e., school
principal, family members, senior school managers). Clandinin and Connelly (1994, 2000)
and Clandinin et al. (2006) stated that all these methods should be used to make sense of the
narrator's story. Creswell (2013) emphasized that the higher the number of methods used, the
more comfortable is the process of making sense of the experience. With the different
methods used, the diversity of the participants played an important role in discovering the
common and different points of the nested experiences of Seyma and other participants.

        Interviews and informal meetings were regularly held with Seyma throughout the
year. In addition, documents such as school notifications, announcements about school
activities, notifications from the school, agenda and minutes from school board meetings, and
examples from studies of students were collected. Descriptive field notes, interview
transcripts, research journals, and theoretical notes written after school visits were filed in the
archive system of an existing research project. To identify recurring themes, the field notes
regarding Seyma's experiences were reviewed many times. Stories were created in the
context of field notes that were written starting from the time when we began conducting the
research at the school in late September 2017. These notes continued until May 2019. It had
already been decided that the school would close in June 2019. After this decision, Seyma
started working in another school in the summer of 2019. The last meeting between Seyma
and the researchers was held in May 2019. In February 2020, another meeting was arranged
and some of the stories were revisited.

        Finally, it is necessary to talk about the school, which was the research setting. The
school had been established under a public institution. However, it had private school status.
It provided instruction at the level of basic education. It consisted of one kindergarten class
and four elementary classes. The school employed a preschool teacher, four classroom
teachers, a physical education teacher, and an art teacher. Additionally, three people worked
for support services in the school. School management consisted of a dual structure. The
principal was the authorized signatory supervisor within the school. The principal’s main task
was to manage the school and communicate with the board of directors. The board of
directors consisted of three academicians who specialized in education and one accounting
officer. Apart from this, a scientific board consisting of nine people was responsible for the
functioning of the school. This board did not have a say in the school’s administration. Its
main task was to supervise the functioning of the school in relevant areas and to advise
decision-makers.


NARRATIVE RESULTS

Seyma Teacher's Acceptance to School-A Good Start

The school where Seyma worked had been established in 2017. It had planned to enroll its
first students in the 2018-2019 academic year. Because the school was in the establishment

                                                86

                                                   Southeast Asia Early Childhood Journal, Vol. 9 (2), 2020 (82-96)
                                                                                 ISSN 2289-3156 /eISSN 2550-1763
                                                                      http://ejournal.upsi.edu.my/index.php/SAECJ

phase, the process of teacher recruitment was the first step taken. Eight candidate teachers-
including Seyma-were interviewed for the preschool teacher position. After the first
interviews, three candidates-including Seyma-were found to be eligible for the next
evaluation phase. The candidates were asked to prepare a sample activity plan and apply it in
the presence of expert teachers. As Seyma stated below, this method of recruiting staff and
implementing evaluations made her feel that she would be working in a school with a very
good institutional structure.

       I: How did your recruitment process begin?

       Ş.T.: First, I was taken to an interview. I was well-dressed for the interview. Indeed, I had
       confidence in myself. After 16 years of teaching, I thought I had enough experience. I trusted
       my experience, too. I remember the questions they asked me. First, they touched on current
       education issues. I remember them asking me about some reports. For example, we talked
       about the implications of PISA about pre-school education. As far as I remember, they first
       tried to understand my knowledge about current issues, I think. Then I think they tried to
       understand what I had been reading about my profession. After that, they tested my
       pedagogical knowledge. Indeed, I learned that when I was successful in this second session, I
       would be tested for practical performance. I was given a subject and some learning
       objectives. Using these learning objectives, I was asked to design an outdoor activity and
       apply it [in] school. There were three teachers. That is, they saw how I put my existing
       knowledge into practice. It was a very difficult process. Of course, I had two competitors.
       You don't know how they're performing. You get nervous, too. I would say this in any case,
       not only because I was successful, but I wish every teacher was recruited in this way. I think I
       went through very transparent and comprehensive testing.

       I: So, how did this stepwise recruitment process affect your view of the institution? What did
       you think about the school?

       Ş.T.: Actually (thinking for a while), I mean, I should say that it is so compact and careful,
       even elaborate. I thought I would work in a school which has a strong institutional structure,
       as they have such a series of evaluations and a testing system for teacher recruitment. Yes,
       recruiting teachers is a highly important responsibility. If the school is carrying out this
       process in this way, I thought, they will do everything accordingly. In this sense, a very
       professional understanding seemed to prevail.

       In the notes that we took during the interviews with her family, we find that Seyma's
self-confidence increased after she was accepted into the institution. She constantly talked
about the school, especially in her daily conversations. Her family stated that she was looking
forward to the new school year with great excitement, like a "child".


Problems Began to Show Up

In schools and classes that provide preschool education in Turkey, the semester begins one
week before the start of regular classes. During this week, children and their families are
given an orientation education. Children’s adaptation to the school and their classes is
evaluated in the following three weeks. The events that caused Seyma to question the
institutional structure took place during this evaluation process.

       I: When exactly did you start questioning the institutional structure of the school?

       Ş.T.: One of our children had extreme discipline problems. He was dismissed from school
       when he last exerted violence against another child. That is, a student is involved in violent
       acts and he always does it to the same children, which causes his expulsion from school. One


                                                      87

                                                    Southeast Asia Early Childhood Journal, Vol. 9 (2), 2020 (82-96)
                                                                                  ISSN 2289-3156 /eISSN 2550-1763
                                                                       http://ejournal.upsi.edu.my/index.php/SAECJ

       of the members of the scientific committee, who I always consulted with, talked to the top
       management to state that the student should be dismissed. The committee did not agree. Then
       the scientific committee member talked to the school principal. The principal said “OK” to
       the member, but later told us that the student would not be dismissed. The issue got
       complicated. For example, they did not dismiss the student at first, yet, there was nothing to
       do when the student went on bullying others. You see, they have commissioned a scientific
       committee for consulting; however, their decision is not adopted.

       I: So, what did you think after this event? What did it feel like?

       Ş.T.: It is the start of the term, and you make a good start. I got confused for a while and
       asked myself why things went wrong. Okay, after all, a private institution needs to make
       money. It is difficult to tell a family to withdraw their child from the school. But I stopped and
       thought for a moment. I said, “Yes, this is a serious decision. Nevertheless, a good institution
       makes this decision and applies it”. They could not make this decision at the beginning. They
       panicked.

       I: Did you first understand things from this event?

       Ş.T.: Actually, this does not mean making inferences and coming to conclusions immediately.
       However, it's not as it seems. Or, it is not similar to the recruitment of us, I said. I questioned
       it but went on working. As I said, it was not an easy decision. I can understand some of the
       things.



Different Problems, Deepening Problems, and an Unending Inquiry Process

After the first weeks of the academic year, the school’s adaptation processes for the children
had been completed. A child from Seyma's class was withdrawn by his family because he
could not adapt to school. In addition, two students left school due to a schedule mismatch
and attended other schools. While the term progressed as expected, problems began to show
up in decision-making processes within the school.

       I: What happened during the academic period? What caused you to continue questioning the
       school?

       Ş.T.: They were not very big events, but I think they were related to the institutional structure
       that was yet not settled. I don’t say the school did not have an institutional identity, yet. As it
       was a new school, everyone was new, after all. The principal was new, too. I was aware that
       we needed time. However, for example, there was a problem with the arrival time of the
       children or I requested some items from the school. I had to use them for my lessons.
       However, it was so tiring and time-consuming to make a decision about my requests for
       materials that I either gave up using the material in the lessons or not asking for it at all.

       I: What caused you to fall into a situation like this?

       Ş.T.: The structure was complicated in the institution. There was a principal, but he was also
       responsible [to] the top management. There was a scientific committee in the top
       management and there was a board of directors. They are all faculty members, but the team
       was so large. The decision made by one of them was overturned by the other[s]. It was not a
       conflict, but I think it was crowded. It made things cumbersome. We, teachers, are just like
       practitioners. We were asked for our ideas, but the institution was somehow not settled. It
       could not make decisions. After all, the principal understood the situation, and he started to
       act on his own.

       I: So you saw that decision-making mechanisms in the process were tiring and crowded,
       didn’t you?


                                                       88

                                                   Southeast Asia Early Childhood Journal, Vol. 9 (2), 2020 (82-96)
                                                                                 ISSN 2289-3156 /eISSN 2550-1763
                                                                      http://ejournal.upsi.edu.my/index.php/SAECJ

       Ş.T.: Absolutely. I think this [did] great damage to the functioning of the school.

        Another important stakeholder of the school is, of course, families. Families also
started to have a negative impact on Seyma over time. Although they were particularly
demanding, they were not motivated enough to participate in their children’s education.
While Seyma thought the institution could solve some issues, the problems became worse
before the system could resolve them.

       I: What were the reasons for the school's failure in solving the problems relating to the
       families?

       Ş.T.: Of course, they were unable to make decisions again (laughs). There was a faculty
       member in charge of the preschool division in the scientific committee. He said, “Let's gather
       the families and let me explain the philosophy of the institution and our class to them”. He
       would explain our general philosophy. Only eight of the 20 families came to the meeting.
       Only one of the families came to the meeting as husband and wife. Okay, we cannot bring
       them to school by force, though. Doesn't the school work for family involvement?

        In particular, the low level of participation in the parents' meeting made Seyma very
upset. During our interviews, we made notes about this situation. In one of these interview
notes, Seyma reported that the situation related to the families exhausted her and that the
school was not trying to do anything. In that meeting, we could see that Seyma had made a
clear judgment. She seemed to have made her decision about the school’s institutional
structure and stated that she was sick of the process.

       I: What were the things that made you think so?

       Ş.T.: The faculty member in the scientific committee suggested sending a needs assessment
       form to the families. We wanted to bring families and experts together according to the topics
       they requested. In this way, the families would be informed. We gave each child a form and
       sent it to the parents. Only nine of the forms [were] returned.

       I: What was the result?

       Ş.T.: He said there was nothing to do if the families did not respond. He did not insist on it at
       all.

       I: What did you feel at that moment?

       Ş.T.: I said, "What a pity!" ‘What kind of school was this?’ I thought. You're an institution
       and someone is trying to do something, but the institution doesn’t seem to care. At that
       moment, I remember saying that there was no future for this school. I spoke to my husband
       for a long time. He even said I could quit if I wanted, but there was a contract.

      Throughout the school term, different aspects of the problems showed up. According to
Seyma, the problems began because the school structure did not settle. This was a source of
stress for the principal. During the meetings that we held in December 2018, problems were
observed to arise, especially between the principal and Seyma, due to the management style
of the principal. Seyma was unable to bear it. In our meeting with the principal at that time,
he emphasized that the school's administrative structure was problematic. He stated that there
were serious problems in obtaining financial resources and that there were a lot of problems
on the board of directors. We saw that similar problems had continued from that period up to
May 2019. In summary, the weakness of the institutional structure in the school reached a
point where it affected the relationships between the school management and Seyma and

                                                      89

                                                   Southeast Asia Early Childhood Journal, Vol. 9 (2), 2020 (82-96)
                                                                                 ISSN 2289-3156 /eISSN 2550-1763
                                                                      http://ejournal.upsi.edu.my/index.php/SAECJ

even the relationships between teachers. Our records showed that the school had a very heavy
and bulky structure. The fact that emerged in May was quite a shock for all the teachers in the
school and deeply hurt them. Seyma decided to quit school after learning this. An excerpt
from our meeting at that time, when she could not control her feelings, appears below.

      I: Have you calmed down a little more? We can meet later if it is not convenient at the moment.

      Ş.T.: No, I'm fine now. (She calms down a bit after crying for some time but after a while, her
      eyes are again full of tears.)

      I: Can you tell me what has happened?

      Ş.T.: Above all, I found out that we were not recruited as a teacher (showing some official
      documents relating to social security records). Instead, they commissioned us as a support
      team, so we have been working as a service staff. That is the fact according to the official
      records of the social security institution. Also, social security payments have either been made
      late or are missing. [In addition], our contract has been arranged to cover 11 months. It has
      turned out that this arrangement aims to pay no compensation when they fire us. This is so
      hurt[ful]. After all, we do not deserve such treatment, for we are teachers. To be honest, all
      personal rights have been violated. (…) I told him to report to the board that I would contact
      other schools. What kind of a place is this? (crying).

      The problems continued at the same intensity in the coming days. During the interview
with Seyma and her family, the fact that the family was disturbed by the current situation at
the school was quite clear. Even Seyma’s 13-year-old daughter admitted that she did not want
her mother to work there because Seyma carried all the tension home. Her husband stated that
he would back up and respect her decision. After all these occurrences, Seyma left the school.
Meanwhile, the school board changed. The founding board resigned and was replaced by a
new board. Nevertheless, in our meetings with school board, they said that their aim was to
close the school in a manner that would do the least harm to the children and families. The
school is now closed and all of the teachers work in different institutions.


EDUCATIONAL IMPLICATIONS AND DISCUSSION

What did we, as narrator researchers, learn from Seyma?

This research never intended to take a general photograph of the system of a country. This
would not fit the basic philosophy of the research. Seyma is one of tens of thousands of
teachers and part of education system with her experiences, the people in her circles, and her
family. Of course, what she has experienced has not happened to her alone. We are certain
that there is a substantial group of people—both in Turkey and in other countries around the
world—who have similar stories. The events we have reported are moments of breaking
points in a year. When we look at the picture that emerges from these moments, we see how
an educational institution that was well-designed and that took the right steps at the beginning
ultimately, after a year, came to a halt due to growing problems, especially in administrative
terms. Following is an academic discussion of the findings.

         As the teacher stated in her narrative, the school’s method of recruitment, as well as
its testing and evaluation process, led her to believe that she would be working in a very good
school with a strong institutional structure. This result has shown itself in theoretical and
empirical findings. Indeed, Sun et al. (2007) touched on how the manner in which teachers

                                                      90

                                            Southeast Asia Early Childhood Journal, Vol. 9 (2), 2020 (82-96)
                                                                          ISSN 2289-3156 /eISSN 2550-1763
                                                               http://ejournal.upsi.edu.my/index.php/SAECJ

are employed, assessed, rewarded, and promoted can greatly affect the quality of education.
Although teaching behavior is considered important, the underlying processes, principles, and
practices of effective teaching are equally important (Berkovich & Eyal, 2015; Berkovich &
Eyal, 2017; Harris, 1998). In this research, we and the participant herself accepted that the
teacher recruitment system of the school was well above Turkish standards. While teachers
are assigned to their positions in state schools solely according to their scores on a multiple-
choice test in Turkey, our participant was subjected to a series of tests including an applied
evaluation.

        Another important stakeholder of the school is the families. Families, too, began to
have a negative impact on Seyma. Similarly, teachers may want to learn about the learning
styles of children from their parents (Johnson et al., 2000). In particular, the low level of
participation in the parents’ meeting highly annoyed Seyma. Child-centered documentation is
a form of documentation that focuses on the activities in which children participate. It is used
mainly to provide information for both children and parents. It can be seen as informative but
not as a tool for thinking about learning (Alvestad & Sheridan, 2015). However, as the
narrative of the teacher revealed, the low level of parent participation negatively affects the
sharing of success or student-related problems beyond being incompatible with the theory.
Brewer (2007) stated that family participation contributes not only to the success of a child in
the preschool period but also to the belief and motivation of both the family and the teacher
with respect to education. In this case, it can be seen that Seyma felt "lonely" in terms of the
education of children and started to lose faith in the school.

        The weakness of the institutional structure in the school reached a point where it
impacted the relationship between Seyma and the management, and even among the teachers.
School principals are the individuals who are primarily responsible for teacher-teacher
communication in the school environment. The degree of the realization of the school
principal's experiences in the same region, in the same school, and in different environments
in the same demographic context shows the capacity to socialize (Crow, 2006). Problem-
solving, innovative initiatives, and the development of the school as a strong student
community that is willing to take responsibility and to be successful reflect the expected
characteristics (Blase & Blase, 2003). Because a school with problems does not have a
positive learning atmosphere, peer influence decreases considerably and asocial behaviors are
reflected in students. Peer influence is especially important in early childhood education
(Bommer et al., 2004). Both transformational and instructional leadership skills are expected
to come to the fore here.

        The management approach not only affects the traditional status and security of
administrative work but also provides a positive distinction between managers and others
(Gray, 1999). There is a principal, but that principal is responsible to the board of directors,
which contains a scientific committee. All of these individuals are faculty members, but the
team can overrule the decision of a very large board. The limitations of the role of assessment
regarding the real roles of teacher assessment in local school management and the ways in
which school actors react to accountability pressures support two interrelated explanations
(Hanberger, 2016). On the other hand, small groups are regarded as providing optimal
opportunities to achieve the pedagogical tasks of preschool education and to work in line with
the curriculum objectives (Sheridan et al., 2014). The presence of academic administrators on
the scientific board suggests the professional development and follow-up of teacher
development. The professional demands of teachers or the professional demands of the
system and the populist demands of the customers who are not generally from the education

                                              91

                                            Southeast Asia Early Childhood Journal, Vol. 9 (2), 2020 (82-96)
                                                                          ISSN 2289-3156 /eISSN 2550-1763
                                                               http://ejournal.upsi.edu.my/index.php/SAECJ

sector can destabilize the school (Eden, 2001). The narrative indicated that the questioning
was negative and, theoretically, revealed a discrepancy.
        Principals provide information and data about the school’s processes by providing
numerous evaluations and surveys, as well as by monitoring those processes. These
externalized forms of regulation are characteristics of accountability logic with the
determination of goals and the examination of performance (Hult et al., 2016). In schools, as
in other institutions, one can find information and practices that cause tension-filled
environments (Ball, 1997). Instead of the performance and peaceful environment specified in
the literature, worries such as the 11-month contract and the unilateral right to dismiss
teachers and not pay compensation, which would negatively affect teacher motivation,
manifested themselves in the teacher’s narrative.

        School principals and leaders who identify endemic problems in their schools know
their strengths and weaknesses; thus, they will adopt relevant leadership styles to address
those problems (Msila, 2011). Listening, inspiring, and being the driving force are among the
leadership characteristics of preschool principals (Håkansson, 2016). The problem with the
lack of an institutional structure naturally reveals BSMA by failing to demonstrate the
principal’s leadership qualifications. However, creating and developing a vision for the
school is the primary priority of the principal in terms of providing the point of view (Chance
& Grady, 1990). On the other hand, the latest study on the changing requirements of
preschool institutions with respect to the systematic quality study of the curriculum may lead
to decreased teacher commitment due to an increased focus on the intense learning objectives
of the curriculum (Bakken et al., 2017; Håkansson, 2016). However, the dependence of the
school’s structure, which is the basic element, and the school management approach to other
people contradict the theory.


Suggestions for Implementations

Teacher training programs in higher education emphasize only the theoretically positive
aspects and approaches of teaching and rarely reveal the dark side of school life. Therefore,
prospective teachers cannot develop an understanding of how to deal with the problem of ill-
treatment and abuse. Although the higher education curriculum is known to educate well-
equipped teachers, prospective teachers may become aware of a school’s problems
encountered in practice before graduating. Because BSMA effects have been shown to have
serious, widespread, and negative impacts, teacher trainers can help prospective teachers gain
skills regarding in-class teaching, collaborative work, and decision-making processes
throughout the school.

         It may be necessary to recognize and understand the potential effects of adverse
events, experienced as a result of BSMA, on teachers, students, and school-wide decision-
making and classroom teaching. It can be suggested that knowledge and skills should be
developed in small and large groups and discussions in light of relevant, up-to-date literature
and should not be reflected in the classroom environment. For example, the development of
internal work, self-recognition, strengths and weaknesses, problem-solving abilities, and an
ill-treatment perspective should be targeted. More specifically, various approaches to
interaction can be introduced, such as protecting one's self-esteem, dealing with the feelings
that result from bullying (such as anger and fear), collaborating with a school principal who
has negative features to ensure that demands are specific, reporting complaints, and
objectively resolving a case. In addition, it can be suggested that successful and experienced

                                              92

                                            Southeast Asia Early Childhood Journal, Vol. 9 (2), 2020 (82-96)
                                                                          ISSN 2289-3156 /eISSN 2550-1763
                                                               http://ejournal.upsi.edu.my/index.php/SAECJ

teachers should work with inexperienced teachers in adverse situations.

        From a broad perspective, while we suggest proposals to develop national policies and
plans-even tools enriched with a legal infrastructure—to achieve the desired characteristics in
schools and classrooms, initiative areas should be created by considering regional and
cultural differences when local characteristics are taken into account. Policies, norms,
expectations, pressures, professional ethics, and behaviors determine the utilization areas of
organizational factors by school principals.

        Principals who are trying to develop their schools should, as effective teaching
leaders, work to integrate growth, thereby creating a school culture of individual and shared
values for educational development. To do this, the following are recommended for school
principals:

       •   Accept the challenges of effective growth and change,
       •   Accept that change is a journey of learning and risk-taking,
       •   Respect teachers' knowledge and skills, and know that they have a professional
           identity,
       •   Talk openly and frequently to teachers about teaching and learning processes,
       •   Offer suggestions about classroom experiences, give feedback, and obtain the
           opinions of teachers,
       •   Develop trust, openness, the freedom to make mistakes, and non-threatening
           partnerships with teachers,
       •   Support the development of coaching skills and reflective conversations,
       •   Encourage teachers in current methods and practices,
       •   Provide time and opportunities for peer communication between teachers,
       •   Encourage group development, teamwork, and innovation while promoting
           continuous growth, confidence in staff and students, and teacher effectiveness.


Strengths and Limitations

This research sought to capture an image or picture of a school administered through a
BSMA management approach. The research focuses on one year of experiences of a teacher
and does this not directly but, rather, through narration in multiple sessions, during which the
teacher could express herself freely; such an approach is a strength of the study. However,
while the study’s strength lies in the presentation of in-depth data based on the findings
obtained as a result of the research, without the need to worry about the generalizability of
the theoretical result, this approach also limits the research’s ability to provide
recommendations based on the findings. Additionally, the fact that the study offers a picture
obtained from a much more generalizable review can be considered a strength of the
research, as can the fact that the study presents sociological variables in general and cultural
variables specifically. In addition, given the feature of studies in terms of making a positive
deduction from the research, while the analysis of a negative example in a badly managed
school can be thought of as a limitation, BSMA efforts the reasonable considering BSMA
features show the strength of the study.

       Finally, the globalization and quality of early childhood education and pre-school
education has become a main agenda item with regard to international objectives for
education. In this research, it is noteworthy that the narrative findings of a pre-school teacher

                                               93

                                                   Southeast Asia Early Childhood Journal, Vol. 9 (2), 2020 (82-96)
                                                                                 ISSN 2289-3156 /eISSN 2550-1763
                                                                      http://ejournal.upsi.edu.my/index.php/SAECJ

present perspectives to decision-makers, policymakers, teachers, and researchers on a global
scale. As narrator researchers, we worked with one participant and focused on her. While this
complied with the nature of our research, it also makes up for its limitations. However, it is
clear that BSMA can emerge in many different ways and can have completely different
effects depending on the characters of the people involved. For this reason, we believe the
contribution of transforming studies in this field into big research’s by providing financial
support in terms of both schools and teachers.


REFERENCES
Aizenberg, M., & Oplatka, I. (2019). From professional isolation to effective leadership: Preschool teacher-
     directors’ strategies of shared leadership and pedagogy. Teachers and Teaching, 25(8), 994-1013,
     https://doi.10.1080/13540602.2019.1688287
Alvesson, M., & Sveningsson, S. (2003). Good visions, bad micro-management and ugly ambiguity:
     Contradictions of (non-) leadership in a knowledge-intensive organization. Organization Studies, 24(6),
     961-988.
Alvestad, T., & Sheridan, S. (2015). Preschool teachers' perspectives on planning and documentation in
     preschool. Early Child Development and Care, 185(3), 377-392.
     https://doi.10.1080/03004430.2014.929861
Bakken, L., Brown, N., & Downing, B. (2017). Early childhood education: The long-term benefits. Journal of
     Research in Childhood Education, 31(2), 255-269 https://doi.10.1080/02568543.2016.1273285
Ball, S. J. (1997). Good school/bad school: Paradox and fabrication. British Journal of Sociology of
     Education, 18(3), 317-336. https://doi.10.1080/0142569970180301
Barley, S. R., & Kunda, G. (1992). Design and devotion: Surges of rational and normative ideologies of control
     in managerial discourse. Administrative Science Quarterly, 37(3), 363-399.
Berkovich, I., & Eyal, O. (2015). Educational leaders and emotions: An international review of empirical
     evidence 1992–2012. Review of Educational Research, 85(1), 129-167.
Berkovich, I., & Eyal, O. (2017). Good cop, bad cop: Exploring school principals’ emotionally manipulative
     behaviours. Educational Management Administration & Leadership, 45(6), 944-958. DOI:
     10.1177/1741143216659293
Blase, J., & Blase, J. (2003). The phenomenology of principal mistreatment: Teachers’ perspectives. Journal of
     Educational Administration, 41(4), 367-422.
Blase, J., & Blase, J. (2006). Teachers' perspectives on principal mistreatment. Teacher Education
     Quarterly, 33(4), 123-142.
Blase, J., & Blase, J. (2007). School principal mistreatment of teachers: Teachers' perspectives on emotional
     abuse. Journal of Emotional Abuse, 4(3-4), 151-175. https://doi.10.1300/J135v04n03_10
Bommer, W. H., Rubin, R. S., & Baldwin, T. T. (2004). Setting the stage for effective leadership: Antecedents
     of transformational leadership behavior. The Leadership Quarterly, 15(2), 195-210.
Brewer, J., A. (2007). Introduction to early childhood education. (sixth ed.). Perason.
Campbell-Barr, V., & Bogatić, K. (2017). Global to local perspectives of early childhood education and care.
     Early Child Development and Care, 187(10), 1461-1470. https://doi.10.1080/03004430.2017.1342436
Carroll, B., & Levy, L. (2008). Defaulting to management: Leadership defined by what it is
     not. Organization, 15(1), 75-96. https://doi.10.1177/1350508407084486
Chance, E. W., & Grady, M. L. (1990). Creating and implementing a vision for the school. NASSP
     Bulletin, 74(529), 12-18.
Clandinin, D., J., & Connelly, F., M. (1994). Personal experince methods. In N. K. Denzin & Y. S. Lincoln
     (Eds.), Handbook of qualitative research in the social sciences (pp. 13-427). Sage.
Clandinin, D., J., & Connelly, F., M. (2000). Narrative ınquiry: Experince and story in qualitative research.
     Jossey-Bass.
Clandinin, D., J., Huber, J., Huber, M., Murphy, M, S., MurrayOrr, A., Pearce, M., et al. (2006). Composing
     diverse identities: Narrative inquiries into the interwoven lives of children and teachers. Routledge.
Connelly, F., M., & Clandinin, D., J. (1988). Teachers as curriculum planners: Narratives of experience.
     Teachers College Press.
Connelly, F., M., & Clandinin, D., J. (1999). Story to live by: Teacher identities on a changing professionals
     knowledge landscape. In F., M., Connelly & D., J., Clandinin (Eds.), Shaping a professional identity:
     Stories of an educational practise (pp. 114-132). Althouse Press.


                                                      94

                                                   Southeast Asia Early Childhood Journal, Vol. 9 (2), 2020 (82-96)
                                                                                 ISSN 2289-3156 /eISSN 2550-1763
                                                                      http://ejournal.upsi.edu.my/index.php/SAECJ

Cooper, H. (1996). Research news and comment: Speaking power to truth: Reflections of an educational
    researcher after 4 years of school board service. Educational Researcher, 25(1), 29-34.
Creswell, J., W. (2013). Qualitative inquiry & research design. (third ed.) Sage.
Crow, G. M. (2006). Complexity and the beginning principal in the United States: Perspectives on
    socialization. Journal of Educational Administration, 44(4), 310-325.
    https://doi.10.1108/09578230610674930
Dewey, J. (1938). Experience and education. Simon & Schuster.
Eden, D. (2001). Who controls the teachers? Overt and covert control in schools. Educational Management &
    Administration, 29(1), 97-111.
Geijsel, F. P., Krüger, M. L., & Sleegers, P. J. (2010). Data feedback for school improvement: The role of
    researchers and school leaders. The Australian Educational Researcher, 37(2), 59-75.
Ghoshal, S. (2005). Bad management theories are destroying good management practices. Academy of
    Management Learning & Education, 4(1), 75-91.
Ghoshal, S., & Moran, P. (1996). Bad for practice: A critique of the transaction cost theory. Academy of
    Management Review, 21(1), 13-47.
Gioia, D. A., & Corley, K. G. (2002). Being good versus looking good: Business school rankings and the
    Circean transformation from substance to image. Academy of Management Learning & Education, 1(1),
    107-120.
Grey, C. (1999). ‘We are all managers now’;‘we always were’: On the development and demise of
    management. Journal of Management Studies, 36(5), 561-585.
Håkansson, J. (2016). Organising and leading systematic quality work in the preschool–preschool managers’
    perspectives. School Leadership & Management, 36(3), 292-310.
    https://doi.10.1080/13632434.2016.1247043
Hanberger, A. (2016). Evaluation in local school governance: A framework for analysis. Education
    Inquiry, 7(3), 299-314. https://doi.10.3402/edui.v7.29914
Harris, A. (1998). Effective teaching: A review of the literature. School Leadership & Management, 18(2), 169-
    183. https://doi.10.1080/13632439869628
Harris, A., Day, C., & Hadfield, M. (2003). Teachers' perspectives on effective school leadership. Teachers and
    teaching, 9(1), 67-77. https://doi.10.1080/1354060032000049913
Hult, A., Lundström, U., & Edström, C. (2016). Balancing managerial and professional demands: School
    principals as evaluation brokers. Education Inquiry, 7(3), 299-360. https://doi.10.3402/edui.v7.29960
Intxausti, N., Etxeberria, F., & Bartau, I. (2017). Effective and inclusive schools? Attention to diversity in
    highly effective schools in the Autonomous Region of the Basque Country. International Journal of
    Inclusive Education, 21(1), 14-30. https://doi.10.1080/13603116.2016.1184324
Johnson, J. P., Livingston, M., Schwartz, R. A., & Slate, J. R. (2000). What makes a good elementary school? A
    critical examination. The Journal of Educational Research, 93(6), 339-348.
    https://doi.10.1080/00220670009598728
Kahila, S. K., Heikka, J., & Sajaniemi, N. (2020). Teacher leadership in the context of early childhood
    education: Concepts, characteristics and enactment. Southeast Asia Early Childhood Journal, 9(1), 28-43.
Karip, E. (2005). Küreselleşme ve Lizbon eğitim 2010 hedefleri. Kuram ve Uygulamada Eğitim
    Yönetimi, 42(42), 195-209.
Leone, S., Warnimont, C., & Zimmerman, J. (2009). New roles for the principal of the future. American
    Secondary Education, 37(2), 86-96.
Löfdahl, A., & Folke-Fichtelius, M. (2015). Preschool’s new suit: Care in terms of learning and
    knowledge. Early Years, 35(3), 260-272. https://doi.10.1080/09575146.2014.995600
Maravelias, C. (2003). Post-bureaucracy–Control through professional freedom. Journal of Organizational
    Change Management, 16(5), 547-566. https://doi.10.1108/09534810310494937
Masnan, A. H., & Hashim, N. H. (2014). The teaching skills of beginning preschool teachers. Southeast Asia
    Early Childhood Journal, 3, 46-55.
McNichols, M., & Wilson, G. P. (1988). Evidence of earnings management from the provision for bad
    debts. Journal of Accounting Research, 26, 1-31.
Mintzberg, H., & Gosling, J. (2002). Educating managers beyond borders. Academy of Management Learning
    &Education, 1(1), 64-76.
Msila, V. (2011). School management and the struggle for effective schools. Africa Education Review, 8(3),
    434-449. https://doi.10.1080/18146627.2011.618650
Nachiappan, S., Damahuri, A. A., Ganaprakasam, C., & Suffian, S. (2018). Application of Higher Order
    Thinking Skills (HOTS) in teaching and learning through communication component and spiritual, attitudes
    and values component in preschool. Southeast Asia Early Childhood Journal, 7, 24-32.



                                                      95

                                                    Southeast Asia Early Childhood Journal, Vol. 9 (2), 2020 (82-96)
                                                                                  ISSN 2289-3156 /eISSN 2550-1763
                                                                       http://ejournal.upsi.edu.my/index.php/SAECJ

Öqvist, A., & Cervantes, S. (2018). Teaching in preschool: Heads of preschools governance throughout the
    systematic quality work. Nordic Journal of Studies in Educational Policy, 4(1), 38-47.
    https://doi.10.1080/20020317.2017.1419040
Pfeffer, J. (1993). Barriers to the advance of organizational science: Paradigm development as a dependent
    variable. Academy of Management Review, 18(4), 599-620.
Pfeffer, J. (2005). Why do bad management theories persist? A comment on Ghoshal. Academy of Management
    Learning & Education, 4(1), 96-100.
Reezigt, G. J., & Creemers, B. P. (2005). A comprehensive framework for effective school
    improvement. School Effectiveness and School İmprovement, 16(4), 407-424.
    https://doi.10.1080/09243450500235200
Scheerens, J., & Demeuse, M. (2005). The theoretical basis of the effective school improvement model
    (ESI). School Effectiveness and School İmprovement, 16(4), 373-385.
    https://doi.10.1080/09243450500234567
Sheridan, S., Williams, P., & PramlingSamuelsson, I. (2014). Group size and organisational conditions for
    children’s learning in preschool: A teacher perspective. Educational Research, 56(4), 379-397.
    https://doi.10.1080/00131881.2014.965562
Sun, H., Creemers, B. P., & De Jong, R. (2007). Contextual factors and effective school improvement. School
    Effectiveness and School İmprovement, 18(1), 93-122. https://doi.10.1080/09243450601058287
Tranfield, D., Denyer, D., & Smart, P. (2003). Towards a methodology for developing evidence—Informed
    management knowledge by means of systematic review. British Journal of Management, 14(3), 207-222.
United Nations Educational, Scientific and CulturalOrganization [UNESCO]., (2007). Education for All Global
    Monitoring Report 2008: Education for All by 2015. Will We Make It?. UNESCO & Oxford University.
Wikeley, F., & Murillo, J. (2005). Effective school improvement: An introduction. School Effectiveness and
    School Improvement, 16(4), 355-358. https://doi.10.1080/09243450500234336
Wikeley, F., Stoll, L., Murillo, J., & De Jong, R. (2005). Evaluating effective school improvement: Case studies
    of programmes in eight European countries and their contribution to the effective school improvement
    model. School Effectiveness and School Improvement, 16(4), 387-405.
    https://doi.10.1080/09243450500234617
Williams, S. M. (2015). The future of principal preparation and principal evaluation: Reflections of the current
    policy context for school leaders. Journal of Research on Leadership Education, 10(3), 222-225. DOI:
    10.1177/1942775115621159
Yukl, G., & Lepsinger, R. (2005). Why integrating the leading and managing roles is essential for organizational
    effectiveness. Organizational Dynamics, 34(4), 361–375. https://doi.10.1016/j.orgdyn.2005.08.004




                                                      96