CTE Workshop Proceedings, 2024, Vol. 11, pp. 98-119                                                             https://doi.org/10.55056/cte.684



Comparing social media use in school management:
experiences from Ukraine and the United States
Liubov A. Kartashova1 , Nataliia O. Prykhodkina1 , Tetiana A. Makhynia1 ,
Hanna M. Tymoshko1,2 and Olena A. Sholokh2
1
    University of Educational Management, 52A Sichovykh Striltsiv Str., Kyiv, 04053, Ukraine
2
    T. H. Shevchenko National University “Chernihiv Collegium”, 53 Hetman Polubotka Str., Chernihiv, 14000, Ukraine


               Abstract. This paper analyses and compares the use of social media in school management in Ukraine
               and the United States. It examines the types of social media used, purposes for use, and challenges faced.
               Key findings show that Facebook, YouTube, Instagram and X are most popular in both countries. Social
               media communicates with stakeholders, showcases school activities, and builds relationships. Challenges
               include data privacy, digital literacy, and misinformation. The paper reviews training programs in both
               countries to improve social media competency for school leaders. It concludes that social media has
               become an essential communications tool in education, accelerated by the pandemic’s impacts.
               Keywords: social media, school management, education, Ukraine, United States, communication




1. Introduction
The active and comprehensive implementation of information and communication technologies
characterises the modern period of school management development. The main goal of their
implementation is to improve the quality of education and interactions among all participants
in the educational process.
   Social media usage has grown exponentially worldwide. According to GlobalWebIndex [13],
people spend a third of their online time on social media platforms. Comscore data also shows
that time spent on social media and messaging apps accounts for over a quarter of the time on
mobile devices [6].
   Social media is an online platform that allows users to easily create and share content,
collaborate, and build networks and communities. Key characteristics include user participation,

" lkartashova@ua.fm (L. A. Kartashova); prykho2@gmail.com (N. O. Prykhodkina); t_st@umo.edu.ua
(T. A. Makhynia); timoshko49@gmail.com (H. M. Tymoshko); osholoh72@gmail.com (O. A. Sholokh)
~ http://umo.edu.ua/kafedra-vidkritikh-osvitnikh-sistem-ta-informacijno-komunikacijnikh-tekhnologhij/sklad/
kartashova-ljubov-andrijivna (L. A. Kartashova); http:
//umo.edu.ua/institutes/imp/struktura-institutu/kaf-upravl-navch-zaklad/sklad/prikhodjkina-natalja-oleksijivna
(N. O. Prykhodkina); http:
//umo.edu.ua/institutes/imp/struktura-institutu/kaf-upravl-navch-zaklad/sklad/makhinja-tetjana-anatolijivna
(T. A. Makhynia); http:
//umo.edu.ua/institutes/imp/struktura-institutu/kaf-upravl-navch-zaklad/sklad/timoshko-ghanna-mikolajivna
(H. M. Tymoshko); https://scholar.google.com/citations?user=pOMFGNYAAAAJ (O. A. Sholokh)
 0000-0002-1270-4158 (L. A. Kartashova); 0000-0002-6211-5546 (N. O. Prykhodkina); 0000-0003-4065-0465
(T. A. Makhynia); 0000-0003-0996-6138 (H. M. Tymoshko); 0000-0001-5258-8086 (O. A. Sholokh)
                                      © Copyright for this paper by its authors, published by Academy of Cognitive and Natural Sciences (ACNS).
                                      This is an Open Access article distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons License Attribution 4.0 International
        Workshop                      (CC BY 4.0), which permits unrestricted use, distribution, and reproduction in any medium, provided the original work
    CTE Proceedings
                                      is properly cited.




                                                                       98

CTE Workshop Proceedings, 2024, Vol. 11, pp. 98-119                   https://doi.org/10.55056/cte.684


openness, conversation, community and connectedness [22]. Social media encompasses social
networking sites like Facebook, microblogging sites like X, photo/video sharing platforms like
Instagram and YouTube, messaging apps like WhatsApp and more.
  Compared to traditional media’s one-to-many model, social media facilitates many-to-many
communications. This allows for more significant interaction, engagement and collaboration
among users. It also changes power dynamics, giving individuals more influence alongside
institutional voices [19].
  Social media offers enhanced communication, learning, professional development and community-
building opportunities in education. However, it also risks privacy, security, misinformation,
and digital literacy. Wise use of social media requires critical evaluation of opportunities and
challenges [29].

1.1. Related works
Kaplan and Haenlein [16] defined social media as “a group of Internet applications based
on the ideological and technological foundations of Web 2.0 that allow to create and share
user content”. Web 2.0 tends to develop websites on similar principles stemming from the
focus on the project and service socialisation and its improvement by users [21]. Social media
fundamentally differs from traditional media types by implementing a bidirectional information
transfer strategy, meaning “many sources and many recipients” [31]. Traditional media, in turn,
uses a unidirectional strategy, meaning one source and many recipients.
   There is no generally accepted definition of the term “social media”. In our opinion, the most
concise, simple and relevant definition of this phenomenon is: “Social media is broadly defined
as a lot of relatively inexpensive and widely available electronic instruments that allow any
person to publish and receive information, collaborate and build relationships with other people”
[9].
   Social media is an online communication in Thornley [38] terms with the understanding that
a person can smoothly and flexibly change their role to appear as an audience or participant.
Social software is used for this purpose, which makes it possible for anyone (without specific
coding expertise) to post, comment, move, edit information, and create communities based on
their interests.
   Stephens [36] defines social media as “forms of communication either Internet or text-based
that support social interactions of individuals”.
   Azhnyuk [3] defines social media as an online service intended for the mass distribution of
user-generated content, wherein anyone could be an author, as opposed to traditional media,
wherein authors are pre-selected and have a limited audience.
   Some researchers consider the concepts of “social media” and “social network” synonymous.
However, this needs to be corrected. We are on board with the statement of Scott [31] that
“social media is a superset and social network is a subset”. Thus, social networks are just a
specific instance of social media, albeit the most popular one.
   Azhnyuk [3] breaks up social media into three categories: 1) social networks; 2) blogs
(including standalone, blog hosting, microblogging, etc.); 3) content hosting (photo services like
Instagram and Flickr, video hosting services like YouTube, hosting for slides, documents, music
like Slideshare, Scribd, Soundcloud, etc.). However, he notes that online media intended for



                                                 99

CTE Workshop Proceedings, 2024, Vol. 11, pp. 98-119                   https://doi.org/10.55056/cte.684


personal contact or group communication, rather than mass publication, should be kept from
social media, particularly email, messengers, and online games.
  Zhdanova [41] identifies seven types of social media:

   1. Social networks are online services that prompt you to make new acquaintances and
      form interest communities. A user has an online profile and several ways to interact with
      others (through groups, events, polls, games, etc.) on such sites. Facebook and LinkedIn
      are the most famous examples of social networks.
   2. Messengers are online messaging services where users interact through personal corre-
      spondence. Messenger applications like Telegram, Viber, and WhatsApp are available on
      mobile devices.
   3. Social bookmarking sites help users save and share interesting information as a link to
      other resources. For example, the Pinterest network allows to store a large number of
      images in different categories in order to facilitate the search later.
   4. Blogs and forums offer comments to many users simultaneously. Medium, Blogger and
      WordPress are well-known blogging platforms.
   5. Microblogging lets send short updates to everybody subscribed to such updates. The most
      outstanding microblogging, X, has gained much attention among journalists, allowing
      them to quickly track developments and get information on what is happening.
   6. Social news services allow users to create or publish links to news from other sources.
      The main element is voting; the community chooses which news will become the most
      important and visible to the rest of the users. The most famous example is Reddit.
   7. Multimedia hosting is a service possessing most of the social network peculiarities
      (user profile, circle of friends, opportunities to distribute and comment on information).
      However, it is primarily focused on the ability to download video, photo and audio files.
      Examples include YouTube, Vimeo, and Flickr.

1.2. Social media in educational management
One critical task of educational management is to ensure the development of the educational
institution as an independent organisation through establishing interaction with all participants
of the educational process, partnership with public organisations and support of local businesses.
Relationship networks take the position of one effective interaction model for all participants
of the educational process. The skills of active communication through social networks are
currently necessary for everyone. Facebook, X, YouTube and other networks have moved
beyond a framework of face-to-face interaction, and it is a powerful communication platform
facilitating both building a brand and being a virtual representation for government, business,
and public organisations.
   Unlike the official websites of general secondary educational institutions requiring training
in a more professional way for updating information and establishing feedback, the pages of
institutions in social media have their characteristics determined by the properties of electronic
communication, such as prompt dissemination of information, accessibility, simplified search
the target audience, ease of the feedback set up and so forth. Its structure and organisational
and technological parameters affect the nature of social connections. It is an element of the



                                                 100

CTE Workshop Proceedings, 2024, Vol. 11, pp. 98-119                   https://doi.org/10.55056/cte.684


constructing mechanism for the communicative space within modern society, performing
several functions while creating a value basis for its existence.
  Primbs [26] identifies key needs for users in social media:
    • managing relationships from Facebook dating as a replacement for exchanging visiting
      cards to close contacts in the family or community of friends;
    • managing information by filtering news and relevant information based on user prefer-
      ences through friends and subscriptions;
    • managing one’s identity by forming a personal brand.
  For the preceding reasons, a follower of the website of the educational institution or school
principal having independently joined a school community on social media is in a position to:
    • establish contacts between the participants of the educational process and terminate
      communication without explanations at any moment;
    • set up constant access to information on news of the educational institution activity due
      to the operational aspects of search algorithms of social media;
    • develop own attitude to specific events in the educational field relying upon an opinion
      of the experts of the ultimate educational brands. It means that the actual attitude of the
      experts to a particular educational institution and a vision for further developments is
      relevant for the followers rather than the information in itself under the context of big
      data on educational reforms reported by thousands of sources.
   Thus, for the head of an educational institution, the presence on the social network per-
sonally or through the institution’s page allows them to promptly inform the participants of
the educational process with the life of the organisation, purposefully manage the flows of
various information, influence their consciousness and worldview transforming parents from
“readers/observers” to active co-experiencers/fans or vice versa. However, awareness ensures
that the adverse developments of individual autonomy are reduced.
   Returning to the [26], the role of fans should be emphasised: “Real fans are much more than
mere readers/listeners/viewers/target group, fans interact. Fans are ready to do something
for the object of their worship. Fans are the first to submit photos when you are announcing
a photo contest. Fans write the first comments under your posts breaking the ice. Fans cut
trolls down to size excusing from a nasty work. Fans will also stand with you when you get a
shitstorm. They provide entertainment for regular visitors of your community. And they give
you stuff you can work with again”.
   The communication efficiency on the network is manifested by a high level of trust within
the network, as opposed to distrust of external persons; the existence of a unifying ideol-
ogy/religion/lifestyle that allows to act together; targeted message delivery, which makes
possible it to be received precisely by the person who needs it, as opposed to communication
with a mass but passive audience in the case of traditional media [25]. These mechanisms
for group functioning ensure the integration of individual actions in joint group activity and
communication.
   One of the crucial components of the management process in an educational institution is to
inform participants of the educational process and communities on its activity in open public
resources [5].



                                                 101

CTE Workshop Proceedings, 2024, Vol. 11, pp. 98-119                  https://doi.org/10.55056/cte.684


2. Research methodology
The pedagogical research under consideration has been carried out as part of the research work
“Training of competitive specialists in the context of educational changes” (RK 0117U002378)
conducted by the Department of Pedagogy, Administration and Social Work of the Educa-
tional and Scientific Institute of Management and Psychology of the University of Educational
Management of the National Academy of Educational Sciences of Ukraine.
   The article aims to provide a comparative analysis of the features of using social media in
school management: the experience of Ukraine and the United States of America.
   We monitored 120 sites of Ukrainian middle schools and 123 sites of American schools (several
sites from each state).
   The monitoring parameters are:

    • Which social media do principals use in managing the schools, teams of teachers and
      students?
    • What are the purposes of using social media?

  Also, we monitored the pages of Ukrainian and U.S. principals on social networks.
  We conducted a survey of 138 school principals in Ukraine. The key survey questions were:

    • Do you have a personal page on social networks?
    • Does your school have its page on social networks?
    • What social networks do you use in your managerial activities?
    • Are there any barriers to school communication in social networks?
    • Which information in social networks is the most interesting for participants of the
      educational process?

   We had a content analysis on the massive open online courses (MOOCs [40]) by the Ukrainian
platforms EdEra, Prometheus and VUM online and the English ones such as edX, Udemy,
FutureLearn, XuetangX and Coursera, whose self-study contributes to the readiness for the
effective using of social media in school management.
   We have also used the online survey results of 3,9 thousand principals of general secondary
educational institutions, educators, parents and students from 9–11 grades on distance learning
in schools of Ukraine that the State Education Inspectorate of Ukraine conducted.
   For comparison we took the results of a survey of American school principals from the report
at the official website of U.S. Department of Education “Social media in school emergency man-
agement: Using new media technology to improve emergency management communications”
[36], the report of Pew Research Center “Social networking fact sheet” [24], reports “Global
Guide 2020” [12], “90 days that changed K-12 teaching & learning: strengthening the bonds of
communications” [1], “2019 Social Media Trends in Education Report” [15].


3. Results and discussion
Using social media, the schools can:



                                                 102

CTE Workshop Proceedings, 2024, Vol. 11, pp. 98-119                      https://doi.org/10.55056/cte.684


    • quickly respond to the needs of the audience: hear the parent, student and the public
      community (highlight the main topics for discussion, get feedback);
    • prevent conflicts due to operational coverage of problems in the activities of the school;
    • through social networks learn more about the activities of other schools and build own
      strategy for activities in social networks;
    • fills vacancies and provides the school with highly qualified personnel by searching for
      personnel in social networks—for example, the group “Jobs for educators” on Facebook.
      The goal is to post messages about available vacancies in schools and for teachers who
      find work.

   In the school, social media are primarily an external communication tool. For large schools
with a large number of participants in the educational process, social media can be a tool for
interaction between participants in the educational process among themselves (for example,
quickly obtaining the necessary information and providing mutual assistance). Social media
allow the teaching staff, especially the director, to quickly resolve issues related to the adaptation
and rotation of personnel.
   We obtained the following experimental results (table 1).

Table 1
The results of monitoring of the use by school principals of social media in school management.
  Social media         The results of monitoring of Ukraine   The results of monitoring of the USA
  Facebook                             96 %                                    98 %
  Instagram                            33 %                                    87 %
  X                                    1%                                      99 %
  Telegram                             10 %                                      -
  WhatsApp                             4%                                      76 %
  Viber                                36 %                                    11 %
  Youtube                              25 %                                    84 %
  Linkedln                               -                                     28 %
  Google Blogger                       5%                                      87 %
  Google+                              5%                                      89 %
  Pinterest                            7%                                      56 %
  Skype                                12 %                                    42 %
  Flickr                                 -                                     63 %

   Most principals avoid committing to the professional use of social media because it is entirely
overwhelming. Knowing what will yield the best results between Instagram, X, YouTube, and
Facebook takes much work. It is crucial to consider the best social media for purposes.
   Every principal tries to choose the best way to promote a wonderful school community. For
learning and interacting, the American principals of middle schools use X. It is the gold standard
for them. Instagram and YouTube are the best and most popular tools for documenting and
sharing remarkable work in school. Flickr is useful for sharing pictures. American principals
of middle schools use Facebook for calendar reminders and to get the word out quickly about
calendar changes and event planning.



                                                 103

CTE Workshop Proceedings, 2024, Vol. 11, pp. 98-119                       https://doi.org/10.55056/cte.684



Table 2
Comparative analysis of the goals of using social media in school management in the USA and Ukraine.
                                                                    The purpose        The purpose
  The goals of using social media in school management               rating of         rating of the
                                                                      Ukraine              USA
  Simplified search for the target audience allowing to expand        1 (90 %)            3 (87 %)
  personal and professional contacts between participants of the
  educational process
  Demonstration of educational measures                               2 (70 %)            4 (85 %)
  Public disclosure of successes of students, teachers and school     3 (62 %)            1 (99 %)
  classes
  Public disclosure of urgent announcement                            4 (57 %)            2 (98 %)
  Demonstration of various forms of training                          5 (49 %)            6 (76 %)
  Project and competition reporting where both students and           6 (43 %)            7 (62 %)
  teachers can participate
  Clarification on the issues of the educational process (school      7 (41 %)            8 (39 %)
  enrollment, standardised external testing, state final examina-
  tion, etc.)
  Explanation of educational reforms and innovations                  8 (33 %)            9 (11 %)
  Challenges of participants of educational process consolidation     9 (17 %)            5 (81 %)
  concerning engagement in socially important projects


   For example, the school principal Eric Sheninger, 2013 American “Best Director Award”
winner and bestselling author of “Digital Leadership: Changing Paradigms for Changing Times”
[34], allowed his teachers to submit their daily reports using the blog. Sheninger’s blog was
viewed by 6,500 people worldwide, and over 600 are constantly following the life of the principal
and his school. Interestingly, it was an incentive not only to report to the administration
on their work for teachers but also to share with others the experience they have gained by
introducing gadgets into teaching and the success stories achieved by the students in these
lessons. The topics of blog posts began gradually to expand, and teachers shared the system of
grades in school, their rubrics, how they interact with children outside of school, how gadgets
improve academic performance, and so on. A new perspective on education and blog creation
has transformed the lives of teachers and students. Firstly, the US government purchased the
latest equipment at the school Eric Sheninger writes proudly about on his blog [34]. Secondly,
teachers from around the world came to the school in New Jersey to learn about the experience.
In addition, the virtual reality company provided a program that allowed New Milford school
students and their teachers to attend virtual space meetings where children could ask questions
and virtual training courses were provided.
   The principal of Renner Elementary School, Teresa Tulipana, embraces social media as
a communication tool. Facebook and X accounts keep families abreast of school events and
happenings. She envisioned them as systems to provide calendar reminders. She thinks Facebook
is also an excellent tool for efficiently sharing our school’s academic and behavioural focus areas
in a fun and engaging way. Recently, a kindergarten teacher posted an Animoto highlighting
pictures from the Writer’s Workshop, which communicated the importance of writing at our



                                                  104

CTE Workshop Proceedings, 2024, Vol. 11, pp. 98-119                    https://doi.org/10.55056/cte.684


school. When the fourth grade completed Famous Missourian research projects, these were
posted so parents could understand the value and importance of their research. Social media has
also allowed the deployment of crucial professional development content in Renner Elementary
School. Recently, they used Blackboard, an educational social media tool, to host a virtual
faculty meeting. Through Blackboard, staff watched a short Rick Wormeli video on defining
mastery and then responded to reflection questions on a discussion board. This flexible format
allowed staff members to learn at a time that was convenient to their calendars and increased
engagement by assuring that every voice was heard [9].
   The principal of Tomahawk Creek Middle School says that her school’s teachers utilise social
media whenever they can. They currently have a Facebook page for the school and PTA. She has
found this a great way to get messages out to parents and students. Several teachers use Edmodo
to post discussions and assignments for their students and have reported remarkable success
using this tool. For example, one teacher had 25 kids on Edmodo the day he started using it.
They are considering implementing an X account next year to help get information out to the
community. Although this is not a replacement for standard means of communication (Web
sites, letters home, etc.), it is a great additional way to share information with the community.
   Regarding discipline issues, they attempt to address those who cause the issues. The technol-
ogy is here to stay, so they try to implement it where they can and deal with the trouble issues
when they arise. Thus far, they have had no problems using these means of communication [9].
   The principal of South Side Elementary School in Bristol, Connecticut, David Huber, thinks
X is more than just a social media platform. It is also a professional learning resource, a tool to
communicate with students’ families, and a way to showcase student achievements [11].
   One area of social network usage being the origin of its popularity in Ukraine was the
involvement in solving socially important issues of participants in the educational process. In
particular, Facebook has been used to inform, mobilise and raise funds for volunteers during the
Revolution of Dignity since November 2013. Therefore, the school administration resorts to this
tool to continue this work, assist and support the ATO warriors, and report on the work done.
In addition, content analysis of the pages of the administration and teachers of educational
institutions of Ukraine shows the effectiveness of similar charitable work in collecting assistance
among participants in the educational process supporting socially disadvantaged sections of
the population or volunteers as orphanages, older adults, rural libraries, hospitals, etc.
   In addition, not only prompt information but also targeted support directly to the participants
of the educational process is provided through the Facebook network and messengers, among
which Viber is the most popular for the management of the educational institution. It is about
involving many indifferent people to help the participants of the educational process who were
in an emergency like fire, accident, surgical treatment, etc. Such assistance massively reduces
fraud and disillusionment with charities through direct personal contacts.
   Another example of social network usage in school management is the establishment of
successful cooperation and communication between educational institutions of municipal
ownership and its public within the framework of project activities aimed at repairing or
arranging the territory and premises of educational institutions, as well as build-out of a
creative, development or inclusive environment. The key to the success of such projects is the
proper organisation of its advertising on social networks by the project’s author, in particular,
the administration of the educational institution, as well as the high activity of participants in



                                                 105

CTE Workshop Proceedings, 2024, Vol. 11, pp. 98-119                    https://doi.org/10.55056/cte.684


the educational process to support projects in social networks. 663 educational projects have
mainly won according to the results of the “Public Budget 2020” project out of 1564 projects in
13 categories having passed the planning and implementation stage in Kyiv, which is 42 % of all
projects [14].
   Nevertheless, social networks are equally threatening. The freedom of information distribu-
tion through social networks and communities, regardless of its content and quality, particularly
transforms the virtual Internet space into a risk zone for the spiritual and moral sphere of the
individual, shifting classical values and developing a new virtual culture.
   An exciting transformation occurred to the Facebook community “Parents SOS” founded
in June 2014 due to the initiative “talk on the Social Network” in order to discuss problems
related to education and assist parents in the case of mistreatment of their children in school or
kindergarten and initiate systemic changes in education.
   The community works according to a simple plan:

1) the situation is announced (at school or in education in general);
2) it is discovered how this situation complies with the law;
3) the conclusion what should be changed, whether the situation or the legislation, and they
   change it together.

   Although the public organisation initiated many changes in the education system through
civic initiatives during its existence, its members often resorted to systematic violation of
netiquette, resorting to rude, obscene, evaluative expressions and personal affronts in the
beginning. Instead of solving a problem, sometimes it was possible to be sunk in the information
rain of value judgments supporting a particular message have not received a solution to the
problem in the real world.
   It should be noted that the group’s administrators are currently working hard to address these
shortcomings, as evidenced by the article’s content analysis of the group’s 2019 publications. In
particular, publications are increasingly focusing on situations of success as systemic changes,
concrete victories over bureaucracy in education and extortion, legal clarification of the rights
and freedoms of participants in the educational process, and transparent algorithms for solving
the most common educational problems for all participants.
   So we have determined, based on our analysis, that the following types of social media are
the most popular for USA and Ukrainian schools:

   1. Blogs.
      A blog is a 21st-century newsletter. Blogs provide a two-way interaction and allow the
      school administration to integrate multimedia content in order to make the school popular.
      There is no better way to share strategies, ideas and success stories. Teaching blogs are
      no less popular, with the help of which teachers can effectively manage the independent
      extracurricular work of students, as well as create tasks aimed at improving the skills of
      speech activity. Learning different types of letters (search, viewing, familiarisation and
      studying) is facilitated by the unlimited ability to post links to different materials in any
      quantity. Also, blogs are in no way inferior in acquiring speaking and listening skills.
      This happens through podcasts, educational texts of radio programs, and videos freely
      available on the Internet. Integrating all the listed training methods into a blog allows



                                                 106

CTE Workshop Proceedings, 2024, Vol. 11, pp. 98-119                     https://doi.org/10.55056/cte.684


      you to listen to files repeatedly and, if necessary, stop and revise files. American Schools
      use Google Blogger, WordPress, Edutopia (San Rafael, California), FreeTech4Teachers
      (Maine), Rubicon (Portland, Oregon), Hands On As We Grow (Iowa), Class Tech Tips Blog
      (New Jersey), The Applicious Teacher (Orlando, Florida), Teaching Heart Blog (Pittsburgh,
      Pennsylvania) and other platforms. For example, Eric Sheninger, in addition to his official
      blog as Principal of New Milford [33], has created a professional blog to tell the story of
      the school’s digital transformation and learn from others interested in digital leadership.
      On the Internet, several impressive blogs by heads of school heads in Ukraine exist. In
      particular, the Google request “blog of a school principal” represents 19 million search
      results. However, it should be understood that the use of blogs in the management of
      general secondary education is often due to external circumstances as a requirement for
      certification. For this reason, the Internet is a whole of blogs formally created with a glut
      of popular articles, elements of plagiarism or unstructured content. Quality content can
      only be seen by executives who are passionate about this type of work and update the
      materials systematically. However, interviews with more than 400 education executives
      show that blogs in Ukraine currently need to be updated and can be entirely replaced by
      social networks. Therefore, a mere 5 % of heads of our online respondents use blogs in
      their management activities.
   2. Digital photo sharing.
      Photos can quickly depict and share student work, improvements and achievements.
      American and Ukrainian school principals and teachers take pictures of student projects
      and post them on Instagram. American teachers also use Pics4Learning during classroom
      observations. They share photos from their Instagram accounts with others, such as X.
   3. Video platform.
      Creating a YouTube, TeacherTube, SchoolTube channel, or Vine account for the school
      allows them to record and share educational and social processes. Teachers and adminis-
      tration of American schools share live events such as school concerts in real-time using
      tools like Ustream, ClassVR, etc. In Ukraine, the principals use YouTube.
   4. X.
      X, the best-known free microblogging application, is useful for quickly exchanging
      thoughts, ideas, and information. American scientists were among the first users of the
      social network X. During the first years, reports of scientific conferences, symposiums,
      research citations, etc dominated it. Tweets (from the former X name, Twitter) are a
      dynamic combination of text, images, videos, and website links. Having created a hashtag
      for the school, one could share a conversation with related parties with the ability to
      search for any problematic topic identified through X. At the beginning of each school
      year, American school leaders send parents a letter describing how to create an X account
      and to set up options for receiving text messages. The ability to receive X updates on its
      terms makes it unlike any traditional communication tool [31].
   5. Facebook.
      The world-famous resource Facebook has emerged as an academic social network. Initially,
      the website was available only for students at Harvard University. Then, registration was
      opened to other universities in Boston and, later, to students of all educational institutions
      in the USA. All the above tools could be integrated or published on the Facebook page



                                                 107

CTE Workshop Proceedings, 2024, Vol. 11, pp. 98-119                    https://doi.org/10.55056/cte.684


      [38]. It is the favourite social media among Ukrainian and American school principals
      and teachers.

   It is impossible to create and maintain confidence in the institution’s operation being manda-
tory. Creating requirements for effective educational activities is only possible with prompt
and complete information. That is why the administration should organise the activity of the
educational institution under the conditions of information openness and communication with
the participants of the educational process and the community.
   Information transparency is ensured by the availability of educational facilities, including
social networks—information transparency in the educational institution to inform the partici-
pants of the educational process. The educational institution decides what to inform and how
to do it. The primary principle of information distribution is to report essential data to parents,
who are the most concerned and critical audience.
   It is for the purpose of enabling local educational managers to communicate quickly, correctly
and clearly, not to be afraid of criticism and be able to turn to crisis situations, an online
course “Effective Communications for Educational Managers” has been developed by the public
organisation “Smart Education” powered by the EdEra online platform [8] and viewed by 4,400
people during 10 months of 2019.
   In order to be successful communicators in the modern information space, its developers
offer:

    • be persistent and consistent in sending a message, ideas and facts, the audience will be
      grateful for accurate navigation in the chaos of educational information;
    • repeat the message many times in different formats through interviews, events, photos,
      infographics, etc, aiming to be heard;
    • know what bothers and what interests your audiences, and build your business and
      communication against this background;
    • always keep efforts and resources on the mission of the institution;
    • focus on the simplicity and clearness of messages;
    • has unique inspirational stories;
    • get your audiences as close as possible.

   Much attention is paid to anti-crisis communications, whose goal is to immediately and firmly
abandon attempts to conceal any unpredictable or unpleasant event in the educational institution.
The overall penetration of modern communications into public life makes it impossible to conceal
any information. One of the primary principles of public communication should be remembered:
a person who first reported the event largely determines the further development of its media
coverage.
   The unpredictable event message should consist of three required components answering
the following questions:

    • “what happened?” – provide full information on the event, immediately blocking or at
      least substantially reducing the possibility of misinformation on it;




                                                 108

CTE Workshop Proceedings, 2024, Vol. 11, pp. 98-119                    https://doi.org/10.55056/cte.684


    • “what are we doing?” – the school demonstrates its proactive stance in addressing the
      problem, what has been taken to remedy the problem, who has been further involved
      and informed;
    • “what to expect?” – an uncomfortable state of uncertainty is removed or significantly
      reduced for the person, and the most probable developments are shown.

   Lastly, you should always report how the problem is resolved. Given that, you also should be
frank. If the problem cannot be finally resolved at the school level, it should be revealed and
reported on further steps to resolve it [17].
   Since information distribution and communication are grounded on the processes of dissemi-
nation and exchange of information, it is crucial to know how these processes are implemented
and how they can be effectively organised. Building quality information distribution by the
head to the participants of the educational process and the community can contribute in many
ways to improving the level of media literacy of the administration and teaching staff of the
institution.
   The main characteristic of social networks is the rapid and prompt dissemination of informa-
tion. A prime example is sharing of “innocent” fakes at the request of the school administration
with good intention of preventing the consequences of participation in the games “Blue Cat”,
“Run or Die”, “Momo”, “Candy” and a new game “Bounce!” through social networks by parents.
Low media literacy of participants of the educational process, lack of ability to recognise the
signs of fake news, and poor orientation of critical perception of information contribute to the
testing of parents of various technologies of measuring the status of the audience and channels
of information dissemination on social networks.
   Information security should start with every participant in the educational process, especially
with the school administration, and it should become a daily habit for us not to become the
object of fake dissemination, a tool for the introduction of dirty technologies, a convenient toy
in the game of manipulators. Such results are summed up in their posts by Ukrainian media
educators Inna Ivanova (review of the “Candy” fakes, September 2018) and Svitlana Izbash
(review of the “Bounce!” fakes, February 2020), as a result of this preventing parents from
“advertising” such games.
   The school principal should also consider other types of danger that students may encounter
using any network, and that should be taken into account in the institution’s policy:

    • content (access to information not intended for children of appropriate age);
    • behaviour (offering actions that could endanger child safety, fraud);
    • dangerous contacts (chatting, file sharing, messengers).

   In order to avoid such risks, a school principal should develop a policy on the safe use of the
Internet, which provides:

    • content filters;
    • availability of antivirus programs and their timely updating;
    • use of Internet resources during training sessions under the teacher’s control;
    • monitoring the page on social networks for placing unauthorised information on it;



                                                 109

CTE Workshop Proceedings, 2024, Vol. 11, pp. 98-119                   https://doi.org/10.55056/cte.684


    • providing educators and students with training on the safe use of the Internet and the
      development of end-to-end information and digital competence;
    • online culture enhancement of the communication participants of the educational process;
    • preservation of personal data of participants of the educational process [5].


4. Challenges that school leaders faced during the pandemic
The COVID-19 crisis has unexpectedly and dramatically changed school leaders’ roles. The
unprecedented nature of this situation means there is no set direction for them to follow. School
leaders are like actors in a play where the story, the script and costumes have all changed
mid-performance, and they are on stage improvising to adjust to their new role [30].
   The forced mass introduction of distance learning technologies during the pandemic [39] has
exacerbated social media use in school management.
   From April 8 to 15, 2020, the State Education Quality Service of Ukraine conducted an
anonymous online survey of 3.9 thousand school principals, 43.4 thousand teachers, 120.5
thousand parents and 44.1 thousand students of 9-11th grades [2].
   From the point of view of our research, we were interested in the results of a survey of
principals, who make up more than 25% of school principals in Ukraine. 49.95% of them work
in rural areas, 41.98% – in cities and 8.07% – in urban settlements.
   Most parents and students in grades 9–11 who participated in the survey confirmed that for
the period of quarantine, there is distance learning in all subjects of the invariant component:

    • 102,380 parents (85%);
    • 36,425 students (83%).

  The directors of general secondary educational institutions also assured that 97% of edu-
cational institutions for quarantine teach students using distance learning technologies. The
preference for distance learning is divided in half:

    • 55% of surveyed students (24,087 people) and 50% of parents (60,569 people) were positive;
    • 45% of students (20,001 people) and 48% of parents (57,858 people) gave a negative
      response.

   After completing the quarantine, 41% of the surveyed teachers (17,872 people) indicated their
desire to use distance learning technologies, including social media, and 54% (23,397 people)
would use them partially. Only 5% of teachers (2,096 people) stated they would not turn to
distance learning technologies in the future.
   The survey results of principals also confirmed that almost 96.9% of general secondary
educational institutions (GSEI) students are taught using distance learning technologies during
the quarantine period. The majority of leaders (75.9%) noted that the entire teaching staff was
involved. However, in almost 20.1% of schools, distance learning is provided only by teachers
with computer equipment and Internet access. At the same time, 3.12% of the surveyed (GSEI)
leaders stated that their school did not switch to remote work mode.



                                                 110

CTE Workshop Proceedings, 2024, Vol. 11, pp. 98-119                     https://doi.org/10.55056/cte.684


   Under quarantine, educational institutions use different modes of distance learning, programs
and digital services. GSEI leaders noted that online learning is mainly used for distance work.
The most effective are services with the ability to assess the material’s assimilation level – they
are used by 44.88%, without the possibility of evaluation – 20.27%. Asynchronous learning with
the ability to assess the material’s assimilation level is carried out by 20.55%
   According to the report, the issue of establishing effective interaction with participants in the
educational process is identified as one of the most difficult in the implementation of distance
learning along with technical support, methodological training and organisational issues [23].
   As noted in the “Global Guide 2020”, in the USA, where available, Facebook, Instagram, and
LinkedIn are the dominant social media platforms for education. X and YouTube are also popular
social platforms for education. Virtual meeting platforms such as Zoom and Google Meet were
used to expand and enhance outreach [12].
   We analysed the results of Project Tomorrow, an education nonprofit that runs the ongoing
Speak Up Research Project [10]. The latest data gives responses from 110,467 K-12 students,
11,731 teachers and librarians, 1,128 school and district level administrators, 11,749 parents and
1,532 community members collected between March 16 2020 and June 30, 2020 [1].
   The situation in which schools were connected with the pandemic opened new opportunities
for more students to communicate with their teachers regularly using email. Email communica-
tions with teachers and students in middle school, for example, increased 33% during school
closures: The percentage of students in grades 3–5 who regularly email their teachers also
increased from 8% to 16%. Over three-quarters of students in grades 6–12 (77%) report that
personal emails are now a standard mode of communication with their teachers. Students report
that this new communications avenue provided more efficient and effective ways for them to
get feedback from their teachers and help them solve learning challenges with just-in-time
support.
   The new environment has also accelerated the adoption of text messaging between students
and teachers as a communication modality. In 2015, only 14% of teachers said that they were
using texting to communicate with students. Though teachers regularly report using text
messages and other forms of social media to communicate with colleagues (57%) and parents
(28%), their adoption of this tool to communicate directly with students, individually or as a
class, has not increased in the past five years.
   Relative to teacher communications, middle school students are united in their preference for
three types of digital tools: personal emails (56%), text messages (55%) and auto phone messages
(49%).
   The sudden shift to digital learning due to the pandemic-induced school closures required
many school and district leaders to think differently about the purpose of school, new modalities
for instruction, and how to effectively harness a wide range of digital tools to support learning
continuity. In some cases, administrators relaxed district rules about using personal devices,
mobile apps and social media accounts to help facilitate efficiency and effectiveness in this
unprecedented time. For example, while most districts did not encourage teachers to text
message students before the school closures, texting increased significantly during the school
closure period as both students and teachers (as well as parents) found the usage to be highly
effective. Given both the value of those enhanced communications channels and the continued
uncertainty in school formats during a pandemic, it is likely that more digital tools, even



                                                 111

CTE Workshop Proceedings, 2024, Vol. 11, pp. 98-119                   https://doi.org/10.55056/cte.684


including new social media platforms, will emerge to support student-teacher communications.
   District technology leaders (54%) say they understand the importance of putting in place
safeguards to protect student data when instituting a new digital initiative or adopting new
technologies to support instruction. However, only 17% of school districts use a risk dashboard to
identify students in trouble or need adult intervention based on their communications messages
over the school network.
   This issue of communications over the school or district network versus a student or teacher
using a personal smartphone and their own data plan to transmit messages is also an important
consideration. Efficiency of communications was a chief concern during the school closures.
Thus, as documented, many students and teachers gravitated quickly to their accounts to help
facilitate those interactions. However, 52% of district technology leaders say they encour-
age teachers and students not to mix personal and school accounts and applications in their
communications.
   The school principals say they would like new teachers to learn to effectively leverage social
media tools for student engagement and communications within their teacher preparation
programs. With a new mindset about the value of technology to support enhanced student-
teacher communications, the opportunity for effectively leveraging new tools in the classroom,
whether an online classroom facilitated through Google or the physics lab on the second floor,
appears promising.
   For the dissemination of school information American school principals use such social media:
58% – Instagram, 58% – YouTube videos, 53% – Snapchat, 58% – X, 47% – Text messages [1].
   In another survey, “2019 Social Media Trends in Education Report” [15] developed by Class
Intercom, we observe that 95% of schools use social media to communicate during the pandemic.
85% of schools report using photos to share virtual, in-person, and hybrid learning. Another
79% use video to share what is happening in their schools and district. 37% of schools are
allowing students to contribute to their social content. 40% of districts have up to 10 users with
administrator access to social accounts. Nearly 20% of schools are investing in paid social.
   However, school and district leaders must be cognizant of protecting student data and
student safety when using these new online tools for communication with peers and teachers.
Additionally, as these tools become more pervasive, districts will want to fully understand their
legal obligations in terms of retaining messages and their responsibility and accountability for
staff usage of these tools.


5. Ways to prepare school leaders for using of social media in
   school management in a pandemic
According to a survey conducted by the State Education Inspectorate of Ukraine, parents’ lack of
support and understanding of the situation is recognised as a problem by 28.2% of respondents
from 3.9 thousand school principals [23].
   The things that can contribute to this:

   1. Professional training of school leaders in the master’s degree “Management of
      the educational institution” and “Educational Administration”



                                                 112

CTE Workshop Proceedings, 2024, Vol. 11, pp. 98-119                     https://doi.org/10.55056/cte.684


   Training of future managers of educational institutions is carried out according to the
educational-professional program “Management of educational institution” speciality 073 “Man-
agement” in the field of knowledge 07 “Management and Administration”, approved by the
Academic Council of the University of Educational Management of the NAES of Ukraine taking
into account the Standard of Higher Education for the second (master’s) level of higher education
[27].
   This program aims to train new education managers who can identify and solve complex,
specialised, practical problems in managing educational institutions, their units, and subsystems
to meet the educational needs of the state, society, educational institutions and students.
   The normative content of training of higher education, formulated in terms of learning
outcomes in higher education in the field 073 “Management” for the second (master’s) level of
higher education specified in the disciplines of general training and free choice of curriculum
for candidates educational program “Management of educational institution” of the second
(master’s) level of higher education [27].
   In the context of our study, the educational program provides for the acquisition of general
competencies, including the ability to think abstractly, analyse, synthesise and establish relation-
ships between phenomena and processes (general competence 1); the ability to communicate
with representatives of various professional groups and in the international context (general
competence 3); skills of using information and communication technologies for search, process-
ing, analysis of information from various sources and decision making (general competence 4)
and acquisition of professional (special-professional) competencies of the speciality (professional
competence 6), including the ability to create and organise effective communications in the
management process) [18].
   In the United States, future school principals are trained in the Master in Educational Ad-
ministration program because to become a high school principal, one must have a master’s
degree in school administration and become certified as a school administrator or principal. In
the learning process, future education managers train educators to become school principals
and administrators, focusing on serving diverse educational communities and fostering student
achievement [4]. A school administrator or principal must be certified. For example, The
Principals’ Training Center for Practicing and Aspiring Principals in International Schools offers
a course “Technology Leadership”; in the process of studying, students should know how a
principal juggles the demands of digital communication, social media and digital environments
in a school setting, how can digital tools and environments be utilised to create sustainable and
vibrant learning communities etc. [4].

   2. Introduction of school principals with the topics and opportunities of massive
      open online courses (MOOC)

   The opportunity to study at a convenient time, free access to the latest information, teaching
materials, modern technologies and practical cases, and the opportunity to learn from the best
universities and teachers in the world have led to the widespread popularity of MOOC among
its students.
   Among the proposed MOOC, we have selected courses in three areas that contribute to school
principals’ readiness in the United States and Ukraine to use social media in school management.



                                                 113

CTE Workshop Proceedings, 2024, Vol. 11, pp. 98-119                            https://doi.org/10.55056/cte.684


These include media literacy and critical thinking, cybersecurity, and establishing effective
online communications.
   Critical thinking and the educational process built on its foundations have become the basis
of educational reforms in the world’s leading countries over the last ten years [28, 32, 37]. The
World Economic Forum in Davos regularly lists the skills needed for a successful career. In
recent years, critical thinking has risen in ranking these skills from fourth place (skills for 2015)
to second place (skills that will be important in 2020s). The ability to think critically ensures
scientific, technological and social progress and is the key to democracy, and education plays a
crucial role in its development. Critical thinking provides independent and responsible action
and self-improvement (table 3).

Table 3
MOOCs, represented at English and Ukrainian platforms, aimed at developing media literacy and critical
thinking for school principals.
   The results of monitoring of Ukraine                  The results of monitoring of the USA
   (1) “Critical Thinking for Educators” on the plat-    (1) Media LIT: Overcoming Information Over-
   form Prometheus                                       load (Arizona State University) on edX
   (2)“Educational tools of critical thinking” on        (2) Sorting Truth From Fiction: Civic Online
   the platform Prometheus                               Reasoning (Massachusetts Institute of Technol-
                                                         ogy) on edX
   (3) “The science of everyday thinking” on the         (3) Making Sense of News (University of Hong
   platform Prometheus                                   Kong) on edX
   (4) “English for media literacy” on the platform      (4) Fake News, Facts, and Alternative Facts (The
   Prometheus                                            University of Michigan) on edX
   (5)“Media literacy” on the platform Prometheus        (5) Fake News (Davidson College) on edX
   (6) “Media literacy: practical skills” on the plat-   (6) Critical Thinking: Fundamentals of Good
   form Prometheus                                       Reasoning (IsraelX) on edX
   (7) “Factcheck: trust-check” on the platform          (7) Problem Solving and Critical Thinking Skills
   EdEra                                                 (Fullbridge) on edX
   (8) “Internet Verification” by VUM online             (8) Global Media, War, and Technology (The
                                                         University of Queensland) on edX
   (9) “Media Literacy for Citizens” from IREX in        (9) Understanding Media: Introduction to Me-
   partnership with the Academy of Ukrainian             dia Literacy and Representation (The University
   Press and StopFake                                    of Newcastle Australia) on FutureLearn
   (10) “News Literacy” by Media Detector                (10) Disinformation, Misinformation, and Fake
                                                         News Teach-Out (University of Michigan) on
                                                         FutureLearn
   (11) “Very Verified: an online media literacy         (11) Developing Literacy: A Journey from Still
   course” on the platform EdEra                         Image to Film (Into Film) on FutureLearn
                                                         (12) Making Sense of Data in the Media (The
                                                         University of Sheffield) on FutureLearn
                                                         (13) Making Sense of the News: News Literacy
                                                         Lessons for Digital Citizens by Coursera

   Information and its timely access provide the maximum competitive advantages. However,
it is equally essential to be able to protect this information. Our MOOC content analysis



                                                     114

CTE Workshop Proceedings, 2024, Vol. 11, pp. 98-119                         https://doi.org/10.55056/cte.684


showed several courses aimed at learning exactly how and why a person can be attacked in the
information space and how to improve their information security, which will further develop
an effective program to protect personal information resources (table 4).

Table 4
MOOCs, represented on English and Ukrainian platforms, aimed at developing cybersecurity for school
principals.
   The results of monitoring of Ukraine               The results of monitoring of the USA
   (1) “Digital Security and Online Communica-        (1) Introduction to Cybersecurity (University
   tions” by VUM online                               of Washington) on edX
   (2) ”Information security in the digital world”    (2) Information Security - Introduction to Infor-
   by VUM online                                      mation Security (New York University) on edX
   (3) "Media literacy for educators" by              (3) Introduction to Cyber Security (The Open
   Prometheus                                         University)

  During the pandemic, the issues of fast and consistent information reporting about the
peculiarities of the educational process through various media became especially relevant. The
principals must be ready to convey information accurately, focus on the main thing, and focus
on the simplicity and accessibility of messages through social media that are most adequate to
the audience. A number of MOOCs are dedicated to this topic (table 5).

Table 5
MOOCs, represented on English and Ukrainian platforms, aimed at establishing effective online commu-
nication among school principals.
   The results of monitoring of Ukraine               The results of monitoring of the USA
   (1) “Communication tools for reputation build-     (1) From Digital Technologies to Social Media
   ing” by Prometheus                                 (Curtin University) on edX
   (2) “Digital communications in the global          (2) Understanding Media: Introduction to Me-
   space” by Prometheus                               dia Literacy and Representation (The University
                                                      of Newcastle Australia) on FutureLearn
   (3) “How to understand social networks.            (3) Developing Literacy: A Journey from Still
   Course for journalists” by VUM online              Image to Film (Into Film) on FutureLearn
   (4)“Effective communications for educational       (4) Respecting Our Differences Online (Sam-
   managers” by EdEra                                 sung) on FutureLearn
   (5) “Media literacy for educators” by              (5) Smart Media Communication by XuetangX
   Prometheus
                                                      (6) Ethical Social Media by Coursera


   3. Certification training of school principals according to the relevant programs
  In particular, some media literacy training programs developed by the Academy of Ukrainian
Press are actively implemented by the Institutes of Professional Development of Teachers,
including school principals [20].
  In addition, 11 special courses for training school principals to work in the digital society,
aimed at establishing effective online and Cybersecurity communications, have been developed



                                                 115

CTE Workshop Proceedings, 2024, Vol. 11, pp. 98-119                   https://doi.org/10.55056/cte.684


since the beginning of the pandemic by the Ukrainian Open University of Postgraduate Education
[35].
   The duration of such courses is 1 ECTS credit / 30 hours. Based on the training results, a
certificate is issued under the University of Education Management license.
   Media Management and Leadership are offered in higher education institutions in the United
States. The course is designed for 3 ECTS credits (90 hours). This course aims to give students a
survey of some of the latest management and leadership theories, including those encouraging
a new sense of social responsibility. It also allows students to apply these theories to a number
of different competitive, structural, motivational, strategic, and organisational issues in the
media world by writing original case studies and solving problems in existing case studies [7].


6. Conclusions
This comparative analysis reveals several key findings regarding social media usage in school
management in Ukraine and the United States:

    • Facebook, YouTube, Instagram and X have emerged as the most widely used platforms in
      both countries. Snapchat, WhatsApp and Viber also have significant usage.
    • The main goals are communicating with stakeholders, showcasing school activities and
      achievements, building relationships and facilitating collaboration. During the pandemic,
      social media became essential for virtual education and outreach.
    • Challenges include privacy concerns, security risks, digital literacy gaps, and spreading
      misinformation. The pandemic exacerbated these issues with rapid virtual transitions.
    • Training programs via master’s degrees, MOOCs, and professional development aim to
      build competencies around media literacy, critical thinking, cybersecurity, and strategic
      communication. More development is needed, especially for new virtual contexts.
    • While adoption is more advanced in the US, Ukraine rapidly increased social media use
      for education during the pandemic. This catalyst role suggests it will become further
      embedded in both systems.

  Social media has transitioned from an optional novelty to an indispensable communications
ecosystem in school management. Leaders must continuously evaluate risks and opportunities
while building competencies to use these technologies most effectively. More research should
investigate the long-term strategic integration of social media to fully leverage its advantages
for advancing educational aims in diverse contexts.


References
 [1] 2020 – 90 Days That Changed K-12 Teaching & Learning, 2020. Available from: https:
     //tomorrow.org/speakup/2020-90-Days-That-Changed-K-12-Teaching-Learning.html.
 [2] Analitychna dovidka shchodo orhanizatsiyi dystantsiynoho navchannya u zakladakh
     zahal’noyi seredn’oyi osvity v umovakh karantynu (za rezul’tatamy onlayn-anketuvannya
     uchasnykiv osvitn’oho protsesu), 2020. Available from: http://tinyurl.com/259mm3bd.



                                                 116

CTE Workshop Proceedings, 2024, Vol. 11, pp. 98-119                   https://doi.org/10.55056/cte.684


 [3] Azhnyuk, Y., 2012. Shcho take sotsialni media i khto taki SMM-menedzhery. Available
     from: https://yaroslav.azhnyuk.com/post/27117182331/%D1%89%D0%BE-%D1%82%D0%
     B0%D0%BA%D0%B5-%D1%81%D0%BE%D1%86%D1%96%D0%B0%D0%BB%D1%8C%D0%
     BD%D1%96-%D0%BC%D0%B5%D0%B4%D1%96%D0%B0-%D1%96-%D1%85%D1%82%D0%
     BE-%D1%82%D0%B0%D0%BA%D1%96-smm-%D0%BC%D0%B5%D0%BD%D0%B5%D0%
     B4%D0%B6%D0%B5%D1%80%D0%B8.
 [4] Best Online Master’s in Educational Administration 2021, 2021. Available from: https:
     //thebestschools.org/rankings/best-online-masters-educational-administration/.
 [5] Bobrovskyy, M., Horbachov, S. and Zaplotynska, O., 2019. Abetka dlya dyrektora. Kyiv:
     State Service of Education Quality of Ukraine.
 [6] Comscore, 2014.        Major Mobile Milestones in May: Apps Now Drive Half of
     All Time Spent on Digital. Available from: https://www.comscore.com/Insights/Blog/
     Major-Mobile-Milestones-in-May-Apps-Now-Drive-Half-of-All-Time-Spent-on-Digital.
 [7] Course Catalog: Media management and leadership, 2020. Available from: https://courses.
     newschool.edu/courses/NMDM5303/.
 [8] EdEra, 2024. Available from: https://courses.ed-era.com/.
 [9] Education World, 2012. Using Social Media: Tips for School Leaders. Available from:
     https://www.educationworld.com/a_admin/social-media-tips-administrators.shtml.
[10] Evans, J.A., 2020. Digital learning during the pandemic: Emerging Evidence of an Education
     Transformation. Available from: https://tomorrow.org/speakup/pdfs/2020%20Speak%
     20Up%20National%20Report.pdf.
[11] Friedman, J., 2019.            How and Why to Use Social Media as a School
     or District Leader.                  Available from:       https://www.hmhco.com/blog/
     how-and-why-to-use-social-media-as-a-school-or-district-leader.
[12] Global Guide 2020, 2020. Available from: https://educationusa.state.gov/sites/default/files/
     EducationUSA-Global-Guide-2020.pdf.
[13] GWI, 2024. The ultimate social media trends report: Global social media trends worth
     sharing in 2024. Available from: https://www.gwi.com/reports/social.
[14] Hromadskyi biudzhet mista, 2022. Available from: https://kyivcity.gov.ua/finansy_ta_
     biudzhet/biudzhet/gromadskiy_byudzhet_mista/.
[15] Johnson, J., 2021. Social Media Trends in Education for 2021. Available from: https:
     //classintercom.com/webinars/social-media-in-education-reporting-findings/.
[16] Kaplan, A. and Haenlein, M., 2010. Users of the World, Unite! The Challenges and
     Opportunities of Social Media. Business Horizons, 53(1), pp.59–68. Available from: https:
     //doi.org/10.1016/j.bushor.2009.09.003.
[17] Kobernik, I. and Krasnova, K., 2019.                   Efektyvni komunikatsii dlia os-
     vitnikh upravlintsiv.           Kyiv.       Available from:    https://nus.org.ua/articles/
     posibnyk-efektyvni-komunikatsiyi-dlya-osvitnih-upravlintsiv/.
[18] Makhynia, T., 2018. Preparation of future education managers during the reform of
     Ukrainian education. European science, 4(1), pp.153–158.
[19] Markova, Y.S., 2014. Using social networks to organize students’ independent work. CTE
     Workshop Proceedings, 2, p.147–151. Available from: https://doi.org/10.55056/cte.198.
[20] Navchalni prohramy, 2022.           Available from: https://www.aup.com.ua/mediaosv/
     navchalni-programy/.



                                                 117

CTE Workshop Proceedings, 2024, Vol. 11, pp. 98-119                    https://doi.org/10.55056/cte.684


[21] O’Reilly, T., 2005. What is Web 2.0: Design Patterns and Business Models for the Next
     Generation of Software. Available from: https://www.oreilly.com/pub/a/web2/archive/
     what-is-web-20.html.
[22] Papanikolopoulou Arco, L.J., 2023. Possibilities and limitations of social media in education
     processes during the pandemic: The teachers perspective. CTE Workshop Proceedings, 10,
     p.315–325. Available from: https://doi.org/10.55056/cte.552.
[23] Pavlik, J. and McIntosh, S., 2018. Converging Media: A New Introduction to Mass Communi-
     cation. 6th ed. New York: Oxford University Press.
[24] Pew Research Center, 2024. Social Media Fact Sheet. Available from: https://www.
     pewresearch.org/internet/fact-sheet/social-media/.
[25] Pocheptsov, G., 2012. Control of the mind. Kyiv: KM-Academy.
[26] Primbs, S., 2016. Social Media für Journalisten: redaktionell arbeiten mit Facebook, Twitter &
     Co. Wiesbaden: Springer VS. Available from: https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-658-07359-6.
[27] Pro zatverdzhennya standartu vyshchoyi osvity za spetsial’nistyu 073 “Menedzh-
     ment” dlya druhoho (mahisters’koho) rivnya vyshchoyi osvity nakaz Minister-
     stva osvity i nauky Ukrayiny No. 959 dated July 10, 2019, 2019.                     Available
     from: https://mon.gov.ua/storage/app/media/vishcha-osvita/zatverdzeni%20standarty/
     2019/07/12/073-menedzhment-magistr.pdfAccessed16Sep2020.
[28] Prykhodkina, N., 2020. Features of the development of media education in the United
     States of America. Scientific Journal of Polonia University, 38(1-1), pp.186–192. Available
     from: https://doi.org/10.23856/3825.
[29] Prykhodkina, N. and Makhynia, T., 2020. Using of Social Media in School Management:
     Experience of Ukraine and United States of America. Educational Dimension, 3, p.181–198.
     Available from: https://doi.org/10.31812/educdim.v55i0.3952.
[30] Sampat, S. and Oommen, A., 2020. 3 recommendations to support school leaders dur-
     ing the coronavirus pandemic. Available from: https://www.globalpartnership.org/blog/
     3-recommendations-support-school-leaders-during-coronavirus-pandemic.
[31] Scott, D.M., 2017. The New Rules of Marketing and PR: How to Use Social Media, Blogs, News
     Releases, Online Video, and Viral Marketing to Reach Buyers Directly. New Jersey: Wiley.
[32] Shekhavtsova, S., Koknova, T. and Shekhavtsov, M., 2021. Using web technologies in the
     process of development of students’ critical thinking. Educational Technology Quarterly,
     2021(2), p.310–330. Available from: https://doi.org/10.55056/etq.28.
[33] Sheninger, E., 2024. A Principal’s Reflections: Reflections on teaching, learning, and
     leadership. Available from: https://esheninger.blogspot.com.
[34] Sheninger, E.C., 2014. Digital Leadership: Changing Paradigms for Changing Times. Corwin.
[35] Spetsialni kursy, 2024.         Available from: https://uvu.org.ua/elektronni-resursy/
     spetsialni-kursy/.
[36] Stephens, K., 2011. Social media in school emergency management: Using new media
     technology to improve emergency management communications. Available from: https:
     //eric.ed.gov/?id=ED543578.
[37] Stupak, K., 2020. Implementation of reflective model of educational practice in the modern
     Finnish school. Educational Dimension, 3, p.46–59. Available from: https://doi.org/10.
     31812/educdim.v55i0.4378.
[38] Thornley, J., 2008. What is social media? Available from: https://propr.ca/2008/



                                                 118

CTE Workshop Proceedings, 2024, Vol. 11, pp. 98-119                https://doi.org/10.55056/cte.684


     what-is-social-media/.
[39] Tkachuk, V.V., Yechkalo, Y.V., Semerikov, S.O., Khotskina, S.M., Markova, O.M. and
     Taraduda, A.S., 2022. Distance learning during COVID-19 pandemic: mobile information
     and communications technology overview. Educational Dimension, 7, p.282–291. Available
     from: https://doi.org/10.31812/educdim.7612.
[40] Yadav, M., 2023. Mining student coding behaviors in a programming MOOC: there are
     no actionable learner stereotypes. Educational Technology Quarterly, 2023(4), p.458–480.
     Available from: https://doi.org/10.55056/etq.611.
[41] Zhdanova, M., 2019. The Social Web: Social Media Types. Available from: http:
     //mediadriver.online/sotsialni_media/riznovidi-sotsialnih-media/.




                                                 119