Id: 809792
                         Participatory Educational Research (PER)
                         Vol.9(1), pp. 362-387, January 2022
                         Available online at http://www.perjournal.com
                         ISSN: 2148-6123
                         http://dx.doi.org/10.17275/per.22.20.9.1



    Developing a guiding model of educational leadership in higher education
          during the COVID-19 pandemic: A grounded theory study

                                                  Gürol Yokuş*
                  Department of Educational Sciences, Sinop University, Sinop, Turkey
                                   ORCID: 0000-0002-4849-5829
Article history                   This research aims to explore educational leadership during the COVID-
Received:                         19 pandemic from the perspectives of higher education students and to
13.10.2020
                                  develop a guiding model of educational leadership for ‘new normal’ with
Received in revised form:         the novel emerging components. This research is conducted using
18.07.2021                        grounded theory method and social network analysis. The first study
                                  group includes 32 participants, second study group includes another 26
Accepted:                         participants, and final group includes 12 participants. Participants in all
15.08.2021
                                  groups are university students studying in a higher education institution
Key words:                        in Turkey. Written documents, personal interviews and group discussion
Leadership for the new normal,    are used for data collection. Based on analysis, a guiding model is
Social network analysis,          developed which illustrates the concept of educational leadership for the
Educational leadership in times   new normal, which is composed of “networking, enhancing educational
of pandemic,
                                  practices, calmness & compassion, analytical & strategical thinking, and
Grounded theory of educational
leadership                        transparency”. Also, the social network analysis shows that “encouraging
                                  online communities, promoting social interaction, creating a safe and
                                  inclusive learning environment, providing learning resources, leading
                                  under pressure, emphasizing optimism, making data-driven decisions” are
                                  cornerstones in terms of educational leadership for the new normal. In
                                  addition to those substantially noted key concepts, some higher education
                                  students also seem to be in need of some other aspects of educational
                                  leadership such as inspiration for learning, open dialogue, risk planning
                                  and leveraging capacity of community. The participants also indicate that
                                  successful educational leadership is about understanding others’
                                  perspectives, rather than sticking to leader’s perspective.


Introduction
        In the 21st century, the world has witnessed the COVID-19 pandemic which forces
humans of all colours and ages to a new style of living which is called as the new normal
(Akbari & Pratomo, 2021; Fleming & Millar, 2019; Francisco & Nuqui, 2020; Strack, Kugel,
Dyrchs & Tauber, 2020) and this new normal reflects unfamiliar changes not only in social
life, economy, health but also in educational institutions (de Moura, 2020; Murashkin &
Tyrväinen, 2020). It has become so clear that leadership is one of the crucial concepts in this
pandemic in educational institutions of most communities across the world. As implied by
Harper (2020), COVID-19 is affecting higher education institutions in terms of most aspects


*
    Correspondency: gyokus@sinop.edu.tr

                                       Participatory Educational Research (PER), 9 (1);362-387, 1 January 2022



such as teaching, learning and employment. As educators, there is a need for a full
understanding of what has changed in students’ perceptions of educational leadership during
COVID-19 crisis and creating necessary educational policies for addressing students’ needs in
this globally alarming threat. As thinking on new normal in education, the digitalization has
been a bridge of hope for millions of students from primary school to higher education, and
especially traditional roles of educational leaders have changed during this new unfamiliar
situation. Social distance principle and students’ making use of digital and virtual platforms
lead to a change in educational leaders’ role of leading, inspiring and transforming (Unesco,
2020). This change is also felt in higher education (Harris, 2020; Marshall, Roache & Moody-
Marchall, 2020; Varela & Fedynich, 2020). Educational leaders should be adapted to this new
normal with starting from understanding higher education learner’s leadership perceptions.
Educational leadership is becoming increasingly complex as the society becomes more at the
local, state, and federal levels (Vogel, 2012). The role of educational leaders is of
considerable importance in higher education for many reasons, as explained by Amey (2006)
that educational leaders create learning environments with cultural awareness, serve as
collaborators in developing knowledge and engagement, serve as facilitators who promote
collaboration, collective responsibility, an interest in common good; and serve as leaders via
partnerships in web-like and non-hierarchical systems.

When we have a look at literature, it is easily noticed that leadership has been a research topic
in business area; however, there are insufficient but growing number of studies which
examine leadership practices in higher education and leadership in the educational
institutions, these studies especially review the new styles of leadership such as
transformational leadership (Harris, Moran & Moran, 2004; Jameel & Ahmad 2019). This
study stresses the need for an adaptable educational leadership when educators have to adapt
to the changing risky situations just like the COVID-19 pandemic. This study also attempts to
explore leadership from transformative and socially responsible perspectives because
educational leadership in higher education is supposed to include instructional, affective, and
social dimension both in formal and non-formal settings.

By its nature, leadership is situational and contextual (Antonakis & Schyns 2012). Therefore,
it gets complicated to explain leadership with one prescribed definition; but the current
literature on leadership in higher education gives us considerable insights (Middlehurst,
Goreham & Woodfield, 2009). To note, when it comes to level of higher education, there is a
growing interest in defining what leadership means. For instance, Juntrasook (2014) identifies
four overarching means of leadership in higher education: ‘leadership as position’, ‘leadership
as performance’, ‘leadership as practice’ and ‘leadership as professional role model’.
Leadership as position means taking on a formal role in a headship position. Leadership as
performance means demonstrating competency and accomplishment in professional contexts.
Leadership as practice means interactions or activities that involve colleagues, students, and
team members, who are often positioned as followers. Leadership as professional role means
acting as always already leaders by virtue of their profession. Related to higher education,
especially distributed leadership (it offers more clarity as explained by Bolden, Petrov and
Gosling, 2009), collective leadership, transformational leadership, socially responsible
leadership are proposed in literature for higher education (Bolden et al. 2009; Dugan, &
Komives, 2010; Harvey et al. 2003; Middlehurst et al. 2009) which are more democratic
models of leadership. Distributed leadership is the most influential leadership model
according to Bolden et al. (2009) as it allows shared, collective leadership practices and as it
has a “rhetorical value in terms of identity, participation, influence and also can equally cover
the underlying dynamics of power within universities”. Another influential leadership theory

                                                         Participatory Educational Research (PER)

                                                -363-

Developing a guiding model of educational leadership in higher education during the COVID-19 pandemic… G.Yokuş



proposed in literature is transformational leadership as this leadership theory is concerned
with “the charisma, intellectual stimulation and consideration of individual leaders” (Bass,
1985; Spendlove, 2007). Socially responsible leadership is also prominent in higher education
which is based on Social Change Model and it is frequently used in the leadership
development programs by universities (Dugan & Komives, 2007; Komives, Owen,
Longerbeam, Mainella & Osteen, 2005; Külekçi, 2015; Yokuş, 2018). This COVID-19
pandemic clearly shows the need for a leadership model in higher education which
emphasizes social responsibility such as self-knowledge, cooperation, common purpose, and
change in today's globalizing society.

This study is concerned with higher education students’ expectations from educational
leadership during COVID-19 crisis. Education has taken a different form during pandemic,
and it occurs to a very large extent in non-formal settings via online or offline meetings in
virtual environments. Balwant (2016) in his study on educational leadership in higher
education emphasizes that in higher education context, educational leaders influence students
both in class interactions and also in other course-related to interactions in non-formal settings
like offline meetings and informal discussions, which is a clear indicative characteristic of
pandemic crisis. It is therefore evident that the role of strong educational leadership in terms
of school/university improvement is non-negligible, and it influences even curriculum
development. It becomes a necessity in this pandemic crisis to identify the interaction and
patterns of influence between students (followers) and educational leaders in higher
education. Educational leadership for a decade has become more prevalent and popular term
replacing the terms of school leadership, school management or educational administration
(Gunter, 2004). Educational leaders in higher education basically include leaders such as
instructors, principals, superintendents, faculty deans, directors, head of programs, department
chairs, academic advisers, curators, vice-chancellor, and rector. Educational leadership is
defined by James, Connolly and Hawkins (2019) as “legitimate interaction in an educational
institution intended to enhance engagement with the institutional primary task”. In other
definitions, the emphasis in mostly on the influence to achieve organizational goals (Bush &
Glover 2014; Greenfield, 1995). James et al. (2019) distinguish three elements of educational
leadership which involve images (facts, ends, goals,), instruments (face-to-face or online
communication tools) and interactions (one way or two-way). In study of Sellami, Sawalhi,
Romanowski and Amatullah (2019) on educational leadership, they argue that educational
leadership is unfortunately considered to be confined exclusively to educational settings.
However, it would be a better understanding of educational leadership when it is posited
‘anywhere’ and ‘everywhere’, rather than limiting it to educational setting. They suggest in
their study to regard educational leaders responsible for building learning organizations, not
just hold them responsible for schools. This is a very appropriate suggestion relevant for
educational leaders of 21st-century educational institutions as there is a challenging task for
them to rethink strategically the institutional primary goals and also prepare students for
learning for future. As asserted by Brooks and Normore (2009), it is felt the need to rethink
the practices of educational leadership for contemporary world. Regarding the improvement
of educational leaders’ practices and qualifying their pedagogy, they put stress on
“glocalization” which incorporates the successful integration of local and global forces. They
explore nine dynamic and interconnected knowledge domains of literacy to be developed by
educational leaders of 21st-century which are listed as political literacy, economic literacy,
cultural literacy, moral literacy, pedagogical literacy, information literacy, organizational
literacy, spiritual and religious literacy, and temporal literacy. To view current leadership
practices as a temporary solution until normal service misses the opportunity to lead
differently and potentially, to lead more effectively (Harris, 2020). As seen in most of these

           Participatory Educational Research (PER)

                                                       -364-

                                       Participatory Educational Research (PER), 9 (1);362-387, 1 January 2022



studies about leadership literature, researchers attempt to explore how educational leaders’
practices influence students’ state of mind, achievement, satisfaction, or other situations
associated with school improvement.

When studies about leadership during COVID-19 crisis, there are conducted a number of
studies which focus on leadership during pandemic (Akbari & Pratomo, 2021; Chisholm-
Burns, Brandon & Spivey, 2021; de Moura, 2020; Dumulescu & Mutiu, 2021; Fernandez &
Shaw, 2020; Fleming & Millar, 2019; Francisco & Nuqui, 2020; Murashkin & Tyrväinen,
2020; Strack et al., 2021). During the lockdown period, strategic planning in higher education
focused on mostly preparation for online instruction and assessment (Loriggio, 2020).
Learners in higher education systems are caught up in online webinars, instructional videos,
live learning experiences and- resources for teachers, parents, and students (Osmond-Johnson,
Campbell & Pollock 2020). Training sessions have been organized for students and faculty
staff to prepare them to navigate this new virtual modality of teaching. These challenges call
for a critical view of educational leadership in times of crisis. This view is supported by Gurr
and Drysdale (2020) who emphasize that leadership is about setting direction and often it
requires the courage to take strategic risks. Roache, Rowe-Holder, and Muschette (2020)
propose that skilled leadership is necessary during COVID-19 for implementing effective
policies aligned with university’s mission and vision, providing professional development and
training for learners in new virtual modality of learning.

In study of Lawton-Misra and Pretorius (2021), they draw attention to not only the critical
role leaders must play in taking responsibility for their organizations and people, but also the
complexity of that leadership role. It comes out that the leadership qualities needed during
COVID-19 crisis appear as empathy, vulnerability, self-awareness, and agility. There are
necessary for decreasing affective intensity experienced by faculty staff and students
(Lawton-Misra & Pretorius, 2021) who are facing emotional distress as a direct result of the
pandemic (Roy et al. 2020). For instance, in order to reduce the stress of staying at home for
an extended period of time, some universities in China provided counseling services to
students (Wang, Cheng, Yue & McAleer, 2020). Samoilovich (2020) notes that this pandemic
in higher education is a period of experimentation in every sense. During crisis, rectors and
academic leaders should adopt “test and learn” attitude, adapt quickly and -beyond crisis-
identify opportunities. Chisholm-Burns, Brandon and Spivey (2021) stress out the unknown
impacts of pandemic especially in higher education. They analyze the perceptions of students
in a college of pharmacy. They conclude that overpromising is not right, adapting to change
and consistency in communication are essential for leadership during COVID-19 in higher
education. Importance of communication, adaptability, flexibility and maintaining connection
are stressed out by administrators, faculty, and students. This finding is supported in study of
Dumulescu and Muţiu (2021) who emphasize that educational/academic leaders in higher
education have to make decisions and to act quickly to manage large educational
communities, addressing students’, teachers’, and staff’s needs, as well as society’s needs.
They explain the certain challenges experienced by academic leaders in a university in
Romania during COVID-19 pandemic. Their findings indicate some leadership insights
during pandemic include leader’s personal attributes, unity through decentralization, and
opportunities to reinvent the university. In addition, Samoilovich (2020) draws attention that
COVID-19 pandemic necessitates strengthening leadership which requires greater
transparency. This pandemic makes decision-making difficult. However, in addition to
governing bodies, administrative boards, academic councils, agile and multifunctional teams
with clear objectives can serve for a better leadership. This crisis gives the opportunity to test
forms of shared governance that integrate managers, academic leaders, and administrative

                                                         Participatory Educational Research (PER)

                                                -365-

Developing a guiding model of educational leadership in higher education during the COVID-19 pandemic… G.Yokuş



personnel in a process of assessing the viewpoints of all engaged stakeholders when defining
courses of action. To ensure the physical and mental wellbeing of students and faculty during
COVID-19 pandemic, it is necessary to build trust, maintain a sense of community and
common purpose (Samoilovich, 2020).

Lawton-Misra and Pretorius (2021) explain that leadership in higher education calls for
unlearning and relearning certain behaviours to lead during the pandemic. To exemplify,
relinquishing control, moving away from a top-down leadership style to a more distributive
approach, collective leadership, adapting to the fluidity of the situation are among skills and
competencies of leaders in higher education. COVID-19 pandemic demonstrates the need for
individuals and groups to work concurrently and collaboratively in order to achieve leadership
outcomes. It has become necessary to abandon the idea of a leader/follower dualism (Bolden,
2020; Lawton-Misra & Pretorius, 2021). Fernandez and Shaw (2020) also support that
making connections with people at all levels of the institution during pandemic crisis, allows
the leader to be truly transformative and the collaboration to be meaningful. Therefore,
collective leadership is more stressed. According to Maas et al. (2020), collective leadership
becomes more important as this crisis has more negative effects on those whose
representation and equality is still too little known (for example, ethnic and racial minorities,
disabled individuals etc.). Fernandez and Shaw (2020) claim that autocratic leadership is
inefficient during pandemic which come with complexities and uncertainties. In response to
crisis, it may be implemented a type of distributed leadership which absolutely takes time,
increases the quality of decisions considering multiple perspectives (Fernandez & Shaw,
2020) and more efficient than other leadership approaches (Berjaoui & Karami-Akkary,
2019). Antonopoulou et al. (2021) stress that another leadership among the different models
of educational leadership is transformational leadership which is one of the most appropriate
models in higher education, especially during pandemic. Transformational leadership focuses
on the division of leadership among educators with different skills to collectively manage
necessary leadership tasks in different contexts.

In study of Marshall, Roache and Moody-Marshall (2020), they comparatively analyze the
current leadership during pandemic in Barbardos and Canada and emphasize four main
leadership behaviours which are critical during COVID-19 pandemic. Educational leadership
for new normal are indicated as providing clear direction, communicating effectively,
working collaboratively, and engaging in adaptive leadership. Boin, Kuipers and Overdijk
(2013) also draw attention to leadership-in-crisis and lists early recognition, sense-making,
making critical decisions, orchestrating vertical and horizontal coordination, coupling and
decoupling, meaning-making, effective communication, rendering accountability, learning,
and enhancing resilience as indicators of leadership in times of crisis. Pekkola et al. (2021)
investigate how Finnish universities manage COVID-19 pandemic and find out that certain
limitations to effective academic leadership in higher education during pandemic include that
instructions from the authorities are ambiguous, leaving much room for interpretation.
Educational leaders hope for more open conversations, negotiations, and more cooperation.
Educational leaders face challenges in relation to crisis management including massive
increase in requests; uneven impact on workload (i.e., overloaded leaders); a lack of
information on academics’ performance and well-being; and the stress of overlooking
important information

The key research question which motives this study is “what educational leadership
behaviours are fundamental in higher education during COVID-19 pandemic”. Depending on
this main purpose, this research attempts to answer the following research problems:

           Participatory Educational Research (PER)

                                                       -366-

                                      Participatory Educational Research (PER), 9 (1);362-387, 1 January 2022



   (1) What are the higher education students’ expectations from educational leaders during
       COVID-19 pandemic?
   (2) What characteristics compose educational leadership in higher education during
       COVID-19 pandemic?
   (3) How to develop a guiding model for educational leadership during COVID-19
       pandemic?

Method
         This study is designed as grounded theory. Grounded theory design is among
qualitative research methods; and with its strategy and scope it takes a considerable place in
contemporary educational studies, especially in interpretive research. Bryant (2017) explains
detailed overview of grounded theory and suggests starting a grounded theory study without
explicit hypotheses, exploring a new problem, or refining further explorations of an existing
problem. According to him, tentative generalizations or theoretical assumptions can be
constructed only when the discovered knowledge reaches a “saturation point”. Bryman and
Bell (2007) support this view by putting forward that grounded theory is dependent on coding
which includes the constant comparison & theoretical sampling, and theoretical saturation. To
consider all, this study attempts to discover a theoretical model of educational leadership for
new normal in higher education. This model is developed from data acquired through
collected written documents, personal interviews, and group discussion. This study follows
theoretical process of grounded theory designed by Izvercian, Potra and Ivascu (2016) which
is illustrated in Figure 1:




                      Figure 1. Theoretical process of grounded theory




                                                        Participatory Educational Research (PER)

                                               -367-

Developing a guiding model of educational leadership in higher education during the COVID-19 pandemic… G.Yokuş



Study Group
         As grounded theory study mainly aims to make generalizations and build a theory, if
possible, this study includes more than one study group. Participants in all groups are
university students studying in different departments in a higher education institution. In the
first study group, a total of 32 participants are selected who can guide the direction of study
and substantially affected from coronavirus pandemic. All selected participants have been in
their hometown since COVID-19 crisis, taken online courses as a part of remote learning,
struggling with their limited skills against this global crisis and deeply in need of a leadership
in this process. For the theoretical sampling stage, a representative heterogeneous sample of
participants have been selected and demographic qualities of all study groups are presented in
Table 1.

Table.1 Demographic Qualities of All Study Groups
             N       Age               Gender                  School             Department
                                                               Experience
First        32      19 (n=9)          Male (n=14)             1 year (n=4)       Education Faculty (n=9)
Study                20 (n=10)         Female (n=18)           2 year (n=5)       Literature (n=3)
Group                21 (n=10)                                 3 year (n=10)      Finance (n=4)
                     22 (n=2)                                  4 year (n=13)      Fine arts (n=5)
                     23 (n=1)                                                     Tourism (n=6)
                                                                                  Sports Academy (n=5)
Second       26      19 (n=8)          Male (n=12)             1 year (n=7)       Education Faculty (n=5)
Study                20 (n=12)         Female (n=14)           2 year (n=7)       Literature (n=3)
Group                21 (n=3)                                  3 year (n=6)       Finance (n=3)
                     22 (n=3)                                  4 year (n=6)       Fine arts (n=5)
                                                                                  Tourism (n=5)
                                                                                  Sports Academy (n=5)
Third        12      19 (n=3)          Male (n=6)              1 year (n=3)       Education Faculty (n=2)
Study                20 (n=3)          Female (n=6)            2 year (n=3)       Literature (n=2)
Group                21 (n=3)                                  3 year (n=3)       Finance (n=2)
                     22 (n=3)                                  4 year (n=3)       Fine arts (n=2)
                                                                                  Tourism (n=2)
                                                                                  Sports Academy (n=2)

First study group participants’ ages range from 19 to 23, both male (n=14) and female (n=18),
with 1 to 4 years of school experience in their field of expertise. In order to understand
diverse perspectives, university students from different discipline areas have been included
such as teacher training, linguistic and literature, finance, fine arts, tourism and sports
academy. In second study group, 26 new university students with ages ranging from 19 to 22,
both male (n=12) and female (n=14) have been included in data collection in order to catch all
possible views which approach differently to the educational leadership for new normal. The
third study group includes 12 participants who have been selected purposefully from those
who took place in this second study group, from six faculties including males (n=6) and
females (n=6). These participants are those who have a clear and explanatory understanding
of educational leadership for new normal, believe in capacity for educational leaders in times
of crisis and ambiguous future, and have ideas about successful leadership for new normal.

Data Collection Process
        A survey form with open-ended questions have been used as the first data collection
tool with the first study group. The items have been checked by three field experts who study

           Participatory Educational Research (PER)

                                                       -368-

                                      Participatory Educational Research (PER), 9 (1);362-387, 1 January 2022



in area of leadership and some questions have been revised according to their suggestions.
The final form includes six open-ended questions in assessment tool exploring students’
perspectives on educational leadership in higher education during the crisis of COVID-19.
The findings obtained from this data collection tool determined the questions in the individual
interviews at the next stage. Second study group is included in study and they have been
interviewed individually in an online platform with a semi-structured form which has mainly
seven questions and alternative backup questions and it took eight weeks at total. In terms of
duration, each individual interview has lasted thirty minutes on average. This semi-structured
form has been created depending on the data of first group participants. This semi-structured
form has been reviewed by three faculty members working in Educational Administration
Department. The revised version of form has been applied to second study group in online
platform. The data has been recorded and the researcher has been taking notes in these online
interviews and making his own interpretations/observations. In order to elaborate on the
educational leadership for new normal, a more exclusive and rigor participants have been
included. As the third study group, 12 participants included in this second group are selected
purposefully who have clear and comprehensible considerations about educational leadership
for new normal. They are included in two focus group-discussion in online platform until
saturation of categories is reached. Saturation of the categories which is very crucial in
grounded theory studies has been succeeded after interviews which took approximately 29
hours of duration. There has been made transcriptions of interviews and then analysis process.
Two samples were given to the questions used in each data collection tool.

1st data collection tool:

    •   Could you tell your story about what changes happened in your school life after the
        pandemic?
    •   What do you think about the word “educational leadership” before and after the
        pandemic, what comes to your mind?

2nd data collection tool:

    •   Could you tell me about any educational leader you have contacted during the
        pandemic?
    •   Could you describe the characteristics of a good educational leader for the new
        normal?

3rd data collection tool:

    •   In what ways did educational leaders become a better leader during the pandemic?
    •   What features of educational leaders specifically motivated you to continue your
        schoolworks?

Data Analysis
       In this grounded theory study, the data gathered from three sources (written open-
ended survey form, transcriptions of interviews, and researcher’ notes) have been
conceptualized in detail. Then, there has been created some temporary labels to the repeating
forms considering Strauss and Corbin’s (1990) coding steps which start with open coding and
continue with axial coding and end up with selective coding. Therefore, data analysis in this
study starts with open coding which includes identifying categories, properties, and


                                                        Participatory Educational Research (PER)

                                               -369-

Developing a guiding model of educational leadership in higher education during the COVID-19 pandemic… G.Yokuş



dimensions, then goes through axial coding which includes analyzing conditions, relations,
strategies, and consequences, then ends up with selective coding which includes creating
theoretical framework around an emerging plot. In open coding of this study, initial concepts
have been grouped at an abstract level, which might give meaning to educational leadership.
The initial concepts are labelled and memos are created for organizing them into categories.
Grounded theory requires that data should be collected until reaching saturation. Data has
been continued to be collected, until there is not uncovered any new concepts. Coding has
been done by researcher and another independent reviewer who is familiar with how
grounded theory works. Axial and selective coding is performed after the open coding in
order to explore how interconnected categories are. Main categories and subcategories have
been developed using axial coding in order to a unveil a model. Thirdly, selective coding has
been done and categories have been integrated to create the theoretical framework at the first
appearance. Member checks, rich details, triangulation, thick descriptions and peer review are
used to ensure reliability and validity of the study.

Findings
        Participants who involve in this educational leadership study mostly identify their
academic advisers, course instructors, supervisors, faculty deans and head of programs as
their educational leaders. In instance of educational leadership, they really look for intimate
relationship founded on interpersonal connections and they long for digitalization in
education. A grounded theory research demands a considerable amount of effort and time
with extensive amounts of data. Clusters of initial codes within the open coding process
includes a total of 18 emergent codes. In the next axial coding stage, the concepts are raised at
a conceptual preliminary category level. In the axial coding stage, there comes out five main
categories based on eighteen codes/concepts in open coding. Each category is described by its
codes/concepts and is related to other categories. For example, “calmness and compassion”
category has three codes which are interrelated to two other categories such as “networking”
and “transparency”. Table 2 presents both consolidated categories and codes which are related
to educational leadership for new normal:

Table 2. Educational Leadership for the New Normal in Higher Education
Consolidated categories            Frequency      Codes                                                  Frequency
                                                  encouraging online communities                         57
Networking                         154            promoting social interaction                           53
                                                  community-oriented                                     44
                                                  create     supportive and inclusive         learning   50
Enhancing           educational    149            environment                                            44
practices                                         provide learning resources                             28
                                                  construct feedback for improvement                     27
                                                  create a vision of academic success
                                                  lead under pressure                                    42
Calmness and compassion            148            emphasize optimism                                     41
                                                  care for learners                                      32
                                                  inspire for learning                                   33
                                                  data-driven decisions                                  41
Analytical    and    strategical   128            risk-planning                                          30
thinking                                          create strategies for long term                        29
                                                  leverage the capacity of community                     28
                                                  Trust                                                  40
Transparency                       110            organizational culture                                 40
                                                  open dialog                                            30



             Participatory Educational Research (PER)

                                                        -370-

                                       Participatory Educational Research (PER), 9 (1);362-387, 1 January 2022



This grounded theory research reveals that there exist five key themes of leadership for new
normal. Looking at in detail to observe which categories are repeating more frequently in
terms of educational leadership for new normal, it is observed that “networking” is the first
most repeating category with its elements such as encouraging online communities,
promoting social interaction and being community-oriented, which are highly related to
educational leadership for new normal. Second most relevant category appears as “enhancing
educational practices” with its elements such as creating supportive and inclusive learning
environment, providing learning resources, creating a vision of academic success, and
constructing feedback for improvement. Third relevant category is educational leaders’
“calmness and compassion” with its elements such as leading under pressure, emphasizing
optimism, care for learners, and inspire for learning. Fourth category is “analytical and
strategical thinking” with its elements such as making data-driven decisions, risk-planning,
creating strategies for long term and leveraging capacity of community. Fifth category is
“transparency” with its elements such as trust, open dialog, and organizational culture.

Within the theme of networking, A12 claims what to expect from educational leadership
during the pandemic:

       “Well, for me, I want to be involved in a community... I felt the need for an online
       community and be in a network to meet up with educators, my friends, administrative,
       share what’s going on and what’s the plan for educational goals.”

A7 reflects his thoughts on what has changed in coronavirus in terms of educational
leadership:

        “I understand how value networking and interaction is during this COVID-19 outbreak.
       Due to the constraints, really, being in an online community and having access to
       educational leaders such as instructors and faculty deans have precedence over anything.”

Emphasizing on creating a vision of academic success, B14 explains:

       “leaders’ vision should be embraced by learners, too. So, it is the responsibility of
       educational leaders to create a vision among school staff and students by communicating
       with student teams, community and stakeholders. And then measure the progress”.

A17 emphasizes the importance of providing resource for learning during COVID-19
pandemic:

       “we get access to the study materials on online platforms…educational leaders should
       give training to learners on how to best utilize e-learning materials and benefit from
       remote learning.”

Within the theme of calmness and compassion, A29 contributes by giving more details about
her expectation:

       “We need clear and specific messages from educational leaders in coronavirus period... I
       expect from leaders to stay calm, listen and respond with hopefulness”.

Emphasizing caring for and inspiring others, B18 implies that:


                                                         Participatory Educational Research (PER)

                                                -371-

Developing a guiding model of educational leadership in higher education during the COVID-19 pandemic… G.Yokuş



         “We want from leaders to show they care about us. Students in higher education attach
         importance to be realized by their educational leaders, if they are cared, they feel
         appreciated.”

Within the theme of transparency, trust and organizational culture are mostly emphasized. For
example, B1 implies that:

         “First, this pandemic teaches us how important trust is between learners and leaders... We
         feel supported and this trusting relationship helps us perform better both academically
         and managing the crisis.”

B10 elaborates detailed thoughts on transparency by claiming:

       “it is hard but educational leadership requires organization. I want to know the real story;
       how worse it is. A good leader should be trustable, needs to give honest information, and
       make learners feel valued and stick together.”

 Within the theme of analytical and strategical thinking, B11 expresses them as characteristics
of educational leadership during pandemic:

         “Continuous improvement is up to good and effective decisions… They should utilize
         data (from parent, learners etc.) in order to analyze strengths, weaknesses and what-to-do
         next.”

A2 puts emphasis on risk planning:

         “Educational leaders have a great responsibility. First of all, they should manage the
         crisis by planning the risks…a good leader reduces the negative effects of pandemic by
         planning what may go wrong and make alternative plans.”

Additionally, some students emphasize educational leaders should not ignore learners’
capacity, and move only with their own decisions, rather they should leverage the capacity of
community. For instance, B12 expresses that:

       “In addition, sometimes educational leaders … ignore our talents… educational
       leadership for new normal should … support talent development of all learners.”

The last step, selective coding finds out relationship between codes and categories to reveal
which categories and codes outstand most. In this stage, one of the important things to
consider is which codes are central and which codes are periphery. For understanding
relationship and network among codes, Social Network Analysis has been done using the
programme of SocNetV tool. This analysis shows how many connections a code/concept has
with other concepts. As explained by Wasserman and Faust (1994), a large number of
disciplines makes use of social network analysis to examine the relationship among entities.
This relationship might be connection or tie which even includes self-selected ties (Knaub,
Henderson & Fisher, 2018). Figure 2 manifests the results of Social Network Analysis which
indicates how strong and mutual relationships exist between 18 codes:




           Participatory Educational Research (PER)

                                                       -372-

                                       Participatory Educational Research (PER), 9 (1);362-387, 1 January 2022




                       Figure 2. The relationship between 18 concepts.

Figure 2 indicates that there are 7 most outstanding codes which are in the centre of
educational leadership for the new normal. When social network analysis is considered in
detail, it is evident that university students put great importance to “encouraging online
communities, promoting social interaction, creating a safe and inclusive learning
environment, providing learning resources, leading under pressure, emphasizing optimism,
making data-driven decisions” in terms of educational leadership for new normal. These
codes indicate that students in times of crisis recognize the significance of being in a network
which is based on social/communal merits, they value community more than personal
concerns. It is possible to claim that individuality takes a new form in this pandemic process.
Also, promoting optimism and social interaction are indispensable leadership traits university
students expect from educational leaders. On the other hand, the analysis indicates that
keeping knowledge to himself, being too self-reliant, panic, underestimating data, lack of
vision are regarded as serious obstacles in terms of the educational leadership for new normal.
Although there are substantially noted key concepts, some participants also need for some
other aspects of educational leadership such as inspiration for learning, open dialogue, risk
planning and leveraging capacity of community. The participants also indicate that a
successful educational leadership is about understanding others’ perspectives, rather than
sticking to leader’s perspective. They stress that each individual has their own vision differing
from the leader; therefore, they note on the necessity of developing a vision for the whole
student community and school program.

The inductive data analysis and social network analysis strictly following the axial and
selective coding procedures give considerable meaning to understanding of the educational
leadership. To start with, networking, enhancing educational practices, calmness and
compassion are fundamental for educational leadership. These dimensions are followed by
analytical & strategical thinking and transparency. During crisis, -still not as much as socio-
emotional factors- the importance of analytical & strategical thinking and transparency is non-
negligible for educational leadership in times of pandemic. There is interconnectedness rather
than hierarchy among dimensions of educational leadership emerging in this grounded theory.
The data analysis has also resulted in a theoretical framework of the educational leadership
for new normal. There has been developed a guiding model of educational leadership for new
normal, which is illustrated in Figure 3:

                                                         Participatory Educational Research (PER)

                                                -373-

Developing a guiding model of educational leadership in higher education during the COVID-19 pandemic… G.Yokuş




               Figure 3. A guiding model of educational leadership for new normal

Figure 3 illustrates that in this educational leadership model for new normal, educational
leaders serve as three major roles: resource providers, inspirers for learning and talent
developers. Instruction is transforming into virtualized and remote learning, and online
communities are replacing for physical schools. Learners are exceptionally experiencing
isolation both physically and emotionally, and attempt to get used to new normal school style.
Educational leaders for new normal should start with ensuring networking. Then they are
expected to enhance educational practices within online learning communities by creating a
vision, providing sources, and constructing feedback. However, it is a key point to satisfy
students emotional needs which are greatly affected by educational leaders’ calmness and
compassion. Analytical and strategical thinking which include data-driven decisions and long-
term strategies help educational leaders to build a strong leadership for the crisis. Lastly,
transparency in educational leadership is important during COVID-19 pandemic as it keeps
learners in an informed, open and trust mood.

Discussion and Results
       This grounded theory research is focused on exploring educational leadership from
perspectives of higher education students during COVID-19 pandemic; and this study also
attempts to develop a guiding model with identifying the newly emerged components of
leadership for new normal in education. From the data analysis, five constituents of
educational leadership composed of eighteen codes have been organized according to their
connections with each other. The five main components of educational leadership for new
normal have been built as networking, enhancing educational practices, calmness &


           Participatory Educational Research (PER)

                                                       -374-

                                     Participatory Educational Research (PER), 9 (1);362-387, 1 January 2022



compassion, analytical & strategical thinking, and transparency. In the following, we will
present all the main variables with their sub-elements, making discussion considering
literature of leadership and citations from the in-depth interviews undertaken.

a) Networking – is considered as one of the most important characteristics of educational
leadership for new normal. Networking includes building online communities, promoting
social interaction and being community oriented. In pandemic, the core functions of schools
have shifted, and education leaders have been pushed to the very limit (Harris, 2020). A good
educational leader is first and foremost expected to achieve networking by building
communities- which are inherently online due to pandemic. In this study, it is obvious that
online communities are the new schools and educational leadership for new normal should
succeed in gathering students around common interests and lead the community emphasizing
social interaction. Forty five percent of participants put emphasis on building community and
promoting social interaction as one of the indicatives of leadership for new normal. They
emphasize that communities should be built online and educational leaders in COVID-19
crisis should allow “a virtual point of presence” as students cannot meet physically.

Findings suggest that educational leaders in times of new normal should develop online
communities and have a supportive working team in charge of providing information related
to the educational goals, the learning resources, assessment, and evaluation during pandemic.
Most of the students stress that an ideal community should allow for continuous interaction
and knowledge sharing. Data shows that educational leaders’ first and foremost qualities
should be encouraging network rather than isolation, promoting social interaction and creating
a vision in benefit of the whole community. Being community-oriented promotes common
good and it is part of educational leadership. In study of Fernandez and Shaw (2020),
leadership for new normal calls for unpredictable adaptive behaviours. They emphasize a
leadership model that underlie empowerment, involvement, and collaboration. According to
them, academic leaders with emotional intelligence and emotional stability should place the
interests of others above their own during pandemic. Secondly, academic leaders should
distribute leadership responsibilities to a network of teams throughout the organization to
improve the quality of the decisions made in crisis resolution. According to them, the best
leadership practices for academic leaders managing COVID-19 are considered as connecting
with people as individuals and establishing mutual trust, distributing leadership throughout
the organization, and communicating clearly and often with all stakeholders (Fernandez &
Shaw, 2020).

Most of the higher education students consider being community-oriented a part of
networking and therefore a part of educational leadership for new normal. Students are ready
to diminish their individualistic expectations to an acceptable level for the good of common.
These findings are related to the concept of Lorenzi’s (2004) prosocial leadership and Maak’s
(2007) responsible leadership. Lorenzi defines prosocial leadership as a “positive, effective
influence with constructive goals that serve the common good” and expresses that leaders
should lead for common good rather than satisfying narrow, personal or even greedy interests.
The findings of this grounded study indicate that educational leaders for new normal should
act with common interests in a collectivist manner by channeling their own desires into the
common good.

During pandemic, school leaders are focusing their considerable leadership energies on
engaging others in the collaborative, shared and collective work that is both vital and urgent
(Harris, 2020). Networking becomes the most important component of educational leadership

                                                       Participatory Educational Research (PER)

                                              -375-

Developing a guiding model of educational leadership in higher education during the COVID-19 pandemic… G.Yokuş



for new normal; however, it is not only important in times of pandemic; but -not as much as
in new normal- it is normally a key concept for a successful school development. This
viewpoint is supported by Fernandez and Shaw (2020) who state that “academic leaders
should distribute leadership responsibilities to a network of teams throughout the organization
to improve the quality of the decisions made in crisis resolution”. Therefore, the fluidity and
uncertainty surrounding the COVID-19 virus necessitates a leadership approach that focuses
on networking and teams of diverse expertise throughout higher education institution.

Irvine, Lupart, Loreman and McGhie-Richmond (2010) emphasize the importance of
networking as a part of educational leadership. They advocate that developing a supportive
school community is as important as raising academic achievement. As claimed by Halverson
(2007), educational leaders create conditions for strong communities by initiating interaction,
facilitating the development of obligations, and providing systematic feedback which
indicates to what degree mutual obligations are being met. Supovitz and Christman (2005)
support this view by explaining that small communities allow teachers and students to get to
know each other and respond to their needs better and building a community creates a culture
for sustained instructional improvement, which eventually lead to student learning. In this
study, students need to have a sense of community during COVID-19 outbreak in order to
stay connected and informed. Out of crisis times, each student has his/her own motivations of
educational leadership, prioritizing some certain features and neglecting the others. However,
the data of this study indicates that leaders for new normal should promote common good
without ignoring the needs of individuals with different interests. Data shows that students are
motivated by involving in an online community, acting community-oriented and testifying
educational leaders’ contribution to the whole group. Talu and Nazarov (2020) assert that a
leader in organizational contexts in the COVID-9 pandemic must be coherent, flexible,
account for his/her emotions, be involved, and listen to all the opinions of others in order to
carefully manage this period of crisis. The ongoing COVID-19 pandemic will have a
multilateral impact on organizations, and strategically oriented leaders will formulate goals to
turn challenges into victories for themselves and their organizations (Talu & Nazarov, 2020).
Murphy (2020) express extraordinary times require extraordinary measures and education
systems are now developing emergency protocols. Leading the new normal is possible with
strong communities and it can be asserted that this is a period transforming schools to virtual
communities.

b) Enhancing educational practices – this is regarded as an essential component of educational
leadership during COVID-19 pandemic. It includes creating supportive and inclusive learning
environment, providing resources for learning, constructing feedback for improvement, and
creating a vision of academic success. In study of Francisco and Nuqui (2020) on new normal
leadership during COVID-19, it is revealed that new normal leadership is the ability to be
adaptive while staying strong with one’s commitment; it is about being an effective
instructional decision-maker; and it’s about being a good planner, vigilant, and initiator.
Educational leadership –no matter during pandemic or ordinary times - is purposeful and it
aims to influence specific outcomes in accordance with a vision of school and academic
success. Before pandemic, educational leadership was more about developing strategies to
meet educational objectives in a limited time and restricted school setting. It was not as much
related to supportive & inclusive learning environment and constructing feedback as in
pandemic process. Most of the time, it was just about academic vision of schools which were
often not shared by followers/learners. Marshall, Roache and Moody-Marshall (2020) took a
comparative look at educational leadership during COVID-19 crisis in higher education
institutions in Barbados and Canada. They stress that a vision is needed in times of crisis.

           Participatory Educational Research (PER)

                                                       -376-

                                       Participatory Educational Research (PER), 9 (1);362-387, 1 January 2022



Stakeholders feel confidence when educational leaders have an effective plan to navigate a
crisis. During the COVID-19 pandemic; students, teachers, and other stakeholders have been
searching for direction. Gurr and Drysdale (2020) state that setting direction is an important
leadership quality during COVID-19 crisis in which strategic risk taking is placed at the
forefront. It is important to note that for leaders to set a clear direction, they must engage in
sense making. This involves the ability to make sense of confusing situations (Gurr &
Drysdale 2020).

Most of the students connect educational leadership with academic purposes and expect to be
academically supported by educational leaders in online platforms beyond school boundaries.
After networking, it comes enhancing educational practices as the highest important value of
educational leadership. In study of Varela and Fedynich (2020), educational leaders reported
confidence in their preparedness to lead instruction, and to support teachers, all students, and
parents during remote instruction as a result of COVID-19 pandemic related school closures.
To give more detail, seventy nine percent of educational leaders agreed that they were
prepared to lead high quality instruction to deliver virtually. As emphasized by Pollock (2020)
related to educational leaders’ leading virtual schools during the pandemic, leaders’ role have
pivoted to concentrating on supporting educators, students, and parents in transitioning to a
different way of schooling

In this study, it is obvious that approximately half of university students put emphasis on
creating supportive and inclusive learning environment and constructing feedback for
improvement. However, some university students complain that they face a decline in their
success and academic performance as they switch to online/remote learning due to pandemic.
They emphasize a key practice for educational leadership: creating a vision of academic
success, a vision which is shared by all stakeholders. It is seen that educational leadership is
mostly related to the school’s vision and curriculum. This aspect is emphasized in the study of
Wing (2013) who confirms that educational leadership includes “creating a shared sense of
purpose in the school, nurturing continuous improvement through school development
planning, developing an innovative school culture and the improvement of instruction,
coordinating the curriculum and monitoring learner outcomes”.

Within the context of enhancing educational practices, students also expect from educational
leaders that resources are successfully provided for learning. This study reveals that
educational leaders during COVID-19 pandemic are not just strategy developers to meet
school objectives, but also resource providers, curriculum specialists, instructional supporters,
talent developers and learning facilitators. In literature is reviewed, it is apparent that the
explicit responsibility of educational leaders is to contribute to school capacity, academic
achievement and intellectual growth and talents of learners. In study of Harris (2020), it is
revealed that coronavirus is a crisis but also an opportunity to “lead differently and
potentially, to lead more effectively”. This is a period of leading in a digital world and
universally, education leaders at all levels in the system, attempt to influence and engage with
others through a screen and practice their leadership. Educational leaders as resource
providers have a key role for disadvantaged groups. COVID-19 is an opportunity for
educational equity. However, in the report developed by the National Foundation for
Educational Research (NFER), it is found out that a third of pupils are not interested in the
lessons, forty-two percent is reluctant to hand over their assignment, and students who are in
disadvantaged schools are the least likely to be involved in remote/online learning. This report
shows that seven out of 10 state school children have very few online lessons less than one in
a day, while almost a third of private schools have been providing four or more online lessons

                                                         Participatory Educational Research (PER)

                                                -377-

Developing a guiding model of educational leadership in higher education during the COVID-19 pandemic… G.Yokuş



every day. Approximately all teachers have a feeling that their students fall behind the
curriculum and their learning subjects, and over half of teachers feel that there is a widening
learning gap between disadvantaged students and their peers (Sharp et al. 2020). In this study,
participants expect from educational leaders to create supportive and inclusive learning
environment, and construct feedback for improvement, these qualities work for educational
equity. There are no one-fit-all educational decisions during COVID-19 pandemic; rather, as
suggested by Sahlberg and Hasak (2017), educational leaders should turn towards “small
data” to help them determine the best educational actions, school priorities and curriculum
goals for their learners. Roache, Rowe-Holder and Muschette (2020) argue that skilled
leadership is imperative to have the vision to create policies which are aligned to the mission
and vision of the institution. Leadership must be strategic in making these decisions which
will have growing benefits for the institution. Also, there is a need for a synthesizing model
which will integrate the local priorities, school vision, online distance instruction. This
necessity is referred in the study of Fullan et al. (2020). They suggest a new hybrid model
during COVID-19 pandemic which integrates the best of remote-learning and school situated
learning. This hybrid model “embraces digital to amplify, accelerate and connect learners and
learning, while intentionally focusing on global competencies as well as academic standards”.

c) Calmness and Compassion – The findings of this study indicate that students during
COVID-19 pandemic expect from the educational leaders a very important feature: keeping
calmness and compassion. Roy et al. (2020) express that as long as higher education
institutions remain student-centered, students’ health and well-being are key areas of support
that should be addressed. Unfortunately, some university students are facing emotional
distress as a direct result of the pandemic (Roy et al. 2020). For instance, to mitigate the stress
of staying at home for extended periods, some universities in China have provided
counselling services to students (Wang, Cheng, Yue & McAleer, 2020). This study indicates
that students expect from educational leaders to keep their calmness when there are risky
situations which provoke emotional reactions in learners. Calmness dimension of educational
leadership consists of leading under pressure, emphasizing optimism, caring for learners and
inspiring for learning. The data suggests that educational leaders for new normal should avoid
emotionally loaded explanations during pandemic and must set forth rational objectives by
keeping calm and instilling hope.

Making reasonable demands on colleagues and having patience for others and self are
imperative for educational leaders (Harris, 2020). One of the most prominent features of
educational leaders for new normal is to promote an atmosphere which participants feel
themselves hopeful and cared. Students believe that educational leadership grows out of
considerate behaviour. During COVID-19 pandemic, what university students need is
responsive leadership, not such a model leadership devoid of feelings. Participants report that
the best educational leaders are those who show compassion by caring for learners and
inspiring for learning. An educational leadership which focuses on compassion as a strategy
to achieve institutional mission and curriculum goals will be a productive leading style. On
the contrary, an educational leadership which neglects compassion will fail its intentional
meaning. Enhancing educational practices and transparency features of educational leadership
are interconnected with calmness and compassion.

When leadership studies are reviewed, it is evident that staying calm, being positive,
optimism and responsibility are often cited as crucial in terms of leadership. In study of Vogel
(2012), it is reported that responsibility, accountability, compassion, calmness are identified
as important and guiding values for practicing educational leadership. Evans (2020)

           Participatory Educational Research (PER)

                                                       -378-

                                      Participatory Educational Research (PER), 9 (1);362-387, 1 January 2022



emphasizes that throughout pandemic process, leading faculty out of crisis requires a crucial
leadership feature: leading with empathy. Caring for others’ feelings and compassion for their
real-life challenges really matter in times of pandemic. Evans encourages faculty to help
university students cope with challenges such as stress, anxiety, social isolation, death of a
loved one with strategies such as being flexible and understanding, showing compassion, and
staying connected. Forester and McKibbon (2020) highlight that leadership matters in the
time of COVID-19 not formally but interactively and socially. They advise leaders to show
people how to go on all the time, how to treat each other and how to think of future and new
normal. It is expected from leadership to show how to act by exhibiting and modelling
compassion, and more or less empathy. Likewise, Tran, Hardie and Cunningham (2020) focus
on leading with empathy and humanity when managing dilemmas and challenges caused by
COVID-19 pandemic. They note that all education leaders are forced into taking immediate
actions and respond to the uncertainties. An educational leader participating in their study
holds faculty meeting each week, supports teachers to be empathetic with the problems of
their students, and accept empathy as a cornerstone of his leadership style by expressing that
school culture is centered around compassion more than ever.

Applying compassion to learning and teaching, this uncertain pandemic times should
encourage educational leaders to focus their strategies including compassionate practices in
order to reduce collective stress. Educational leaders should give a message that they are
responsive to others’ thoughts, care for their needs and welfare, and attempt to inspire for new
normal, not just sympathetically acknowledge their stress. The data also indicates that
educational leaders should show compassion to themselves (considering new pressures on
them) in order to keep their compassion for others. In leadership study of Lawton-Misra and
Pretorius (2021), it comes out that pandemic has highlighted the need for person- and people-
oriented leadership with a focus on among others, caring, empathy and compassion. What
becomes clear during the reflections is that empathy, vulnerability, self-awareness and agility
are some of the qualities needed during this crisis. Leaders are expected to not only fully
understand the meaning of empathy and compassion, but to know how to sincerely
demonstrate these qualities to staff and students alike. While these qualities should be
expected of educational leaders at all times, the pandemic brought them into sharper focus
(Lawton-Misra & Pretorius, 2021).

d) Transparency – The findings of this study indicate that students during COVID-19
pandemic expect transparency from educational leaders. As seen in findings, transparency
with its components of trust, organizational culture and open dialogue is a key aspect of
educational leadership. The data suggests that educational leaders for new normal be honestly
transparent with their learners/followers. University students in this study feel the need to
trust their educational leaders; however, this can be supplied only when there is an open
dialogue between educational leader and online community. They also expect from
educational leaders to create organizational culture which means that announcements are not
made superficially and by non-authorized people but made officially by the educational
leaders within organizations. Most of the students put high emphasis on trust and
organizational culture.

Transparency requires sharing with empathy and optimism which is connected to calmness
and compassion aspect of educational leadership. Students expect to trust their educational
leaders, to perform an open dialogue, to be hopeful and have a sense of control. As
emphasized by Marshall et al. (2020), this pandemic reinforces the importance of frequent
and transparent communication; it is key to providing reassurance and a degree of comfort to

                                                        Participatory Educational Research (PER)

                                               -379-

Developing a guiding model of educational leadership in higher education during the COVID-19 pandemic… G.Yokuş



stakeholders during periods of ambiguity and heightened anxiety. They propose that during
turbulent times, communication must be clear and timely. Despite the complexity and
uncertainty associated with COVID-19, leaders should communicate clearly during
challenging situations. With reference to the COVID-19 pandemic, at a higher education
institution in Barbados, leaders made a concerted effort to communicate with stakeholders
frequently. This approach cultivates respect and support for leaders and fosters a sense of
comfort among stakeholders that every effort is being made to manage the situation
effectively (Marshall et al., 2020). Chisholm-Burns, Brandon and Spivey (2021) conduct a
study which aims to describe the leadership lessons learned by an academic faculty during the
COVID-19 pandemic from the perspective of administrators, faculty, and students. Five main
themes emerge across all three focus groups, which include open and ongoing
communication, staying connected, turning crisis into opportunity, being adaptable/flexible,
and finding ways to stay productive. It is concluded that core leadership practices in emergent
situations like the COVID-19 pandemic include adaptability to the changing environment,
communicating accurately and with appropriate frequency, which illustrate the need for
flexibility during times of crisis.

Transparency as part of educational leadership is also emphasized in the study of Vogel
(2012) who examines the guiding values which shape the ethical framework of educational
leaders who follow doctoral degree in Educational Leadership. The role of transparency is
clearly indicated as important, and it helps people to trust as they believe there is nothing to
hide. These obviously require more effort and transparency places new pressures on
educational leaders. Transparency aspect of leadership points to the need for educational
leaders to be trusted, rather than hiding information. Trocchia and Andrus (2003) list
integrity, honesty and fairness as the top characteristics of leadership, which all support
transparency. Joseph and Winston (2005) search for a relationship between leadership and
trust, and finds out a positively significant relationship between leadership and leader trust.

Additionally, Bryman (2007) associates effective leadership behaviour with providing clear
guidance. Providing clear guidance is closely related to organizational culture and open
dialogue. In the study of Lesinger et al. (2016), it is identified a significant relationship between
educational leadership, organizational culture and trust in schools. Educational leadership is
significantly related to school culture and organizational trust. Leaders with a higher
organizational culture have the highest level of educational leadership. Cogaltay and Karadag
(2016) conduct meta-analysis in order to test the effect of educational leadership on some
organizational variables. The findings of meta-analysis indicate that educational leadership
has large positive effects on organizational commitment, organizational trust and
organizational culture. This supports trust and embraces open dialogue between leaders and
the community.

When it comes to studies during COVID-19 crisis, trust still appears as important aspect in
educational leadership. Dolan, Raich, Garti and Landau (2020) view COVID-19 crisis as an
opportunity for introspection, and accept trust as the value of values, specifically during
pandemic. They explain the reason as trust takes time to build, and very difficult to restore.
Also, for new normal, learners will lead learning in global virtual “schools” and teachers are
expected to be trusted educational leaders. Fernandez and Shaw (2020) investigate the
academic leadership in times of COVID-19 crisis, and they claim that leading an educational
institution in a crisis is stressful and leader’s role is even greater in times of change. They list
connecting with people as individuals and establishing mutual trust as the best leadership
practices and they also put emphasis on involvement and collaboration. In their study, it is

           Participatory Educational Research (PER)

                                                       -380-

                                       Participatory Educational Research (PER), 9 (1);362-387, 1 January 2022



advised that leaders with emotional intelligence should place others’ interests over their own.
Also, they advise leaders to communicate clearly and frequently to all stakeholders through a
variety of communication channels.

Despite of difficulty of measuring transparency, most educational institutions do not regard
transparency as a strategy which will improve their performance; however, transparency is an
effective aspect of educational leadership for new normal on which it is worth making
investment. For educational leaders, it is advised to improve their relationship with the
community by creating trust, maintaining organizational culture and following an open
dialogue. Pekkola et al. (2021) claim that the COVID-19 pandemic has been managed
effectively at Finnish universities. In their study on academic leadership during pandemic in
higher education, it interestingly comes out that deans’ responses are slightly more negative
than those of rectors. They express that higher education is dislocated, disconnected,
disengaged, dissipated, distant and dysfunctional. According to the academic leaders, the key
difficulty during COVID-19 crisis is that the instructions from the authorities are ambiguous,
leaving much room for interpretation. The actors affected by coronavirus pandemic hope for
more open conversations and negotiations, and for the issues to be dealt with through more
cooperation at a higher education institution.

e) Analytical and strategical thinking- it is considered as one of the characteristics of
educational leadership for new normal. The analysis indicates that a good educational leader
for new normal makes data-driven decisions, plans the risks, creates strategies for long term
and leverages the capacity of community. These are mentioned as best practices of analytical
and strategical thinking, which inherently affect the overall performance of educational
leaders during COVID-19 pandemic. As emphasized by Gurr and Drysdale (2020) in their
study of leadership for challenging times, it is strongly stressed that leadership for new
normal is about setting direction and often it requires the courage to take strategic risks. It is
hard to move forward without taking risks or challenging the status quo, and yet there needs
to be a balance between seeking and avoiding risks during pandemic. In this study, it is
obvious that educational leadership for new normal should be capable of understanding what
the data says and base their decisions on the data analysis to identify what is needed for
school improvement and academic achievement. Their decisions should not save the day,
rather focus on a strategy for a long period of time as the future is uncertain due to pandemic.
It is interconnected with enhancing educational practices. Also, it appears that a good
educational leader should know how to leverage the strengths of members within community.
This leveraging the capacity of community is fundamental to educational leadership as each
member of the community has his/her contribution towards school development and academic
achievement. Educational leaders should discover and develop the strengths of members in
the group, and then maximize the overall benefit from the group to achieve better outcomes.

Rice University makes use of strategical thinking to ensure consistency, for instance they
make use of communication effectively as communication in a crisis is a delicate balancing
act; too much and the message is tuned out, too little may prompt concern and anxiety (Field,
2020). Ariratana, Sirisookslip and Ngang (2015) come up with guidelines for developing
educational leadership and it appears that strategic planning is a key part of leadership.
According to them, strategic planning includes collection of resource to provide together with
community. Information technology should also be utilized for making decisions for an
effective leadership. They make survey research to assess leadership skills among educational
leaders. However, analytical thinking and problem solving of educational leaders is not high,
which come after interpersonal relations, learning, use of information technology,

                                                         Participatory Educational Research (PER)

                                                -381-

Developing a guiding model of educational leadership in higher education during the COVID-19 pandemic… G.Yokuş



professional & morality and teamwork. Despite its importance, analytical thinking stays very
behind. Likewise, in study of Mintrop and Zumpe (2019), it is emphasized that educational
leaders are expected to think over the educational solutions, identify the problems, recognize
cause-effect relations, act accordingly, implement changes and reflect on this process. Despite
this challenging ideal responsibility, educational leaders normally resort to a set of heuristics
frequently practiced. Educational leaders instinctively define problems as the absence of
solutions, view “change” as filling an empty vessel, comprehend learning as conventions-
based process, and consider “rationality” as something “which works.” However, this
grounded study indicates that educational leadership is a guiding and influencing process
based on analytical and strategical thinking.

Making data-driven decisions as a part of educational leadership during COVID-19 pandemic
is a key feature. According to Goldring and Berends (2009), data can serve as a catalyst to
propel organizational learning, as it utilizes different types of information from a variety of
sources. They point out that data is not only about standardized tests scores, but there can also
be different data collected from the students, school programs, student work, formative
assessments, portfolios, observations of the quality of teaching. They advise education leaders
to employ data to develop a culture of learning for students in the school. In Vogel’s (2012)
study with educational leaders, a participant educational leader refers to the value of data-
based decision making by claiming that their decisions must be based on data, not opinion. Its
importance shows up for educational leadership for new normal.

Leveraging the capacity of learning community during pandemic is about talent-utilization
and talent-development. Leadership in pandemic -distributed by nature- moves attention away
from the actions of individual leaders to their interactions with others, resulting in joint
activity, joint practice, and capacity building (Harris, 2020). A recent study defined new
normal leadership in terms of a focus on people, human resources, mentoring, learning,
emotions, development, respect, exchange of ideas, a creative class, trust through sharing,
teams, embracing equality, diversity, tolerance, vision, and commitment to the vision, through
talent, technology, storytelling, and a dynamic interplay between all stakeholders, employees,
customers, investors, shareholders (Fleming & Millar, 2019). From a similar perspective,
Fuller et al. (2020) emphasizes competency-based model and view the Covid-19 pandemic
has an opportunity to enhance education with thoughtful engagement and potential
improvements. There is felt the need during COVID-19 pandemic for improving the current
learning paradigms focusing on competency-based model. This is related to leveraging the
capacity of community. Talent-development programs are more important than ever during
pandemic. If there is made a critical analysis of this crisis, it might lead to better education
models, which really care for developing each individual’s talent. Depending on the analysis
of this grounded study, it can be suggested that educational leaders can build valuable
networks of relationships which nurture both the development of individuals and the whole
learning group. This leveraging the capacity of community is mostly neglected by educational
leaders; however, it is a great potential available force to improve the quality of learning,
achieving school goals and reducing the pressures of educational leaders. This finding is
supported by Fernandez and Shaw’s (2020) study about academic leadership in times of
pandemic. They address to the necessity of distributing leadership responsibilities to a
network of teams to improve the quality of the decisions made in crisis resolution. This will
also enhance the capacity of teams and reduce the educational leaders’ increasing stress. Also,
in study of Dumulescu and Muţiu (2021), some attributes emerge as central for educational
leadership in higher education, such as unity through decentralization which reveals a
community dimension of educational leadership, balancing autonomy with togetherness,

           Participatory Educational Research (PER)

                                                       -382-

                                       Participatory Educational Research (PER), 9 (1);362-387, 1 January 2022



setting the direction through guidelines, thinking the autonomy of the faculties with the
strength of teams. These studies support the finding that leveraging the capacity of
community come into sharper focus during COVID-19 pandemic. When all findings of this
study are considered in detail, there are crucial insights for understanding educational
leadership for new normal.

Conclusion
        This grounded theory research focuses on the educational leadership for the new
normal in higher education during the COVID-19 crisis. Five main aspects of educational
leadership are identified as networking, enhancing educational practices, calmness &
compassion, analytical & strategical thinking and transparency which are supported by
educational leadership literature during the pandemic (Chisholm-Burns, Brandon & Spivey,
2021; Fernandez & Shaw, 2020; Gurr & Drysdale, 2020; Harris & Jones, 2020; Klein, 2012;
Lawton-Misra & Pretorius, 2021; Maas et al., 2020; Marshall, Roache & Moody-Marshall,
2020; Pekkola et al., 2020; Samoilovich, 2020; Talu & Nazarov, 2020). Certain leadership
practices such as networking, calmness and compassion are more connected to educational
leadership for the new normal. This study indicates that university students need to stay
connected and informed within online communities and they request more transparency in
which leaders openly share both good and unfavorable developments and give feedback
which in turn hopefully strengthens trust and organizational culture between followers and
leader. Most of the participants expect from educational leaders to create supportive and
inclusive learning environment, construct feedback for improvement, create a vision of
academic success and provide resources for learning. Enhancing educational practices is a
potentially significant concept within a higher education institution context and educational
leadership is connected to achieving institutional goals and academic development. University
students suggest that it needs to be a part of educational leadership to accomplish the goals of
department, curriculum and to contribute to the visions of school organization. Also, another
key feature of educational leadership is calmness and compassion during pandemic, in which
students profoundly need educational leaders to lead under pressure, emphasize optimism,
care for learners, and inspire for learning. Analytical and strategical thinking is still important
for educational leadership for the new normal as the educational leadership generally requires
making data-driven decisions, risk-planning of the instructional and organizational process.
Educational leadership is changing during COVID-19 crisis and leading the new normal
requires considerable attention. The notion of educational leadership which undermines
community, calmness and transparency is likely to fail in terms of faculty development and
academic performance as it will have very insignificant effects on students in higher
education. Consequences of COVID-19 pandemic and new expectations from educational
leaders mitigate the need for different leadership behaviours.

References
Akbari, T. T., & Pratomo, R. R. (2021). The new normal leadership: How technology alter
       communication style in contemporary organization. Jurnal Komunikasi Ikatan Sarjana
       Komunikasi Indonesia, 6(1), 1-12.
Amey, M. (2006). Leadership in higher education. Change: The Magazine of Higher Learning,
       38(6), 55-58.
Antonakis, J., Day, V. D., & Schyns, B. (2012). Leadership and individual differences: At the
       cusp of a renaissance. The Leadership Quarterly, 23(4), 643-650.



                                                         Participatory Educational Research (PER)

                                                -383-

Developing a guiding model of educational leadership in higher education during the COVID-19 pandemic… G.Yokuş



Antonopoulou, H., Halkiopoulos, C., Barlou, O., & Beligiannis, G. N. (2021). Transformational
        leadership and digital skills in higher education institutes: during the COVID-19
        pandemic. Emerging science journal, 5(1), 1-15.
Ariratana, W., Sirisookslip, S., & Ngang, T. K. (2015). Development of leadership soft skills
        among educational administrators. Procedia-Social and Behavioral Sciences, 186, 331-
        336.
Balwant, T. P. (2016). Transformational instructor‐leadership in higher education teaching: A
        meta‐analytic review and research agenda. Journal of Leadership Studies, 9(4), 20-42.
Bass, M. B. (1985). Leadership and performance beyond expectations. New York: The Free
        Press.
Boin, A., Kuipers, S., & Overdijk, W. (2013). Leadership in times of crisis: A framework for
        assessment. Int Rev Public Adm, 18, 79-91.
Bolden, R. (2020). Leadership, complexity and change: Learning from the Covid-19 pandemic.
        https://blogs.uwe.ac.uk/leadership-and-change/
Bolden, R., Petrov, G., & Gosling, J. (2009). Distributed leadership in higher education: Rhetoric
        and reality. Educational Management Administration & Leadership, 37 (2), 257-277.
Brooks, S. J., & Normore, H. A. (2010). Educational leadership and globalization: Literacy for a
        glocal perspective. Educational Policy, 24(1), 52-82.
Bryant, A. (2017). Grounded theory and grounded theorizing: Pragmatism in research practice.
        New York: Oxford University Press.
Bryman, A. (2007). Effective leadership in higher education: A literature review. Studies in
        Higher Education, 32(6), 693-710.
Bryman, A., & Bell, E. (2007). Business research methods. New York: Oxford University Press.
Bush, T., & Glover, D. (2014). School leadership models: What do we know?, School Leadership
        and Management, 34(5), 553–571.
Chisholm-Burns, M. A., Brandon, H. H., & Spivey, C. A. (2021). Leadership lessons from
        administrators, faculty, and students during the COVID-19 pandemic. Currents in
        Pharmacy Teaching and Learning. doi: 10.1016/j.cptl.2021.07.001
Cogaltay, N., & Karadag, E. (2016). The effect of educational leadership on organizational
        variables: A meta-Analysis study in the sample of Turkey. Educational Sciences: Theory
        and Practice, 16(2), 603-646.
de Moura, G. (2020). Cybersecurity leadership principles: lessons learnt during the covid-19
        pandemic to prepare for the new normal. World Economic Forum, Não Convencional,
        Homeland Security Digital Library.
Dolan, L. S., Raich, M., Garti, A., & Landau, A. (2020). The COVID-19 crisis as an opportunity
        for introspection: A multi-level reflection on values, needs, trust and leadership in the
        future. The European Business Review. 1-17
Dugan, P. John, and Komives, R. S. (2007). Developing Leadership Capacity in College Students:
        Findings from a National Study. A report from Multi-Institutional Study of Leadership:
        College Park, MD: National Clearinghouse for Leadership Programs.
Dugan, P. J., & Komives, R. S. (2010). Influences on college students' capacities for socially
        responsible leadership. Journal of College Student Development, 51(5), 525-549.
Dumulescu, D., & Muţiu, A. I. (2021). Academic leadership in the time of COVID-19—
        Experiences and perspectives. Frontiers in Psychology, 12, 1272.
Evans, N. (2020). Leading with empathy: Supporting faculty through COVID‐19 and beyond. The
        Department Chair, 31(1), 25–26.
Fernandez, A. A., & Shaw, G. P. (2020). Academic leadership in a time of crisis: The coronavirus
        and COVID‐19. Journal of Leadership Studies, 14(1), 39-45.
Field, K. (2020, March 26). 5 lessons from campuses that closed after natural disasters. The
        Chronicle of Higher Education. https://www.chronicle.com/article/5-Lessons-From-
        Campuses-That/248346


           Participatory Educational Research (PER)

                                                       -384-

                                       Participatory Educational Research (PER), 9 (1);362-387, 1 January 2022



Fleming, K., & Millar, C. (2019). Leadership capacity in an era of change: the new-normal leader.
        Journal of Organizational Change Management, 32(3), 310-319. doi: 10.1108/JOCM-05-
        2019-492
Forester, J., & McKibbon, G. (2020). Beyond blame: leadership, collaboration and compassion in
        the time of COVID-19. Socio-Ecological Practice Research, 1-12.
Francisco, C. D., & Nuqui, A. V. (2020). Emergence of a situational leadership during COVID-19
        pandemic called new normal leadership. Online Submission, 4(10), 15-19.
Fullan, M., Quinn, J., Drummy, M., & Gardner, M. (2020). Education reimagined: The future of
        learning. A collaborative position paper between New Pedagogies for Deep Learning and
        Microsoft Education, 1-34.
Fuller, S., Vaporciyan, A., Dearani, A. J., Stulak, M. J., & Romano, C. J. (2020). COVID-19
        disruption in cardiothoracic surgical training: An opportunity to enhance education. The
        Annals of Thoracic Surgery, 1-11.
Goldring, E., & Berends, M. (2008). Leading with data: Pathways to improve your school. USA:
        Corwin Press.
Greenfield, D. W. (1995). Towards a theory of school administration: the centrality of
        leadership. Educational Administration Quarterly, 31(1), 61–85.
Gunter, H. (2004). Labels and labeling in the field of educational leadership. Discourse - Studies
        in the Cultural Politics of Education, 25(1), 21-41.
Gurr, D., & Drysdale, L. (2020). Leadership for challenging times. International Studies in
        Educational Administration, 48(1), 24-30.
Halverson, R. R. (2007). How leaders use artifacts to structure professional community in
        schools. Professional learning communities: Divergence, depth and dilemmas, 11(37), 93-
        105.
Harper, R. S. (2020). COVID-19 and the racial equity implications of reopening college and
        university campuses. American Journal of Education, 127, 1-10.
Harris, A. (2020). COVID-19–School leadership in crisis?. Journal of Professional Capital and
        Community, Vol. ahead-of-print No. ahead-of-print. doi:10.1108/JPCC-06-2020-0045
Harris, A. & Jones, M. (2020). COVID 19-school leadership in disruptive times. School
        Leadership & Management, 40(4), 243-247
Harris, R. P., Moran, T. R., & Moran, V. S. (2004). Managing cultural differences: Global
        leadership strategies for the 21st century. Oxford: Elsevier.
Harvey, S., Royal, M., & Stout, D. (2003). Instructor's transformational leadership: University
        student attitudes and ratings. Psychological Reports, 92 (2), 395–402.
Irvine, A., Lupart, J., Loreman, T., & McGhie-Richmond, D. (2010). Educational leadership to
        create authentic inclusive schools: The experiences of principals in a Canadian rural
        school district. Exceptionality Education International, 20(2), 70-88.
Izvercian, M., Potra, S., & Ivascu, L. (2016). Job satisfaction variables: A grounded theory
        approach. Procedia-Social and Behavioral Sciences, 221, 86-94.
Jameel, S. A., & Ahmad, A. (2019, April). Leadership and performance of academic staff in
        developing countries. Paper presented at the annual meeting of Proceedings of the 33rd
        International Business Information Management Association Conference, Granada, 6101-
        6106.
James, C., Connolly, M., & Hawkins, M. (2019). Reconceptualising and redefining educational
        leadership practice. International Journal of Leadership in Education, 1-18. doi:
        10.1080/13603124.2019.1591520.
Joseph, E. E., & Winston, B. (2005). A correlation of servant leadership, leader trust, and
        organizational trust. Leadership & Organization Development Journal, 26(1), 6-22.
Juntrasook, A. (2014). You do not have to be the boss to be a leader: Contested meanings of
        leadership in higher education. Higher Education Research & Development, 33(1), 19-31.
Klein, J. (2012). The open‐door policy: Transparency minimizes conflicts between school
        principals and staff. International Journal of Educational Management, 26(6), 550-564.

                                                         Participatory Educational Research (PER)

                                                -385-

Developing a guiding model of educational leadership in higher education during the COVID-19 pandemic… G.Yokuş



Knaub, V. A., Henderson, C., & Fisher, Q. K. (2018). Finding the leaders: An examination of
       social network analysis and leadership identification in STEM education
       change. International Journal of STEM Education, 5(1), 26.
Komives, S.R., Owen, J.E., Longerbeam, S., Mainella, F.C., & Osteen, L. (2005). Developing a
       leadership identity: A grounded theory. Journal of College Student Development, 46(6),
       593-611.
Külekçi, E. (2015). Üniversite öğrencilerinin sosyal sorumluluk temelli liderlik becerilerinin
       geliştirilmesine yönelik deneysel bir çalışma [An experimental study about developing
       undergraduate students’ socially responsible leadership skills]. (Doctoral Dissertation).
       Gaziantep University Educational Sciences Institution, Gaziantep, Turkey.
Lawton-Misra, N., & Pretorius, T. (2021). Leading with heart: academic leadership during the
       COVID-19 crisis. South African Journal of Psychology, 51(2), 205-214.
Lesinger, Y. F., Dagli, G., Gazi, A. Z., Yusoff, B. S., & Altınay, F. (2016). Investigating the
       relationship between organizational culture, educational leadership and trust in
       schools. International Journal of Educational Sciences, 15(1-2), 178-185.
Lorenzi, P. (2004). Managing for the common good: Prosocial leadership. Organizational
       dynamics, 33(3), 282-291.
Maak, T. (2007). Responsible leadership, stakeholder engagement, and the emergence of social
       capital. Journal of Business Ethics, 74(4), 329-343.
Maas, B., Grogan, K. E., Chirango, Y., Harris, N., Liévano-Latorre, L. F., McGuire, K. L., ... &
       Toomey, A. (2020). Academic leaders must support inclusive scientific communities
       during COVID-19. Nature ecology & evolution, 4(8), 997-998.
Marshall, J., Roache, D., & Moody-Marshall, R. (2020). Crisis leadership: A critical examination
       of educational leadership in higher education in the midst of the COVID-19 pandemic.
       International Studies in Educational Administration, 48(3), 30-37.
Middlehurst, R., Goreham, H., & Woodfield, S. (2009). Why research leadership in higher
       education?: Exploring contributions from the UK’s leadership foundation for higher
       education. Leadership, 5(3), 311–329.
Mintrop, R., & Zumpe, E. (2019). Solving real-life problems of practice and education leaders’
       school improvement mind-set. American Journal of Education, 125(3), 295-344.
Murashkin, M., & Tyrväinen, J. (2020). Adapting to the new normal: A qualitative study of digital
       leadership in crisis (Unpublished Master Thesis). Department of Business Administration,
       Umeå School of Business, Economics and Statistics.
Murphy, P. M. (2020). COVID-19 and emergency elearning: Consequences of the securitization
       of higher education for post-pandemic pedagogy. Contemporary Security Policy, 41(3), 1-
       14.
Pekkola, E., Siekkinen, T., Kujala, E. N., Kanniainen, J. P., & Laihonen, H. (2021). An
       assessment of COVID-19’s impact on Finnish University Leadership. Knowledge
       Management Research & Practice, 1-7.
Pollock, K. (2020). School leaders’ work during the COVID-19 pandemic: A two-pronged
       approach. International Studies in Educational Administration, 48(3), 38-44.
Roache, D., Rowe-Holder, D., & Muschette, R. (2020). Transitioning to online distance learning
       in the COVID-19 era: A call for skilled leadership in higher education institutions (HEIs).
       Proceedings CCEAM, 103.
Roy, D., Tripathy, S., Kar, S. K., Sharma, N., Verma, S. K., & Kaushal, V. (2020). Study of
       knowledge, attitude, anxiety & perceived mental healthcare need in Indian population
       during COVID-19 pandemic. Asian Journal of Psychiatry, 51, 1-8.
Sahlberg, P., & Hasak, J. (2017). Small data for big change. Education, 98(1), 7.
Samoilovich, D. (2020). Leadership in the time of COVID-19: reflections of Latin American
       higher education leaders. International Higher Education, 102, 32-34.



           Participatory Educational Research (PER)

                                                       -386-

                                       Participatory Educational Research (PER), 9 (1);362-387, 1 January 2022



Sellami, A. L., Sawalhi, R., Romanowski, H. M., & Amatullah, T. (2019). Definitions of
        educational leadership–arab educators’ perspectives. International Journal of Leadership
        in Education, 1-20. doi: 10.1080/13603124.2019.1690701.
Sharp, C., Nelson, J., Lucas, M., Julius, J., McCrone, T., & Sims, D. (2020). Schools’ Responses
        to Covid-19: The Challenges Facing Schools and Pupils in September 2020. Slough:
        National Foundation for Educational Research.
Spendlove, M. (2007). Competencies for effective leadership in higher education. International
        Journal of Educational Management, 21(5), 407-417.
Supovitz, A. J., & Christman, J. B. (2005). Small learning communities that actually learn:
        Lessons for school leaders. Phi Delta Kappan, 86(9), 649-651.
Strack, R., Kugel, J., Dyrchs, S., & Tauber, M. (2020). Leadership in the new now. Boston
        Consulting Group.
Strauss, A., & Corbin, J. (1990). Basics of qualitative research: Grounded theory procedures and
        techniques. CA: Thousand Oaks, Sage Publications.
Talu, S., & Nazarov, A. D. (2020). Challenges and competencies of leadership in Covid-19
        Pandemic. Proceedings of the Research Technologies of Pandemic Coronavirus Impact
        (RTCOV 2020), Advances in Social Science, Education and Humanities Research, 486,
        518-524.
Tran, H., Hardie, S., & Cunningham, M. W. K. (2020). Leading with empathy and humanity:
        Why talent-centred education leadership is especially critical amidst the pandemic
        crisis. International Studies in Educational Administration, 48(1), 39-45.
Trocchia, J. P., & Andrus, M. D. (2003). Perceived characteristics and abilities of an effective
        marketing department head. Journal of Marketing Education, 25(1), 5-15.
Unesco. (2020). COVID-19 and Higher Education: Today and Tomorrow Report. April 9.
Varela, D. G., & Fedynich, L. (2020). Leading schools from a social distance: Surveying South
        Texas school district leadership during the COVID-19 pandemic. National Forum of
        Educational Administration and Supervision Journal, 38(4), 1-10
Vogel, L. R. (2012). Leading with hearts and minds: Ethical orientations of educational leadership
        doctoral students. Values and Ethics in Educational Administration, 10(1), 1-12.
Wang, C., Cheng, Z., Yue, X., & McAleer, M. (2020). Risk management of COVID-19 by
        universities in China. 13(2), 36.
Wasserman, S., & Faust, K. (1994). Social network analysis: Methods and applications.
        Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Wing, N. S. (2013). Equipping the aspiring principal for the principalship in Hong Kong.
        Educational Management Administration and Leadership, 41(3), 272-288.
Yokuş, G. (2018). Analysis of online professional learning networks' effect on pre-service
        teachers' researcherly dispositions, socially responsible leaderships and social networks
        based learning: Digital teacher community. (Unpublished Doctoral Dissertation). Mersin
        University Educational Sciences Institution, Mersin, Turkey.




                                                         Participatory Educational Research (PER)

                                                -387-