International Journal of Advanced Research in Future Ready Learning and Education 25, Issue 1 (2021) 1-9




                                             International Journal of Advanced
                                           Research in Future Ready Learning and
                                                         Education
                                              https://www.akademiabaru.com/submit/index.php/frle/index
                                                                 ISSN: 2821 - 2800



Recruitment Criteria for Teachers’ Retention in Malaysian
International Schools: A Concept Paper
Leong Sok Yee1, Hamdan Said1,*

1    School of Education, Faculty of Social Sciences and Humanities, Universiti Teknologi Malaysia, Skudai, Malaysia



    ABSTRACT

    Issue related to retention in the organization always begins with recruitment. Suitable people with adequate knowledge, skills, and
    positive values are important to the organization. The hiring criteria provide a foundation for the management to motivate
    employees to exert the efforts needed to do their jobs effectively and eventually retain them. The purpose of this study is to
    investigate teacher recruitment criteria based on international school management personnel perspectives to solve teacher
    retention issues. The study aimed to provide additional literature to the body of knowledge on this research area. At the same time,
    the study hopes to provide insight to policymakers and practitioners alike to improve teacher recruitment and retention in schools.
    This study will use a qualitative design to explore school management personnel perceptions of teacher recruitment and retention
    issue. Purposive sampling will be used to select 20 school management personnel for the semi-structured interview. Each interview
    session will be recorded, transcribed verbatim, and analyzed thematically with the assistance of NVivo software. This study
    potentially promotes positive outcomes especially the sufficient manpower in international schools. The results aim to provide a
    framework for interested parties to develop and improve their current school environment.
    Keywords:
    Recruitment criteria; retention;
    international school


1. Introduction

   The annual report of Economic Transformation Programme (ETP) Malaysia presented by the
Performance Management and Delivery Unit (PEMANDU) showed that the intention of the Malaysian
government to expand its international schools, particularly in Kuala Lumpur and growth Corridors
such as the Iskandar Region as these areas are expected to see huge expatriate growth [26]. The report
also stated that the international schools are not only to cater to the needs of expatriates but also
locals. To support this initiative, the government has removed a total of 40% of the restrictions of the
local students to study in international schools [32]. The initiatives taken by the government had
opened doors for Malaysians to enrolment their children in international schools. This initiative
enables Malaysia to experience a great increase in the number of international schools.
   Since 2013, the number of international schools has increased by more than 80% [19]. Despite
increases in the number of schools, to date, an increase in the number of teachers does not meet with
the number of students. COBIS Report [7] indicated that there are currently substantial teacher supply
challenges, which unless tackled with practical solutions, will lead to a serious deficit of professional

*
 Corresponding author.
E-mail address: p-hamdan@utm.my
                                                                                                                                       1

International Journal of Advanced Research in Future Ready Learning and Education
Volume 25, Issue 1 (2021) 1-9



capital. This report revealed that the most severe challenges to recruit and retain enough international
school teachers experienced by the UK and abroad. Similarly, the shortage of teachers is one of the
critical problems that interrupting Malaysian international schools. According to the Ministry of
Education (MOE) [19], the number of international schools’ teachers had increased to 80% while the
number of international schools’ students had increased 119% within 5 years. The figures showed that
the increase in student number does not tally with the increase in teacher number. Various efforts
have been put in place by the government to ensure that issues of teachers' shortage at the
international schools can be reduced to the minimum. Among the preventive measures taken by the
government is allowing several universities to train locals to work at the international schools. On the
part of international schools, preventive approaches have been initiated by the school management
personnel and policymakers to cater to the shortage of teachers in the schools [18,28].
    Issue related to retention in the organization always begins with recruitment. Failure to recruit and
retain quality teachers will bring a great loss to the school stakeholders. Recruitment is the first move
to avoid mistakes in taking people in who may not be suitable to the organization's culture and may
adversely affect the labor relations between employees in the organization [31]. According to Hoi [13],
hiring the right employees is important to positively affect the organization's performance, such as
lower turnover rate, better organization culture, greater production, and bottom-line profit. Teacher
leaving may impact the financial and resources of the schools. The process of recruiting, hiring, and
training new teachers requires significant financial costs [4]. Schools may need to hire teachers
through well-established advertisement agencies or agents. This process will incur a huge sum of
money. For example, Texas Centre for Educational Research [33] showed data that a school will lose
at least $8,000 per recruit who left in the first few years of teaching. The cost increases after nine
years of service. The National Commission on Teaching and America's Future reported that
replacement costs for teachers are now closer to $15,000 for each teacher who leaves [10].
Additionally, school administrators will need time to interview new potential teachers. This task
consumes much time and thus, it is not economic. One of the great laws of labor is that time is money.
Furthermore, newly hired teachers often are less experienced, and therefore they require more
supports to improve themselves [6, 10]. Therefore, school management personnel should ensure the
new teachers that they recruit can stay with the schools longer resulting from appropriate recruitment
criteria. School management personnel must select teachers who are the most compatible with the
school culture, job description, and management structure, to create teacher retention for longer and
more productive for the job [21].
     Sims [29] pointed out that the recruitment strategies are the necessary steps to take into account
by the organizations, not only for attracting new talents but also to enhance its chances for retaining
the employees, once they are hired. Recruitment is a move to ensure the supply of sufficient
manpower in an organization and it is also linked to the factors that are used to retain quality
employees in the organization. Although international school is an independent body in Malaysia,
there are some criteria needed to achieve in the process of applying for a license from the
government. For example, Malaysian international school teachers must possess a valid teaching
permit and suitable qualifications with the major subject they teach [16]. But for non-Malaysian
teachers, the government requires those teachers to possess at least a degree in education or relevant
academic and professional qualification in the teaching field; certified health level by the medical
institutions in Malaysia; and payroll pass from the Malaysian Immigration Department [16]. Compared
to the recruitment of local teachers, the process of hiring foreign teachers is complex and time-
consuming. To ensure a sufficient supply of international school teachers, the Malaysian government
encourages schools to recruit Malaysians as international school teachers. In parallel, a few private
higher education institutions (HEIs), such as SEGi University College, UCSI University, University Tunku

                                                                                                       2

International Journal of Advanced Research in Future Ready Learning and Education
Volume 25, Issue 1 (2021) 1-9



Abdul Rahman (UTAR), and Kirkby International College providing places for teachers to obtain
academic and professional qualifications so that they can provide service in the international or
private schools in Malaysia [26]. With the effort done by the government, international schools can
select the right persons from the qualified candidates who meet the specific criteria of the selection
in each school to ensure the new teachers can stay in the schools longer.
    Suitable people with adequate knowledge, skills, and positive values are important to
organizations. These criteria can ensure that the employees can take in the job without unnecessary
stress. Thus, the hiring criteria provide a foundation for the management to motivate employees to
exert the efforts needed to do their jobs effectively and eventually retain them. An investigation of
teacher recruitment criteria is important to solve the teacher retention issue. As such, there is a need
to conduct a specific and representative study on the spectrum of recruitment and retention criteria
to guide international schools to achieve high recruitment and retention rate.

1.2 Research Question

    This study sought to answer the following research questions:
    i. What are the structural recruitment plans used by school management personnel to recruit
    teachers in Malaysian international schools?
    ii. What are the recruitment strategies used by school management personnel to recruit teachers
    in Malaysian international schools?
    iii. What are the criteria employed by school management personnel to recruit teachers in
    Malaysian international schools?

1.3 Research Objectives

  The goal of this study aims to explore the recruitment criteria which help in teacher retention in
Malaysian international schools. Hence, our study objectives are as follow:
  i. To explore the structural recruitment plans used by school management personnel to recruit
  teachers in Malaysian international schools.
  ii. To identify the recruitment strategies used by school management personnel to recruit
  teachers in Malaysian international schools.
  iii. To explore the criteria employed by school management personnel to recruit teachers in
  Malaysian international schools.

1.4 Limitation

   Due to the COVID-19 pandemic, data collection for this study will be conducted online. Potential
respondents may face accessibility issues due to poor or no internet connection. Online qualitative
data collection may pose difficulty for researchers to gather field data as the researchers cannot carry
out observation in this study.

2. Literature

   Recruitment is a process to ensure the continuous supply of qualified teachers to a school. During
this process, a large number of candidates will be attracted for interviews and suitable candidates will
be selected as teachers. However, the recruitment and selection criteria are varying from school to
school and country to country. These selection criteria are imposed to ensure that the schools have

                                                                                                      3

International Journal of Advanced Research in Future Ready Learning and Education
Volume 25, Issue 1 (2021) 1-9



recruit quality and suitable teachers for their students. For example, in Malaysia, public school
teachers are expected to be fluent in the Malay language and possess a minimum qualification of
diploma in education [30]. Yet, this restriction does not apply in private and international schools. The
Malaysian government encourages international schools to hire Malaysians who possess a valid
teaching diploma and suitable academic qualification with the subject teaching as a teacher [16].
Unlike public schools, the government imposed certain criteria for international schools to hire foreign
teachers. These criteria include possess a degree in education or relevant academic and professional
qualification in the teaching field; good health level as certified by the medical practitioners in
Malaysia; and acquired a payroll pass from the Malaysian Immigration Department [16].
     Additionally, like most countries in the world, foreign teachers are required to obtain a visa or an
employment pass to work in Malaysia. Generally, each country in the world has its unique policy and
requirement for an employment pass application. For example, according to the American Federation
of Teachers International Affairs Department [2], in the United States an employment visa is a one-
year visa that can be renewed twice, for a total of three years, and then foreign teachers must return
to their home countries for two years to fulfill a residency requirement. In addition, the government
of the United States also required international teachers to meet the following criteria: 1. be a primary
or secondary teacher in their last legal residence; 2. satisfy the standards of the state in which they
will be working; 3. be of good reputation and character; 4. want to teach primary or secondary school
in the United States full-time, and 5. have a minimum of three years teaching experience [2]. In
contrast, the Malaysian government required all expatriate teachers to possess an employment pass.
There are three types of employment pass available in Malaysia: Employment Pass (Category I) is for
expatriates with a minimum salary of RM10,000 per month and an employment contract of up to 5
years; Employment Pass (Category II) is for expatriates with a basic salary between RM5,000 to
RM9,999 per month and an employment contract up to 2 years; Employment Pass (Category III) for
Knowledge/Skilled Workers with a basic salary between RM3,000 to RM4,999 per month and an
employment contract must not exceed 12 months [14].
     Apart from the above-mentioned recruitment criteria, there are other criteria that schools need
to seriously consider although they are not enforced by the government to ensure the quality of the
school workforce. As mentioned by Tan [32], recruiting the right candidates for teaching involved
getting people with the right aptitude (what and how of teaching) and attitude (sense of commitment
to teaching). Barber and Mourshed [3] agreed to this notion and stated that a person becomes an
effective teacher when he/she possessed a certain set of characteristics such as a high level of literacy
and numeracy, strong interpersonal and communications skills, high willingness to learn, and have a
great motivation to teach. Otoo, Assuming, and Agyei [24] added to the criteria, the work experience,
and communication or interpersonal skills, that are mostly required by the schools. They reported that
work experience and qualifications are the measures of competence concerning the applicant's
technical skills, whereas communication skills are related to cultural adaptation, social competence,
and language proficiency. Apart from that, Darling-Hammond [10] who explored factors affecting
teacher recruitment and retention in high-need schools also found that hiring better prepared and
experienced teachers can reduce attrition and they provided higher levels of competence. Abdou [1],
a researcher who is interested to understand teachers' recruitment and selection practices found that
international schools in Egypt require credentials, appearance, self-confidence, communication and
interpersonal skills, positive attitude, self-composure, content, and pedagogical knowledge. She noted
that some schools cared about marital status especially newly married female applicants. She
reported that the schools are more likely to inquire about the pregnancy plans, and how the applicants
expect to manage their newborns and their job commitments. According to Bogatova [5], employers
will use various tests such as ability tests, integrity tests, personality tests, group situational tests, and

                                                                                                            4

International Journal of Advanced Research in Future Ready Learning and Education
Volume 25, Issue 1 (2021) 1-9



work simulation tests to understand better the applicant and to determine his/her abilities, talents,
skills, and qualifications to match with the applied position. The main purpose of setting up these tests
and criteria in the process of recruitment is to recruit a capable and high-quality teacher who can work
towards the school goal and stay in the school longer. Thus, it is safe to conclude that recruitment
criteria are closely related to the retention rate of teachers.
     Teachers' selection and recruitment processes are reported to be more effective and meaningful
with the involvement of school management personnel [1,23,38]. It is the responsibility of the school
management personnel to recruit and select the right persons as their school teachers. The
involvement of school management personnel throughout the process of recruitment is very
important since recruitment involved high costs, time, and manpower. These costs include recruiting,
hiring and processing, and training new teachers and new hires [11]. A study conducted by the Georgia
Professional Standards Commission found that the cost of replacing a teacher who left was $11,976
to $ 16,387 [22]. Besides, the study by Wilkin [36] showed that the recruitment process needs to take
almost 30 days which involved vacancies announcement, process application, interview, and
selection. This recruitment process involves various departments and people to recruit a teacher.
School management personnel must select the teachers who are the best compatible with the school
culture, job description, and management structure, to ensure teacher retention for longer and more
productive for the job [21]. Therefore, school management personnel should ensure that the new
teachers that they recruited can stay with the schools longer through the application of appropriate
recruitment criteria.
     A common strategy of recruiting teachers in international schools’ ranges from internal searches,
referrals, and contacting employment agencies, to advertising vacancies with college and university
placement services [37]. As such, Rao [27] divided recruitment strategies into 2 main groups: internal
(present employees, retired/former employees, previous applicants, and employee referrals), and
external (advertisement, campus recruitment, recruiting agencies, job portals/organizational
websites, job fairs/exhibitions, headhunting, and other sources). Internal recruitment strategy is a way
to inform current employees about an open position in the school. They can be informed regarding
the positions by internal advertisements, e-mail, or in person [5]. The advantages of this type of
recruitment strategy are time-saving, more reliable than external recruitment, promotes loyalty
among teachers, is less expensive than external method, and requires less orientation and training
[25]. However, there are some drawbacks with this strategy such as limited choice of candidates may
discourage the flow of new blood into school, and the selection of a candidate may be unfair based
on the management's likes and dislikes [5]. Therefore, an external recruitment strategy offers an
alternative way to recruit potential teachers although it is more expensive compared to an internal
recruitment strategy.
     To ensure the recruitment process is smooth and efficient, a comprehensive plan is essential.
Thebe and Van der Waldt [34] suggested common sequential steps in the recruitment process: 1)
Identify the need to recruit/determine whether a vacancy exists; 2) Update the job description,
specification, and profile; 3) Determine the key performance areas of the job/recruitment planning;
4) Consult the recruitment policy and procedure; 5) Consider the sources of recruitment (searching);
6) Choose the appropriate recruitment method; 7) Develop the recruitment advertisement/strategy
development; 8) Place the advertisement in the most appropriate and suitable communication
medium/implement a decision; 9) Ensuring availability of application blanks/ensure a pool of potential
qualified applications/allow sufficient time for responses; 10) Screen responses/screening; and 11)
Recruitment evaluation and control. Besides, the University of South Carolina [35] offered a
recruitment step as the following: 1) Create or update position description; 2) Develop a recruitment
plan; 3) Decide on the use of a search committee or interview panel; 4) Submit the requisition to post

                                                                                                       5

International Journal of Advanced Research in Future Ready Learning and Education
Volume 25, Issue 1 (2021) 1-9



the position; 5) Screen candidates; 6) Interview candidates; 7) Check references; 8) Make
recommendation to department head; 9) Secure salary approval; 10) Initiate background check; and
11) Write an offer letter. Although, different organizations or schools will have their recruitment plans,
yet, all the plans aim to recruit the right person for the position. These steps help an employer to get
better knowledge about a candidate, his or her abilities, motivation, background, and additional
information which is useful for making a decision [5]. The right person for the position is a way for
retention. Thus, a good recruitment plan is the first key to teacher retention.

3. Methodology

    This study aims to explore international teacher recruitment and retention criteria using a
qualitative research design. In this design, the study explores the unknown teacher recruitment and
retention criteria for Malaysian international schools which are registered with the Ministry of
Education (MOE). Currently, there is a total of 153 Malaysian international schools [20] with an
estimated 612 school management personnel (include principal, vice-principal, head of the
department, and HR manager).
     The study will interview 20 international school management personnel who will be selected
through purposive sampling. It is deemed that the interview data will reach a saturation point by this
figure. The data collection then will be continued for one or two more school management personnel
to ensure and confirm that there is no new information emerged. The samples of school management
personnel will be selected from the total population based on the following four criteria: 1) school
management personnel from the oldest international schools in Malaysia; 2) school management
personnel that have at least 20 years of leadership background; 3) school management personnel who
are successful in leadership positions and granted with awards or recognitions; 4) school management
personnel who are recommended by other international schools or any international school
associations. These selection criteria are needed to enable the researchers to obtain meaningful
information from the respondents to answer the research questions. With the experience in
leadership, the respondents are expected to be able to provide the recruitment criteria employed to
recruit international teachers which are closely related to the issue of teacher retention in school.
     In this study, semi-structured one-to-one interviews will be used. The aim of using semi-structured
interviews for data collection is to gather information from the international school management
personnel who have personal experiences, perceptions, and thought about the research topic. This
action is in parallel with the suggestion made by Lincoln, Yvonna, and Guba [17] that the researchers
can use semi-structured interviews to collect new, exploratory data related to a research topic,
triangulate other data sources or validate findings through member checking. Open-ended questions
will be used in this study to allow the researchers to explore participants' views of reality [12]. In this
way, the researchers can understand the recruitment criteria that international schools of Malaysia
utilized to retain quality teachers from the school management personnel perspective. This study will
render the school management personnel the best time to present their views on the research topic.
Certain questions will be prepared to guide the researchers in the semi-structured interview towards
achieving research objectives, but additional questions will be made during the interview sessions to
clarify the data. Due to the time and geographical limitation, skype interviewing will be employed in
the process of collecting data. After receiving agreement from the participants in taking part in the
interview which will be conducted through Skype, the time of the interview session will be fixed and
both interviewees and interviewers will then meet on Skype to conduct the interview sessions. As a
result, the interview session will be conducted in the participant's favorite conditions to increase the
participation rate. Although the Skype interview does not involve a face-to-face interview, it still allows

                                                                                                         6

International Journal of Advanced Research in Future Ready Learning and Education
Volume 25, Issue 1 (2021) 1-9



the researchers to access verbal and non-verbal cues through a webcam. Moreover, it also provides
an opportunity to record the whole process of interview sessions which eventually eases the coding
process. Despite the benefits, the necessity of access to high-speed Internet, familiarity with online
communication for both parties, and having digital literacy will affect the nature of the interview [15].
    Each interview session will be recorded, transcribed professionally, and analyzed using a content
analysis approach with the assistance of the NVivo version 11 research software programme. In this
study, the content analysis is used to analyze the content of the interview transcripts to derive the
themes. The validation of interview transcripts will be checked through member checking techniques
to avoid bias from the researchers. The dependability and confirmability will be checked through the
audit trail technique. All recorded interview sessions and transcribed notes will be kept for audit. All
the evidence related to the interview sessions will be checked by the auditors. In this study, the auditor
selection technique proposed by Lincoln and Guba [17] will be used to select the appropriate auditors.
The three selection criteria, supported by Lincoln and Guba [17] to select auditors, are 1) someone
with the methodological expertise to conduct an audit of a qualitative study; 2) someone who has
sufficient experience and credibility to be considered trustworthy, whose accounts will be considered
valid by others; and 3) a disinterested party, who has no connection to or affiliation with the study,
and no stake in the outcomes. To maintain consistency, all the changes and revisions to the interview
protocols and transcripts will be documented to keep a trackable record of when and how the changes
are implemented. Besides, the researchers also will keep a record of how certain themes and codes
emerged in NVivo for audit purposes.

4. Results and Discussion

   The expected results of this study are the recruitment plan, strategy, and criteria employed by the
school management personnel to recruit teachers in Malaysian international schools. The results of
this study will be used to provide a framework for interested parties to develop and improve their
current school environment.

5. Conclusion

   The result of the study hopes to provide to the body of knowledge additional literature in this
research area. The study also hopes to reveal effective recruitment and retention criteria from the
perspective of school management personnel which can provide practical guidance for international
education policymakers and school administration to recruit and retain quality teachers in Malaysian
international schools. This study potentially promotes positive outcomes especially the sufficient
manpower in international schools.

References
[1]    Abdou, Amira. "Teachers' recruitment and selection practices within different schooling systems in Egypt." (2012).
[2]    American Federation of Teachers International Affairs Department. Importing Educators: Causes and Consequences
       of International Teacher Recruitment. Washington, DC: AFT, 2009.
[3]    Barber, M., and M. Mourshed. "How the world’s best-performing school systems came out on top (The McKinsey
       Report). McKinsey & Company." (2007).
[4]    Barnes, Gary, Edward Crowe, and Benjamin Schaefer. "The cost of teacher turnover in five school districts: A pilot
       study." National Commission on Teaching and America's Future (2007).
[5]    Bogatova, Mariia. "IMPROVING RECRUITMENT, SELECTION AND RETENTION OF EMPLOYEES Case: Dpointgroup
       Ltd." (2017).
[6]    Carroll, Stephen, Robert Reichardt, Cassandra Guarino, and Andrea Mejia. The distribution of teachers among
       California's school districts and schools. RAND CORP SANTA MONICA CA, 2000.

                                                                                                                       7

International Journal of Advanced Research in Future Ready Learning and Education
Volume 25, Issue 1 (2021) 1-9



[7]    Cobis Research. Teacher supply in British international schools, 2018. www.cobis.org.uk
[8]    Darling-Hammond, Linda. The high cost of teacher turnover. Washington, DC: National Commission on Teaching
       and America‘s Future, 2009.
[9]    Darling-Hammond, Linda. "Recruiting and retaining teachers: Turning around the race to the bottom in high-need
       schools." Journal of curriculum and instruction 4, no. 1 (2010): 16-32.
[10]   Darling-Hammond, Linda, and Gary Sykes. "Wanted, a national teacher supply policy for education: The right way
       to meet the" highly qualified teacher" challenge." education policy analysis archives 11 (2003): 33.
[11]   Georgia School Board Association. “Teacher recruitment & retention”, accessed 2020. https://gsba.com/wp-
       content/uploads/2020/12/GSBA-Recruitment-Retention-rtf20.pdf
[12]   Hesse-Biber, Sharlene Nagy, and Patricia Leavy. The practice of qualitative research. Sage, 2010.
[13]   Hiew, Hon Hoi. "A Study of the Effectiveness of Recruitment in Selecting Qualified Talents in Service Organization."
       PhD diss., UMP, 2013.
[14]   Immigration Department of Malaysia. “Expatriate service division (ESD) Online Guidebook V3.1”, accessed 2017.
       https://esd.imi.gov.my/portal/pdf/tc-esd-quick-guidev3-20181102.pdf
[15]   Janghorban, Roksana, Robab Latifnejad Roudsari, and Ali Taghipour. "Skype interviewing: The new generation of
       online synchronous interview in qualitative research." International journal of qualitative studies on health and
       well-being 9, no. 1 (2014): 24152.
[16]   Kementerian Pendidikan Malaysia, Bahagian Pendidikan Swasta. "Panduan Am Penubuhan Dan Pendaftaran
       Sekolah Antarabangsa." (2018).
[17]   Lincoln, Yvonna S., and Egon G. Guba. Naturalistic inquiry. sage, 1985.
[18]   Makhuzeni, Boitomelo, and E. Nicolene Barkhuizen. "The effect of a total rewards strategy on school teachers'
       retention." SA Journal of Human Resource Management 13, no. 1 (2015): 1-10.
[19]   Ministry of Education Malaysia, MOE. (2018). Quick facts 2018 Malaysia Educational statistic. Putrajaya: Educational
       Data Sector.
[20]   Ministry of Education Malaysia, MOE. Quick facts 2019: Malaysia educational statistics. Putrajaya: Educational Data
       Sector, 2019.
[21]   Nigam, Ashutosh, Neha Goel, and Komal Goyal. "Study of HRM Practices on Employees Retention: A Review of
       literature." Journal of Critical Reviews 7, no. 19 (2020): 3742-3747.
[22]   Nweke, Winifred C., Gerald M. Eads, Comfort Y. Afolabi, Cynthia E. Stephens, and F. D. Toth. "The impact of teacher
       workforce retirement/attrition on personnel replacement cost." Retrieved from Georgia Professional Standards
       Commission website: http://www. gapsc. com/Research/WhitePapers/Teacher_Workforce_Retirement_43_06.
       pdf (2006).
[23]   OECD. Publishing. Teachers matter: Attracting, developing and retaining effective teachers. Organisation for
       Economic Co-operation and Development, 2005.
[24]   Otoo, Isaac Christopher, Juliet Assuming, and Paul Mensah Agyei. "Effectiveness of recruitment and selection
       practices in public sector higher education institutions: evidence from Ghana." European Scientific Journal 14, no.
       13 (2018): 199-214.
[25]   Patel, Vinod N., and Rana, K. Girish. Personnel Management. Jaipur: Oxford Book Co. 2007
[26]   Menteri, Jabatan Perdana, and Unit Pengurusan Prestasi dan Perlaksanaan. Economic Transformation Programme:
       Annual Report 2011. Performance Management And Delivery Unit (PEMANDU), Jabatan Perdana Menteri, 2012.
[27]   Rao, P. Sbba. Human Resource Management: Text and Cases. Himalaya Publishing House, 2009.
[28]   See, Beng Huat, and Stephen Gorard. "Why don’t we have enough teachers?: A reconsideration of the available
       evidence." Research papers in education 35, no. 4 (2020): 416-442.
[29]   Sims, Ronald R. Organizational success through effective human resources management. Greenwood publishing
       group, 2002.
[30]   Suruhanjaya Perkhidmatan Pendidikan Malaysia. “Iklan Permohonan Jawatan Pegawai Pendidikan Perkhidmatan
       (Ppp) Gred DG41”, accessed 2016. https://www.spp.gov.my/ms/pengumuman-berita-terkini/pengumuman-
       2016/pengumuman-guru/213-iklan-permohonan-jawatan-pegawai-pendidikan-perkhidmatan-ppp-gred-dg41
[31]   Sutanto, Eddy Madiono, and Milly Kurniawan. "The impact of recruitment, employee retention and labor relations
       to employee performance on batik industry in Solo City, Indonesia." International Journal of Business and
       Society 17, no. 2 (2016): 375-390.
[32]   Tan, C. C. “International schools’ boom”. New Straits Times, accessed May 27, 2012.
       http://www2.nst.com.my/nation/general/international-schools-boom-1.88061
[33]   Benner, A. D. "The cost of teacher turnover. Austin, TX." Texas Center for Educational Research. Retrieved from
       www. tcer. org/research/documents/teacher_turnover_full. doc (2000).
[34]   Thebe, T. P., and Gerrit Van der Waldt. "A recruitment and selection process model: The case of the Department
       of Justice and Constitutional Development." (2014).
                                                                                                                         8

International Journal of Advanced Research in Future Ready Learning and Education
Volume 25, Issue 1 (2021) 1-9



[35]   University of South Carolina. “Step by Step Guide to Hiring”. Human resources department,
       2016.https://www.sc.edu/about/offices_and_divisions/human_resources/docs/step_by_step_guide_to_hiring.pd
       f
[36]   Wilkins, Marion. "A study of the recruitment of teachers in a rural school division in Southeastern Virginia." PhD
       diss., Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University, 1998.
[37]   Young, Phillip, and William, B. Castetter. The human resource function in educational administration (8th edition).
       Upper Saddle River: Pearson Education, 2003.
[38]   Zafeirakou, Aigli. “Paper commissioned for the EFA Global Monitoring Report 2008, Education for All by 2015: will
       we make it?”, accessed 2007. www.unesdoc.unesco.org/images/0015/001555/155594e.pdf




                                                                                                                        9