Jurnal Ilmiah Ilmu Administrasi Publik: Jurnal Pemikiran dan Penelitian Administrasi Publik
Volume 9 Number 2, July– December 2019. Page 305-314
p-ISSN: 2086-6364, e-ISSN: 2549-7499
Homepage: http://ojs.unm.ac.id/iap




  Analysis of the Principal's Role in Improving the Quality of Primary
                          School Management

                                      Kadariah
                     Manajemen Pendidikan Universitas Terbuka, Makassar
                            Email: kadariah@ecampus.ut.ac.id

    (Received: September 6-2019; revised: November 15-2019; published: December 31-2019)

                                               ABSTRACT

This study aims to: (1) describe the principal’s strategies to plan, organize, actuate, and control the school
programs to improve the quality of education at SMP 1 Cilawu; and (2) describe constraints in the
improvement of the quality of education. This was a case study with qualitative approach. The
research subjects included teachers and educational personnel. The results of the study used the
principal’s as a manager: (1) plans programs by specifying the needs for teachers and educational
personnel who will carry out duties, programs in the form of policies and the curriculum that will be
implemented, and policies to add the time slot for the guidance and counseling subject by two hours a
week; (2) makes an organizational structure by involving students’parents through the school
committee and completing infrastructure facilities that the school needs; (3) gives examples of how to
work well and calmly, motivation, and rewards to the personnel morally and materially, improves
welfare, sends teachers and educational personnel to trainings, and motivates senior teachers to have
spirit of lifelong education; and (4) controls the output, teaching and learning processes, and students
from the enrolment to the graduation. (5) The constraints include the facts that there are
personnel who are not disciplined, there is a lack of communication between the principal and
some of the personnel, and the school operation aid funds do not match the school’s needs.

Keywords: principal; planning; organizing; leading; monitoring

INTRODUCTION
       Education is a human need that is very important in human life itself. Humans in essence
will not only depend on nature without any other influence. In this process, the influence that
will be obtained by humans from other human beings will bring a change of attitude towards the
people they influence. In accordance with the above it is clear that humans need an education,
education is a process to change people from certain conditions to other conditions. So with
education that change will appear in the process of changing people's minds, from not
understanding to understanding, from not knowing to knowing, because education is an absolute
thing that must be met in an effort to improve the standard of living of humans, religion, and
especially the Indonesian people not to be left behind by other nations.
       This is in line with the understanding of education listed in the National Education
System Law No. 20 of 2003 article 1 which reads "Education is a conscious and planned effort
to create an atmosphere of learning and learning process so that students actively develop their
potential to have religious spiritual strength, self-control, personality, intelligence, noble
character, and the skills needed by themselves , society, nation and country ". Therefore the
education system must be able to guarantee equal opportunities for improving the quality and
relevance and efficiency of education management to face challenges in accordance with the

306    Jurnal Ilmiah Ilmu Administrasi Publik: Jurnal Pemikiran dan Penelitian Administrasi
Publik
     Volume 9 Number 2, July– December 2019. Page 305-314




demands of changing lives at home and abroad, so that necessary changes in education are
planned, directed and sustainable. Therefore education requires professional structuring, it
requires capable and tough personal. From this we call education leaders / principals.
       A principal is not only required to master the theory of leadership but must also be skilled
at applying it to practical work situations. The principal is the head of education who has an
important role in developing educational institutions, namely as the holder of control in
educational institutions. In this case the role of the principal must be moved in such a way as is
in his role in improving the quality of education that is as a manager so that it can influence the
staff of teachers, both directly and indirectly. In addition, the principal also has a very large role
in developing the quality of education in these educational institutions.
       Correspondingly, the role of the principal is very influential in the growth and
development of education, namely to improve human resources and the quality of education.
Principals and teachers and other education personnel are required to play an active role in
promoting the growth and development of the quality of their profession in the hope of gaining
new knowledge. The principal also acts as an educator who is responsible for school
management.
       The success of an educational institution depends very much on the leadership of the
principal. Because the principal as a leader in his institution, he must be able to bring his
institution towards achieving the goals set, he must be able to see changes and be able to see the
future in a better globalization life. The principal must be responsible for the smoothness and
success of all matters of governance and formal management to his superiors or informally to
the community who have entrusted their students.
       The success of a school is also inseparable from an effective headmaster, while an
effective headmaster shows his quality in the manner as stated by Sorenson & Goldsmith (2008)
as follows. “(1) establishes a visible presence in the school. (2) monitors teachers and students;
(3) communicates a vision of school goals and objectives; (4) fosters an open and positive
school culture and climate; (5) serves as an instructional expert available to faculty and staff; (6)
develops a safe and orderly learning environment; (7) facilitates an instructional and curricular
program that promotes student archievement; (8) establishes high organizational expectations;
(9) initiates a professional development program; (10) Implements ongoing evaluation of all
personed; (11) aligns curricular and strategic plans to enhance teaching and learning”
       But the reality on the ground to make a quality education a lot of problems that occur
principals are faced with a variety of problems that are not a few of which are in planning the
principal's program sometimes lacking an active role, lack of information about professional
development of educators and staff expertise, in organizing schools and monitoring the
principal's program is not playing an active role.
       Problems with facilities and infrastructure are also faced by schools so that the teaching
and learning process is less than optimal, in monitoring and evaluation it is not right to identify
the cause of the decline in the quality of education in the value of the final national exam
results, the existence of educators and education personnel who lack work discipline, student
delinquency included in the problem budget that is still felt to be out of balance with needs.
       The role / role is a concept that cannot be separated from one's status, position and
position. Between role and status are like two sides of the same coin, therefore we cannot

            Kadariah; Analisis Peran Kepala Sekolah dalam Meningkatkan Mutu Manajemen | 307



understand status without role, and vice versa. Robbins (2001) defines a role as "a set of
expected behavior patterns attributed to someone occupying a given position in a social unit",
whereas according to (Rivai, 2004), "role or role can be interpreted as the behavior that is set
and expected from someone in certain position ". Based on this understanding, it can be
concluded that the role in the organizational context is behavior that must be carried out by
someone based on the position, status, and certain positions held in an organization.
        The principal can be defined as a functional teacher who is given the task to lead a school
where teaching and learning processes are held, or where interaction occurs between the teacher
giving the lesson and the student receiving the lesson (Amanda et al., 2017; Asmanurhidayani et
al. ., 2018; Iskandar, 2013; Niswaty et al., 2019; Saggaf et al., 2018; Salam, 2015; Salam et al.,
2018). In the explanation above, it can be concluded that the position of the principal determines
the direction of an institution, the principal is the regulator of the existing program in school.
Because it is expected that the principal will bring the work spirit of the teacher and build a
school culture in improving the quality of education.
        Gorton et al., (2006) suggested that "managers are people who do things right, are leaders
all people who do the right things and good managers handle routine daily jobs". As a manager,
of course, must have certain skills as Handoko (2003) stated: "(a) conceptual skills, namely the
mental ability to coordinate all the interests and activities of the organization; (b) humanitarian
skills, ability to work by understanding and motivating others as individuals and groups; (c)
administrative skills, namely by planning, organizing, staffing and monitoring; (d) technical
skills, namely the ability to use equipment, procedures, techniques from a particular field such
as machinery, and so on ".
        Principals as managers are essentially carrying out management functions as stated by
Terry & Rue (1987) which explains the notion of management as follows "Management is a
distinc process consisting of planning, organizing, actualiting, and controlling, performed to
determine and accomplish atated objectives by the use of human beings and other resources.
Management is a clear process that includes planning, organizing, mobilizing and controlling
that is carried out to achieve the goals set with the potential of humans and other resources.
Another opinion expressed about management functions is expressed by Robbins & Coulter
(2007) that management functions include planning, organizing, leading, and controlling.
        From the explanation above, the principal as a school manager organizes and manages all
the potential of the school through the stages of planning, organizing, mobilizing, and
supervising these potentials to support the achievement of educational goals. The formulation of
the problem in this study is How do principals in planning, organizing, mobilizing, and
monitoring / evaluating programs in improving the quality of elementary school management.

METHOD
       This research is a case study with a qualitative approach that focuses on how the
principal's role as a manager in improving the quality of elementary school management in
Makassar City. Nevertheless the authors do not ignore the quantitative data needed to better
describe the situation and the object of the research object (Creswell & Creswell, 2017). A
qualitative approach is used on the grounds that this research seeks to uncover the reality in the
field about the role of the principal as a manager and can be understood in depth, so that in the
end the research findings can be obtained.
       This research was conducted at an elementary school in Makassar City. The subject of

308    Jurnal Ilmiah Ilmu Administrasi Publik: Jurnal Pemikiran dan Penelitian Administrasi
Publik
     Volume 9 Number 2, July– December 2019. Page 305-314




this study was informants who provided information relating to the role of the principal as a
manager. The subjects of this study were 11 principals, teachers, and education staff. The
selection of informants in this study was obtained by snowball sampling technique. This
research prioritizes data directly from informants and observations made in the field. The object
of this research is the activity carried out by the principal as a manager.
       The data of this study were obtained by means of researchers conducting interviews by
conducting direct meetings with school principals, teachers totaling 5 people, educational staff 3
people and representatives of school committees by focusing on the material concerned with
ongoing research including the curriculum being carried out at the time this, the principal's role
in carrying out the tasks and history of the object under study.
       This data collection method functions as a digger of information in the form of questions
relating to the principal's role as a manager. In this research, documentation study was used to
obtain general data about the history of 5 elementary schools in Makassar City, organizational
structure, achievements, and school development plans.
       In this study using the method of analysis by reducing data, display data and draw
conclusions from the data collected. Data reduction is carried out by the process of selecting,
loading attention to simplification or enhancement of data in the form of detailed descriptions or
reports. Data reduction starts by making a summary of each data so that it is easy to understand,
discarding data that is considered not important and the whole series is then grouped based on
the category of the problem under study. Data display is an effort to present data by looking at
the overall picture or a certain part of the research data to make it easier to read the data then the
data has been reduced and then presented by combining information arranged in one form that is
easily seen for review. Taking conclusions is an attempt to look for meaning to the data
collected by studying patterns, themes, similarities, differences, and things that arise the most.

RESULT AND DISCUSSION
       Based on the results of the analysis shows that the principal as a manager includes
planning the program. In planning the program, the principal starts from: (1) planning the
human resources by detailing the needs of the teaching staff who will carry out their teaching
duties; (2) planning policies such as the principal's program and curriculum to be implemented
in this school; (3) in formulating policies, the principal involves teachers and experts by going
through several stages such as holding several meetings with PKS, teachers, school committees
and other stakeholders such as supervisors; (4) Based on the principal's policy, there are
additional subjects, namely guidance and counseling with 2 hours of teaching / week.
       The second role of the principal is to organize the program by creating a school
organizational structure such as the involvement of parents through the school committee by
completing the facilities needed by the school, monitoring classroom learning, assignments such
as the existence of PKS and TU according to the ability of teachers both at the level the class
and the skills they have, form a committee in dealing with competitions or training.
       The role of the principal as the third manager is the mobilization of the program that is by
moving the existing educators and educational staff such as by giving good and calm examples
in work, for teachers there is motivation for the spirit of long life education (teachers must

            Kadariah; Analisis Peran Kepala Sekolah dalam Meningkatkan Mutu Manajemen | 309



learn), motivating educators and teaching staff morally and materially, improving welfare,
giving awards to outstanding teachers and educators, involving teachers in education and
training, MGMP, providing guidance to educators in making software (RPP, Syllabus), giving
briefings as well as evaluating the performance of educators and staff education at the beginning
of the month every once a month, and facilitate subordinates to be able to carry out professional
development, as well as supporting educators or education personnel for those who want to
continue their studies and who want to get a certification allowance.
       The fourth role is monitoring and evaluation carried out by supervising both the PBM
and in the achievement of improving the quality of education and the achievement of UN
scores. Supervision in PBM is carried out with reference to the PKB and PKG and is carried out
by a team formed by the school principal. Supervision of improving the quality of education
includes supervision of inputs (HR, organizational structure, plans and programs, vision,
mission and goals), processes (performance of school principals), and outputs (school
achievements generated after the process both academic and non-academic achievements.
Supervision is carried out regularly namely at the end of the semester, at the end / beginning of
the new school year with its implementation assisted by the Vice Governor, PKS and the
Coordinator of the BK (Guidance and Counseling) .After supervision if there are found
obstacles either from HR or sources of hope, then what is done is to give a general
understanding at the teacher coaching meeting, explore the background of the problem, and find
solutions to solve the problem.
       The latter role is as a culture developer by implementing school culture such as culture in
religion, disciplinary culture, culture of achievement and culture of cleanliness in order to
improve the quality of education and form students who are characteristically and adhering to
religious values.

Principal in Planning Activities
       In planning a long and short term program the headmaster always calls the PKS, Vice
Principal, and representatives of subject teachers to ask for their opinions and assistance in
preparing a program. The long-term program of this school wants this school to become a
pioneer school in the fields of sports and arts. In formulating a policy, there is a principal who
helps, namely PKS in the curriculum. School committees are also involved in formulating
policies relating to students and budgetary controls that are accepted by the school. School
committees are active in controlling schools, this is evidenced by the frequent presence of
school committees in schools and discussions with school principals and other teachers.
       Changes to self-development are streamlining the type of self-development that the
principal had quite a lot but at the moment is limited because too much according to the
principal is less effective, self-development which is now prioritized in sports and arts,
counseling guidance. In addition there is also English language training for students and the
formation of students who are characterized by the way there is guidance on Friday prayers and
princess activities carried out one hour before Friday prayers.

Principal in Organizing Activities
      The role of the principal as an organizer in Elementary School results from parental
involvement through the school committee by completing the facilities needed by the school,

310 Jurnal Ilmiah Ilmu Administrasi Publik: Jurnal Pemikiran dan Penelitian Administrasi Publik
     Volume 9 Number 2, July– December 2019. Page 305-314




monitoring learning in class, assigning tasks according to the ability of the teacher both in class
and the skills they have, forming a committee in dealing with the competition.
      The organizational structure in schools is seen to be in accordance with the needs because
in school organizations are the prerogative rights of the principal according to the needs of the
principal in carrying out their duties. During the leadership of the school principal, there is
currently no recruitment of educators, especially with the current teacher certification, from the
previous minimum teaching hours of 18 hours a week to 24 hours per week so to cover the
amount of 24 hours per week must teach in other schools and change subjects in accordance
with diploma so there is an excess of educators in certain fields of study.

School Principal in Mobilization Activities
       The role of the principal as an activator in elementary school results is obtained as
follows: for teachers there is a motivation for the spirit of life long education (teachers must
learn), welfare improvement and the opportunity to ask questions in a pleasant atmosphere,
bring in resource persons to guide teachers in making scientific writing, following seminars and
others such as involving teachers in MGMP, and making effective peer tutors.
       In fostering educators, school principals hold rayon-level MGMP and schools where there
are 12 people each one subject in a month who are included in the MGMP level and school-
level MGMP. Once a month a briefing is held with the teacher and with staff in order to
evaluate the teacher's performance for one month. In fostering educators and education staff,
school principals always hold guidance to educators and education staff in order to improve the
quality of education and clarify the tasks of each, a clear example of the principal in fostering
educators is by having in-house training, following the MGMP every month both at the level
rayon or district, while from education staff such as at the TU and library in order to improve
the performance of the teaching staff, library training is organized to make it neatly organized
and students feel comfortable when reading in the library.
       Welfare improvement is included in the mobilization carried out by the principal, but
there are some teachers who say that financial welfare has not been hit by the targets
implemented while non-financially is very good with the comfort provided by the school
principal and security guarantees.

School Principal in Monitoring Activities
       The role of the principal as a montor in elementary schools is through the monitoring of
all planning, organizing and mobilizing, starting from supervising the making of semester
programs, making lesson plans, implementing PBM both directly and indirectly (Crow &
Peterson, 2010; Lee & Taylor, 2014). All are evaluated periodically at least at the end of the
semester or in the new school year. The evaluation is assisted by PKS and other teachers who
are considered capable of carrying out the task of evaluating.
       In achieving the National Examination (UN) target, the principal always monitors in
preparation for the UN, strategies designed for the UN can be successful, for example the
principal gives motivation to students, then makes a tutoring program in the face of the UN,
PBM programs on existing subjects on the UN only. The headmaster always monitors all
academic activities in the school with the assistance of PKS, especially in the past two years the

              Kadariah; Analisis Peran Kepala Sekolah dalam Meningkatkan Mutu Manajemen | 311



UN results at this school have declined. The school principal wants the results of the national
examination this year to increase from the previous year, while the method used by the school
principal is to give the task of the head teacher to hold additional hours for subjects available at
the national examination so that students can better understand the subjects which will impact
on grades UN results will increase.

The Principal as a Cultural Developer
       In addition to the four roles carried out by the principal above, the principal has another
strategy in carrying out his duties as a manager in elementary schools, the strategy is to become
a cultural developer that is civilizing for discipline, accustomed to loving hygiene, cultivating
achievement, and religious culture implemented with the guidance of Friday prayers and
princess activities carried out at one hour before Friday prayer time. Student learning to improve
student learning outcomes.
       Practical Implications The results of this study provide implications for researchers with
this research researchers can understand and understand the importance of the effectiveness of
parental communication in developing student potential and improving student learning
outcomes. Pedagogical Implications Pedagogical implications in this study are the teacher can
pay attention so that students are open to the teacher if students have a problem. With the
attention of the teacher, students are expected to be comfortable in attending lessons and school
activities.


CONCLUSION

       The role of the principal in planning the program, starting from planning the needs of
human resources who will carry out tasks, planning policies in the form of the principal's
program and curriculum that will be run in schools. In this plan the principal always involves
the teacher, PKS and the school committee. The role of the principal in organizing the program
is to create a school organizational structure that involves parents through the school committee,
completing the facilities needed by the school, division of tasks such as the existence of PKS
and TU according to the ability of teachers both at class level and the skills they have. In
organizing the headmaster does not work alone but is assisted by the assistant headmasters and
school committees.
       The role of the principal in mobilizing educators and education personnel by giving good
and calm examples in work, motivating educators and education staff morally and materially,
improving welfare, giving rewards to personnel who excel, participating in training and
education, MGMP, facilitating subordinates in carry out professional development, support
educators for those who wish to continue their studies, and for senior teachers the motivation for
the spirit of life long education.
       The role of the principal in monitoring and evaluation which includes monitoring students
from the selection process to completion, school achievements both academic and non
academic, supervision of PBM with instruments referring to PKG and PKB, monitoring
learning in class. After monitoring, if obstacles are found in both HR and school performance,
the principal gives general understanding at the teacher coaching meeting, explores the
background of the problem, and seeks solutions to solve the problem. Barriers experienced by

312 Jurnal Ilmiah Ilmu Administrasi Publik: Jurnal Pemikiran dan Penelitian Administrasi Publik
     Volume 9 Number 2, July– December 2019. Page 305-314




the principal in optimizing his role as a manager include: (a) work and study discipline is still
lacking. (b) communication is still lacking between the principal and teachers, (c) implementing
BOS funds whose rules have been determined while school needs are not in accordance with the
BOS funds rules, (d) facing input coming from other stakeholders which sometimes the
stakeholder wants it must be obeyed by the school.
       Cultural Developers. Implementing school culture such as religious culture, disciplined
culture, achievement culture, and hygiene culture in order to improve the quality of education
and to form students who are characteristically and adhere to religious values.

REFERENCES

Amanda, M. O., Salam, R., & Saggaf, S. (2017). Pengaruh Supervisi Kepala Sekolah Terhadap
   Kinerja Guru Di SMK Negeri 1 Bungoro Kabupaten Pangkep. Prosiding Seminar
   Nasional Himpunan Sarjana Ilmu-Ilmu Sosial, 2, 149–154.
Asmanurhidayani, A., Saggaf, M. S., & Salam, R. (2018). The Effect Of Cooperation On
    Quality Work At Family Planning Office And Family Welfare Office In Wajo Regency.
Creswell, J. W., & Creswell, J. D. (2017). Research design: Qualitative, quantitative, and mixed
    methods approaches. Sage publications.
Crow, G. M., & Peterson, K. D. (2010). Principals Role in Restructuring Schools (P. Peterson,
    E. Baker, & B. B. T.-I. E. of E. (Third E. McGaw (eds.); pp. 66–71). Elsevier.
    https://doi.org/https://doi.org/10.1016/B978-0-08-044894-7.00423-1
Gorton, R., Alston, J., & Snowden, P. (2006). School Leadership and Administration: Important
     Concepts, Case Studies and Simulations. ERIC.
Handoko, T. H. (2003). Manajemen Edisi Kedua. BPFE. Yogyakarta.
Iskandar, U. (2013). Kepemimpinan kepala sekolah dalam peningkatan kinerja guru. Jurnal Visi
     Ilmu Pendidikan, 10(1).
Lee, J., & Taylor, M. S. (2014). Dual roles in psychological contracts: When managers take
     both agent and principal roles. Human Resource Management Review, 24(1), 95–107.
     https://doi.org/https://doi.org/10.1016/j.hrmr.2013.03.001
Niswaty, R., Juniati, F., Darwis, M., Salam, R., & Arhas, S. H. (2019). The Effectiveness of
    Leadership Functions Implementation in The Makassar Departement of Manpower. JPBM
    (Jurnal Pendidikan Bisnis Dan Manajemen), 5(1), 1–10.
Rivai, V. (2004). kiat memimpin dalam abad ke-21. PT RajaGrafindo Persada.
Robbins, S. P. (2001). Organisational behaviour: global and Southern African perspectives.
    Pearson South Africa.
Robbins, S. P., & Coulter, M. (2007). Principles of management. Translated by Seyyed
    Mohammad Arabi and Mohammed Ali Hamid Rafiee and Behrouz Asrari Ershad, Fourth
    Edition, Tehran: Office of Cultural Studies.

             Kadariah; Analisis Peran Kepala Sekolah dalam Meningkatkan Mutu Manajemen | 313



Saggaf, M. S., Aras, M., Akib, H., Salam, R., Baharuddin, A., & Kasmita, M. (2018). The
    Quality Analysis of Academic Services Based on Importance Performance Analysis (IPA).
Salam, R. (2015). Penerapan Fungsi Administrasi Perkantoran Modern berbasis Daya Saing
     Organisasi dalam menyongsong MEA 2015. SEMINAR NASIONAL “Revolusi Mental Dan
     Kemandirian Bangsa Melalui Pendidikan Ilmu-Ilmu Sosial Dalam Menghadapi MEA
     2015” Himpunan Sarjana Pendidikan Ilmu-Ilmu Sosial Indonesia, 1, 186–190.
Salam, R., Akib, H., & Daraba, D. (2018). Utilization of Learning Media In Motivating Student
     Learning. 1st International Conference on Social Sciences (ICSS 2018).
Sorenson, R. D., & Goldsmith, L. M. (2008). The principal’s guide to managing school
     personnel. Corwin press.
Terry, G. R., & Rue, L. W. (1987). Principios de administración. El Ateneo,.

314 Jurnal Ilmiah Ilmu Administrasi Publik: Jurnal Pemikiran dan Penelitian Administrasi Publik
     Volume 9 Number 2, July– December 2019. Page 305-314