Chapter 3
Education 2.0: A Vision for Educational
Transformation in Egypt

Nariman Moustafa , Ebtehal Elghamrawy , Katherine King ,
and Yu (Claire) Hao



Abstract This chapter presents a comprehensive description and analysis of Egypt’s
Education 2.0 (EDU. 2.0) reform plan for grades K-2. The reform’s five key compo-
nents are described including the new multidisciplinary curriculum, technology inte-
gration, school management Continuous Professional Development (CPD), access
and infrastructure, and reformed assessment. We analyze this reform from five
perspectives and conclude that a cultural shift, high-quality CPD, and a robust
accountability system are imperative to sustainable educational reform in Egypt.
This cannot be achieved without a shared vision and engagement between teachers,
parents, and Egypt’s Education Ministry.



3.1 Introduction

In 2018, Egypt’s Ministry of Education and Technical Education (MoETE) launched
an ambitious series of reforms to align with the country’s newly developed 2030
Strategic Vision for social and economic change, with a devoted 7th pillar for educa-
tion and training. The educational reforms aspire to bring large-scale transformation
to the country’s education system, which has consistently faced persistent strains
related to a rapidly increasing student population, deteriorating teaching quality,
rigid curriculum, inequality, uncertain political will for change and lack of resources.

In collaboration with Education 2.0 Research and Documentation Project (RDP)

N. Moustafa (B)
Graduate of the Masters of Education, Harvard Graduate School of Education, 46 Rabaa
Holdings, El-Nozha Street, Heliopolis, Cairo, Egypt
E. Elghamrawy
Graduate of the Masters of Education, Third Settlement, Harvard Graduate School of Education,
C*30 Stone Park Compound, New Cairo, Cairo, Egypt
K. King
Northeastern University, 25 Shattuck St, Boston, MA 02115, USA
Y. Hao
University of Oxford, Room 9, 38-40 Woodstock Road, Oxford OX2 6HT, UK

© The Author(s) 2022                                                                       51
F. M. Reimers et al. (eds.), Education to Build Back Better,
https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-030-93951-9_3

52                                                                     N. Moustafa et al.

Known as Education 2.0 (EDU 2.0), the reforms seek to modernize the country’s
education system and improve the quality of education for K-12 schooling. The
reform’s strategic objectives include increasing access to pre-primary education,
improving the quality of the K-12 education system in line with international stan-
dards, and advancing Egypt’s ranking internationally. EDU 2.0 is planned to be
implemented in phases between 2018 and 2030. Constrained with limited resources
and awaiting the gradual increase in fiscal budget pledged in the 2014 constitution
(Nassar, 2019), the MoETE’s strategy is to implement this reform gradually to fully
transform the education system in grades K-12 by 2030 (Worldbank, 2018). Early
grades are to be reformed one year at a time starting in 2018 from pre-primary
grades (plan known as EDU 2.0). However, there are simultaneously some selective
reforms in higher grades (plan known as EDU 1.0). The objective of EDU 2.0 strategy
in its early years of implementation is to transform education in early grades to be
“competency-based,” focusing on the classroom experience of learners. In parallel,
EDU 1.0 also offers some reform actions to students already in the system. By prior-
itizing and working on key challenges in higher grades such as secondary school
assessment, the EDU 1.0 reforms indicate that all students currently within Egypt’s
education system will receive some extent of the reform proposal, though the focus
will be pre-primary and primary grades in the initial phases until EDU 2.0 is fully
rolled out to all K-12 (Saavedra, 2019; Worldbank, 2018).
    That said, the scope of this paper is on EDU 2.0: in specific K-2. The reform agenda
focuses on developing a competency-based, multi-disciplinary, technology-enabled
curriculum, in line with the international movement towards fostering 21st-century
skills acquisition. Technology integration, updated teaching pedagogy, and reformed
assessments are among the critical reform components. Various stakeholders and
international partnerships have contributed to the development and implementation
of the EDU 2.0 reforms. The new educational vision aligns with Egypt’s 2030 Vision
7th pillar and the constitutional mandate to recognize education reform as one of
Egypt’s top priorities.
    This chapter will describe and analyze the reforms in Egyptian grades K-2, during
their first phase of implementation from 2018 to 2020. The analysis will begin by
describing Egypt’s unique context, and the preceding reform iterations leading up
to the EDU 2.0 reforms. Next, it will describe the primary components of EDU
2.0, to illustrate how this large-scale reform was conceptualized and developed for
implementation. It then analyzes the reform using a comprehensive five perspec-
tive model on educational change developed by Reimers (2020a, 2020b). Finally,
results and implications of the reform are discussed, especially against the larger
context of assessing large-scale educational reforms in middle-income countries. As
authors, we attempt to provide a critical analysis of the EDU 2.0 reforms from a
policy perspective situated in a larger socio-political framework, drawing connec-
tions between the intended goals and the known implementation efforts. We argue
that a cultural shift, high-quality Continuous Professional Development (CPD), and
a robust accountability system are imperative to sustainable educational reform in
Egypt, which cannot be achieved without a shared vision between teachers, parents,
and MoETE. We contend that to create the desired outcomes, EDU 2.0 must be

3 Education 2.0: A Vision for Educational Transformation in Egypt                   53

intentionally developed with MoETE collaboration, continuous communication, and
engagement with stakeholders.



3.2 Research implications

Egypt being a sizable middle-income country with a complex education system, EDU
2.0 can provide valuable insight into the design and implementation of large-scale
change. In practice and literature, attention and policy decisions on blended learning
have been allocated to higher education than pre-primary and primary school stages
(OECD/The World Bank, 2010). Hence, this work can notably contribute to the
knowledge surrounding blended learning, public–private partnerships, and digital
technology use at the primary level. Additionally, EDU 2.0 may provide insight
into teacher development strategies for teaching a multidisciplinary curriculum—
one which is inclusive of blending learning, as an approach that is relatively new,
without much available relevant literature (UIS, 2020). It will also be essential to
assess whether Egypt can improve access to early childhood education to its citizens.
This is a larger issue, which also requires mitigating issues of inequality (World
Bank, 2018). Currently, there are few instances worldwide of a full-fledged multidis-
ciplinary curriculum at the national level. EDU 2.0, if successful, can be impactful in
the latter area and may contribute insights to how such a change can take place within
a country characterized by a diverse and complex education system, influenced by
varied socioeconomic factors.



3.3 Methodology

To date, there is no single published EDU 2.0 reform strategy document. As a result,
this analysis was built on a comprehensive literature review, and a partnership with
the Education 2.0 Research and Documentation Project (RDP) led by Dr. Linda
Herrera. The RDP is a collaboration project between the MoETE and the Social
Research Center at the American University in Cairo, created to document the
reforms and gather data during a time of vast educational change. Working closely
with RDP’s researchers, the collaboration provided access to unpublished reports
and firsthand accounts from teachers, principals, and interview transcripts from rele-
vant stakeholders such as Minister advisors, educational business representatives,
and a senior UNICEF Education Officer. RDP provided the authors with a database
of 51 published newspaper articles, 74 journal articles and book chapters, 15 statis-
tical reports, 62 press conferences and interviews, and 30 official reports. These
documents are a mixture of internal documents, published communications within
Egypt, and international reports. The RDP is also working on creating an oral history
archive containing qualitative data from various stakeholder interviews. We analyzed
10 interview transcripts previously collected by RDP in addition to conducting four

54                                                                      N. Moustafa et al.

firsthand interviews ourselves to complement RDP’s archive and offer us a compre-
hensive insights from all stakeholders. The interviews were semi-structured and
sought to elicit perspectives on the design of the reforms, implementation to date,
and their application results in relation to achieving Egypt’s broader strategic educa-
tion goals. Our analysis integrated both primary and secondary data sources with
Reimers’ five perspective framework to assess the intended objectives of the reforms
and their implications for vast educational change in Egypt.



3.4 Context for the reforms

With an officially announced renewed focus on economic and societal development,
Egypt is envisioning a path forward almost a decade after the Arab Spring, the 2011
revolution and years of political power shifts (Mohamed, 2019). Since the Arab
Spring of 2011, Egypt has made modest improvements in economic growth and social
conditions (World Bank, 2020). However, persistent challenges remain. Poverty,
inequality, and unemployment remain barriers to economic advancement, despite
aid from international organizations such as USAID, the European Commission,
and the International Monetary Fund, designed to support civil society organizations
after the uprisings (Elagati, 2013). Unemployment rose to 9.6% in 2020, with job
losses mainly in sectors related to retail and wholesale trade, manufacturing, tourism,
transport, and construction (World Bank, 2020). These challenges are compounded
by Egypt’s rapidly increasing population, which has soared to 102 million in 2020
(Walsh, 2020). With the current trajectory, the population is on track to reach 128
million by 2030 (United Nations, 2020). With the annual population growth around
2%, current economic growth is insufficient to keep pace with this rate of population
expansion in Egypt (Mohamed, 2019).
   This rapid population growth has placed strains on Egypt’s education system,
which is the oldest and the largest in the Middle East and North Africa (MENA)
region. Supporting over 21 million students in 50,000 schools, the system has
undoubtedly been challenged by more significant funding requirements, capacity
shortages, and overcrowded classrooms (USAID, 2020a). As a result, the student-
to-teacher ratio has increased, teacher capacity has deteriorated, and many teachers
cannot provide up to standard learning experiences. Egypt has seen low scores in
assessments such as the Trends in International Mathematics and Science Study
(TIMSS) and Progress in International Reading Literacy Study (PIRLS). Egypt
ranked in the bottom 5% in PIRLS 2016 and ranked 130 out of 137 in the World
Economic Forum’s Global Competitiveness Report in 2017–2018 (Olson et al.,
2008). These assessments highlight some of the major systemic issues the education
system is facing: a lack of sufficient teacher training, strained resources, and insuffi-
cient quality assurance. Together, these factors have combined to perpetuate a system
where students are not mastering foundational skills at the primary level (El Baradei,
2004). Consequently, under-resourced and overcrowded classrooms diminished the

3 Education 2.0: A Vision for Educational Transformation in Egypt                         55

education system’s ability to provide quality education at an increasing scale (World
Bank Statistics, 2021a, 2021b).
   Moreover, the standard national curriculum is outdated, and insufficient in deliv-
ering quality education. The Egyptian education system has traditionally prioritized
rote learning and high-stakes final examinations over active learning and critical
thinking (Alan & Varma, 2020). While the EDU 2.0 reforms attempt to revise some
assessment strategies, high-stakes tests still largely determine students’ progres-
sion throughout the education system and future employment prospects (Mohamed,
2019). The emphasis has been traditionally placed on receiving a credential that
could assure a job in the public sector, without regard for students’ skills to thrive in
the twenty-first century (Saavedra, 2019). The necessity for a restructured education
system is more crucial now than ever. With more than 700,000 Egyptians entering
the job market every year, Egypt’s education system struggles to provide relevant and
updated curricula that relates to a modern and changing economy (OECD, 2015).



3.5 Previous Educational Reforms

Over the past three decades, several reform strategies, policy changes, and national
programs1 have attempted to improve Egypt’s education system. Except for the
Community School Programme, most of these reforms focused on improving
access, changing pedagogies, and restructuring teachers’ professional development
training. There was very little focus on developing students’ competencies, improving
curriculum development, or creating an assessment of outcomes. Rather, most of
these reforms worked in isolation, disregarding a comprehensive view of other crit-
ical educational elements or links to the country’s larger political and socio-economic
conditions. The policies lacked coherence within a comprehensive reform plan as
part of the country’s strategic objectives.
    For example, the 2004 Professional Development focused on improving teachers’
pedagogy, without reforming the curriculum or assessing the teacher or the student.
Likewise, the 2007–2012 National Education Strategic Plan sought to adopt “a decen-
tralized education system that enhances community participation, good governance,
and effective management at the school level as well as at all administrative levels”
(Hamdi, 2019). However, the various unrelated and conceptual objectives of the plan
limited the Ministry’s ability to build and sustain support for the reforms (OECD,
2015). This is still a persistent challenge in education reform in Egypt: there is a lack
of coordination from top-down directives to establish and monitor implementation
and evaluation or to find grassroots support that sustains the reform.
    However, a key outcome of previous reform was an increased number of enrolled
students within the education system. Primary grades net enrollment reached 96.9%,

1 Among these are the Community School Programme (1991–2004) the New School Programme

(2000, 2007), the Alexandria Pilot Project (2002–2004), the Education Reform Programme (2004–
2009), and National Education Strategic Plan (2007–2012).

56                                                                       N. Moustafa et al.

and gross enrollment reached 106.4% in 2019 (UIS, 2020.) Crucially, the reforms
successfully expanded access to basic education and achieved improvements in the
gender gap parity, which remained substantial until the early 2000s.
   Although Egypt has seen several changes because of education reform in the
last several years, access to pre-primary enrollment remains one of the lowest in the
MENA region at 31% (UIS, 2020). The gap is primarily attributed to the fact that
most accessible schools are concentrated in more affluent regions, and access remains
limited to less socioeconomically advantaged communities (PWC, 2018). While
Egypt has achieved near universal access to primary education, the quality of educa-
tion remains a critical challenge. As Tarek Shawki, Minister of Education and Tech-
nical Education heading the EDU 2.0 reforms notes, “The classic education system
of Egypt had expired” (Saavedra, 2019) The EDU 2.0 reforms hopes to focus on
addressing these disparities.



3.6 EDU 2.0 Reform Description

EDU 2.0 was introduced by the Egyptian MoETE in August 2017. The reform’s
primary objectives focus on transitioning the education system away from rote memo-
rization and surface-level learning, and towards an education system that promotes
critical thinking, knowledge-based inquiry, and lifelong learning (Saavedra, 2019).
The initiative is meant to restructure K-12 education in Egypt drastically, and aligns
with Egypt’s 2030 Vision for economic, environmental, and social development
(Oxford Business Group, 2020). As such, the MoETE plans to have EDU 2.0 fully
integrated into the education system by 2030, with the reforms being gradually
implemented in phases beginning at the pre-primary level.



3.6.1 Key International Partnerships

The MoETE enlisted the support of several international organizations to finance and
collaborate on the reforms. Notably, the World Bank’s $500 million loan “Supporting
Egypt Education Reform Project” is designed to align with EDU 2.0 and develop
long-term educational engagement in Egypt (World Bank, 2018). The World Bank’s
project focuses on four primary objectives, which are each integrated with EDU 2.0
strategic goals: (a) increase access to pre-primary education and improve infrastruc-
ture, (b) improve the quality of learning by utilizing digital technologies, (c) establish
frameworks for continuous professional development for teachers and school leaders,
and (d) develop new computer-based assessment and examination systems (World
Bank, 2018).
   Organizations such as UNICEF and UNESCO were instrumental in collaborating
with the MoETE to develop a multidisciplinary curriculum that promotes deeper,
competency-based learning. International publishers such as Discovery Education

3 Education 2.0: A Vision for Educational Transformation in Egypt                    57

and National Geographic have contributed educational materials that cover a range
of distinct yet interrelated subjects to expand the existing Egyptian Knowledge Bank
(EKB), a first of its kind open source online library of educational content available
to all Egyptian citizens (World Bank, 2020).



3.6.2 Theory of Change

The MoETE structured the EDU 2.0’s components to align with three overar-
ching strategic education objectives: (a) education for all without discrimination, (b)
improving the quality of education in line with international standards, (c) bolster
Egypt’s ranking locally, regionally, and internationally (Ministry of Planning and
Economic Development, 2020). Thus, the MoETE’s theory of change suggests that
if these strategic objectives are met, then Egypt’s education system will transform into
a culture of learning, accessible to all, and found in the development of competency-
based skills. In turn, these reforms are meant to advance Egypt’s competitiveness
in educational rankings locally, regionally, and nationally. They will contribute to
economic and social development in the country, as envisioned with the country’s
larger national strategy, Egypt’s 2030 Vision (Ministry of Planning and Economic
Development, 2020).
    To achieve such ambitious plans, the reform appears to be centered in five key
components: a new multidisciplinary curriculum, technology integration, teachers,
and school management. These components are also alongside Continuous Profes-
sional Development (CPD), access and infrastructure, and reformed assessment. The
development and key elements of each component is discussed below.


3.6.2.1   Multidisciplinary Curriculum

As part of the first implementation phases of EDU 2.0, a new K-2 curriculum was
developed under the Ministry’s Center of Curriculum and Instructional Materials
Development (CCIMD) leadership. This was done in partnership with multilateral
organizations including UNICEF and UNESCO, and private trans-national corpo-
rations like Discovery Education (DE). Nahdet Misr, a national privately owned
business, was also in consultation (UNICEF, 2018). As a result of these collabora-
tions, the General Framework for the General and Technical Education Curricula
(GFGTEC) was designed for the primary grades. This framework complemented
the competency-based and multidisciplinary curriculum, which the MoETE later
produced for primary and pre-primary grades.
    The GFGTEC is a 21st-century skills framework based on the UNICEF-MENA
Life Skills and Citizenship Education (LSCE) framework. The LSCE is grounded in
the principles of UNICEF framework (UNICEF MENA, 2017). It contains (a) a new
curriculum design including standards, activities, and outcomes for each grade level,
(b) new physical and digital textbooks, (c) teacher guides, (d) open digital learning

58                                                                      N. Moustafa et al.

content for each chapter for each grade and subject, and (e) a learning management
system on the Egyptian Knowledge Bank and an offline app (Discovery Education,
2019a).
   The framework and the curriculum center learning around fourteen skills, which
should be acquired by each child in their pre-tertiary education. This includes
twelve skills from UNICEF LSCE’s framework, and two skills (accountability and
productivity) proposed by MoETE to fit the Egyptian context (El-Zayat, 2020).


3.6.2.2   Technology Integration

To contend with issues related to deteriorating learning quality, and to modernize the
education system, the MoETE had already begun to make the shift towards blended
learning strategies and their integration into the national curriculum by the time the
EDU 2.0 reforms were introduced. The Egyptian Knowledge Bank was launched
in 2016 and continues to be utilized widely in primary level education (Saavedra,
2019). Now available to 23 million teachers and students, the platform is meant to
be easily accessible by laptops and mobile phones anywhere in the country and free
of charge (Discovery Education, 2020).
   The EKB contains encyclopedias in both English and Arabic, online dictio-
naries, interactive lessons, and a range of books and scientific articles for all ages
and preparatory levels. It also contains three hours of originally produced online
video programs broadcast daily on WebEdTV, which are customized to the Egyp-
tian national curriculum (Discovery Education, 2020). Teachers can access teaching
materials on the EKB that align with the EDU 2.0 curriculum and are able to inte-
grate lessons from the platform into their teaching plans. There are also tools available
within the EKB to help monitor student progress and collect data on student activity
(Discovery Education, 2020).
   In addition to the EKB, the technology integration within EDU 2.0 also sought
to digitize the assessment methodology and expand assessment strategies. New
computerized assessments were introduced, with the goal of increasing students’
competencies in twenty-first century skills while shifting away from rote test
memorization.


3.6.2.3   Teacher and School Management Continuous Professional
          Development

From a strategic planning and policy perspective, the MoETE seems to recognize the
need for CPD programs to build and enhance teachers’ ability to deliver the reforms’
desired objectives (World Bank, 2018). This is evident where teacher and school
management professional development has been identified as key to several initia-
tives within the EDU 2.0 reforms, especially through redesigning a comprehensive
CPD framework (World Bank, 2018). Such a framework ought to include founda-
tional teacher training, induction training, and curriculum-based training. Additional

3 Education 2.0: A Vision for Educational Transformation in Egypt                    59

assessment of hiring policies, promotion, teacher evaluation, and licensure policies
is also needed (World Bank, 2018). Some of these initiatives have been implemented,
while others are still under development.


3.6.2.4   Teachers First

The “Teachers First” initiative was co-developed and co-implemented with the
private international education organization Imagine Education. The training frame-
work was developed specifically for Egypt and is based on the UNESCO Competency
Framework for Teachers (Imagine Education, 2020). It focused on changing atti-
tudes and behaviors. Its four primary pillars included CPD, communities of practice,
mentoring, and the use of an online platform for a three-way assessment strategy (self,
peer, mentor). These pillars were implemented through training topics such as class-
room management, introduction to 21st-century skills, introduction to digital skills,
resourceful/innovative teaching pedagogies, and life-long learning skills (Teachers
First, 2020). It was implemented in a cascade format, which proceeds as follows.
   First, the school principal recommended three teachers to attend a series of work-
shops outside of the school. Upon return, they were expected to create a PD unit at
their school, in which other teachers were trained on best practices in educational
pedagogy. At the same time, the teachers participated in an online community of
practice on an online app called “Lengo,” which collected awarded credits for self-
reported improved professional behavior. They could also receive credits from a
mentor or colleague. (Teachers First, 2020).
   Teachers First was launched in July 2016, before the official EDU 2.0 reform plan
announcement; however, it was discontinued in 2019. The official statement was that
“the program did achieve its objective in building the foundation of Egypt’s teachers,
and now Teachers First goes from impact to sustainability across Egypt” (Teachers
First, 2020).


3.6.2.5   Discovery Education

The education company Discovery Education implemented a curriculum training in
2018, designed to help teachers align with teaching an updated and competency-based
curriculum. A series of workshops and trainings was complemented by a detailed
teacher guide for the new curriculum, online training and resources, and online
Community of Practice (CoP) on a new digital teacher platform, called Professional
Learning Journey PLJ (Discovery Education, 2018a, 2018d, 2018e).
    The Discovery Education model was also implemented in the form of a cascade
training, whereby the MoETE worked in collaboration with Discovery Education to
organize a Training of Trainers (TOT) for early-grade teachers and supervisors to be
master trainers; these trainers then went on to train the remaining early-grade teachers
in all 27 governorates. Delivered in a mandatory three days of training per semester,
most early grade teachers and primary school principals took the training (Discovery

60                                                                    N. Moustafa et al.

Education, 2019a). It was co-developed by CCIMD and Discovery Education and
supported by the MoETE budget and USAID as an early grade learning project
of $15 million (USAID, 2020c). The implementation had three components: (a)
supervisors complete training three days a term, (b) regular school visits and follow
up from the MoETE trainer supervisors and Discovery Education team (with data
collected digitally during visits), and (c) an online PD and CoP using PLJ teacher
framework to enable continuous professional development (Discovery Education,
2018a). The implementation is still ongoing.


3.6.2.6   Access and Infrastructure

The access and infrastructure component of the reform is divided between pre-
education and primary education. Thus, the World Bank has dedicated $100 million
towards increasing access to pre-primary education, while simultaneously improving
the quality of education. The project supports the identification of available spaces
in existing schools or community buildings, equipping pre-primary classrooms with
furnishings and educational resources, and building and equipping entirely new
classrooms (World Bank, 2018). There is a specific focus on reaching underserved
communities that have traditionally struggled to gain access to early childhood
education.
   At the primary level, the access and infrastructure objectives are focused on
contending with overcrowding and a lack of resources in Egypt’s public schools.
The objectives center around repairing existing buildings, while creating plans to
scale up the resources available. New education tools are proposed to assist with this
endeavor, especially digital technology—which is promoted as a method of modern-
izing the curriculum, while also leveraging students’ ability to complete some tasks
at home.


3.6.2.7   Reformed Assessment

With the shift away from rote memorization and high stakes examinations, the EDU
2.0 reforms have highlighted the need for an assessment and examination system
which is “[F]air, valid, and reliable” (World Bank, 2018). A new assessment plan
accompanies the new curriculum, which favors comprehensive assessments based
on a multidisciplinary approach to learning.
   Prior to grade 4, examinations have been eliminated entirely and replaced by
formative assessments. A student annual report developed by the teacher assesses
each child’s progress (verbal, written, assigned competencies) on a matrix of four
levels, ranging from “above expectation” to “less than expected.” This strategy
attempts to cultivate internal motivation for learning in the formative years, rather
than extrinsic pressure to perform well on exams (MoETE, 2015).

3 Education 2.0: A Vision for Educational Transformation in Egypt                 61

3.7 Known Results

The first phase of the K-2 reforms was planned and launched in a tight timeline
from 2017 to 2018, and consequently, several key documents and data sources are
missing—each of which would be useful to provide insight into the reform’s devel-
opment and implementation. From our literature review and interviews with key
stakeholders, it seems that documents outlining the objectives and implementation
strategy for the reforms are neither created, collected, consolidated, nor published
yet. A comprehensive strategy plan, work-plan, monitoring and evaluation plan, and
communication plan are all missing/unpublished at this stage. Furthermore, baseline
assessments on main indicators, progress reports, and quality input measurements are
not available, but necessary to measure known results and predict future outcomes.
Lastly, evidence of the perception of the reforms, engagement in the implementation,
and application of key features are missing among students, teachers, and parents
alike. Having these accounts will be useful to continuous quality improvement in the
implementation phase. Moreover, these “bottom up” perspectives could be useful
in securing buy-in for community engagement and garnering support for education
reform.
   The sections below are a summative report on key indicators and reported results,
covering the period between 2018–2019 and 2019–2020 results are not all published
or collected at this time.



3.7.1 Multidisciplinary Curriculum

In collaboration with CCIMD, UNICEF, and Discovery Education, the MoETE was
successful in completing several key objectives. These include defining new learning
objectives for pre-primary through grade 2, developing new learning content using
the UNICEF LSCE framework, creating new textbooks and teacher guides using the
EDU 2.0 and LSCE framework, and implementing the new curriculum in schools
for pre-primary education through grade 2. Discovery Education continues to work
closely with the CCIMD to build capacity, review the curriculum framework, and
develop the printed and digital content for students and teachers.



3.7.2 Technology Integration

Technology integration is integral to the EDU 2.0 reforms, and digital infrastructure
has been developed to support this scheme. There are over 2,400 digital content
resources for pre-primary through grade 2, and 9,349 digitally equipped schools.
Students continue to have access to digital learning platforms such as the EKB,
Edmodo, and Discovery Education (Egyptian Ministry of Education Information

62                                                                     N. Moustafa et al.

Center, 2019). This is part of wider digital learning expansion, whereby the MoETE
established 9,249 computer labs within Egypt’s public schools, and approximately
27,500 classrooms were equipped with digital hardware. Considering the size of
Egypt’s education system, however, this only represents 16% of the total nation’s
schools (Oxford Business Group, 2017). Besides, technology alone did not solve the
challenges of educational access and quality in classrooms. The uptake of digital tech-
nology does not automatically lead to improvement in access or educational outcome,
due to challenges such as digital literacy among teachers and students. Despite the
significant undertaking of building digital infrastructure, there is widespread need
throughout the country to increase internet connectivity, and to deploy a universal
learning management system that could support online learning (World Bank, 2018).
During the pandemic, school closures led to enforced digital access. Yet, the gap
remains for future research to continue collecting data to understand whether and
how technology is achieving the goals of EDU 2.0.



3.7.3 Teacher and School Management Continuous
      Professional Development

The reforms have made significant strides in improving CPD initiatives, all supported
by USAID, the World Bank, and Discovery Education. A national teacher training
framework was achieved for pre-primary-grade 2, and new teachers now receive
content training in CPD initiatives for the new curriculum. 96,000 teachers have
been trained using a cascade model, where 5,000 teachers receive a master teacher
certification and go on to train others in their cities. 1,500 supervisors oversee this
process, and report on it using PLJ (Egyptian Ministry of Education Information
Center, 2019; Discovery Education, 2019a).



3.7.4 Access and Infrastructure

3,331 new schools were constructed, and 1,955 classrooms were refurbished. Partic-
ular attention was paid to pre-primary schools and classrooms, and to expanding
access to pre-primary education in communities that had limited access. The World
Bank is a key collaborator in expanding access and infrastructure and plans for
mapping new school and classroom spaces are ongoing (World Bank, 2018).

3 Education 2.0: A Vision for Educational Transformation in Egypt                    63

3.7.5 Reformed Assessment

Summative assessments for pre-primary through grade three were eliminated and
replaced with formative assessments aimed to target more competency-based
learning (Egyptian Ministry of Education Information Center, 2019). As curriculum
training develops, there is continued work to address the alignment between teacher
training and new assessment strategies that support a competency-based curriculum
rather than high stakes examinations. A missing area is also addressing parents
perceptions and mindsets around assessments after decades of being accustomed
to the need for high-stakes examinations and grades as their only proof for their
children’s education.



3.7.6 Future Directions

It appears that MoETE has been successful in achieving some of the desired outputs,
but it is unclear, however, how these resources are equitably distributed between
various groups. Furthermore, more information is needed to assess how these outputs
are translated into outcomes or further yet connected to the impact articulated in the
announced Theory of Change. Many of the available indicators do not measure
implementation quality, which is important to establish in assessing the ongoing
implementation of the reforms.



3.8 Analysis

Reimers’ (2020a, 2020b) five perspective framework allows us to analyze how this
national-level reform was designed and implemented to achieve the stated goals—
largely, improving educational access and quality. The framework includes cultural,
psychological, professional, political, and institutional lenses, which operate together
to provide a comprehensive understanding of the complexity and interconnectedness
of the reform components within its larger socio-political context.



3.8.1 Cultural Perspective

The cultural perspective of the reforms highlights the relationship between the educa-
tion system and the larger societal context. It reveals the impact of education and its
goals on societal expectations, as both the society and the education system change
over time (Reimers, 2020a, 2020b). The EDU 2.0 reforms mark a drastic shift in the

64                                                                     N. Moustafa et al.

culture of Egyptian education, in which the traditional methods of rote memoriza-
tion and high stakes examinations are exchanged for a multidisciplinary approach to
teaching and learning 21st-century skills via technology integration. Making signif-
icant changes within a complex education system such as Egypt’s is challenging and
is limited by the traditional top-down approach that the MoETE has traditionally
relied upon. The Minister acknowledged that the biggest needed change, however,
is one in citizens’ mindsets—stating, “The root problem is cultural, in one aspect”
(Saavedra, 2019).
    For large-scale change to be sustainable, the MoETE recognizes the need to
engage the participants in the education system and to maintain communication
as the reforms develop (El-Zayat, 2020). There have been efforts by the MoETE
to communicate directly with parents via social media and online messaging plat-
forms, but a comprehensive communication plan outlining the shift in pedagogy
and its impacts on students and their families has not yet been developed (El-Zayat,
2020). Thus, for a successful cultural shift surrounding the goals and value of educa-
tion to take place, it is imperative to open channels of communication and clearly
define the objectives of the reforms, such that all citizens can buy-in and play a role
in implementing and sustaining change.


3.8.1.1   Curricular Considerations

A cultural analysis of EDU 2.0 also lends itself to an examination of the newly
introduced curriculum’s larger impact. While the new curriculum is mapped to inter-
national frameworks and standards, further research is needed to assess whether they
are integrating Egypt’s local and diverse epistemologies. To be clear, this focus is not
about incorporating diversity lessons in the curriculum or their outcomes. Rather, it
is about integrating a local epistemology and ontology; of what is worth knowing,
how it should be known, and what is to be true. This stands in contrast to an entirely
Western-centric lens, upon which international organizations and corporations (EDU
2.0 new curriculum partners) entirely rely to customarily develop educational content.
From our research, it does not appear that the partnerships—be they consultative or
as part of the design process—took this point into account, which we recognize as a
gap towards achieving a stated vision. Egypt’s specific context is an important point
to consider in educational reform. The interplay between what the society values and
how the education system responds to these values helps define how education will
be up-taken by and understood in the society (Reimers, 2020a, 2020b).



3.8.2 Political Perspective

The connection between the education system and the larger society with its different
interest groups and the power each holds is a salient consideration in the political
perspective of analysis. This perspective recognizes that there are variations in the

3 Education 2.0: A Vision for Educational Transformation in Egypt                    65

interests of particular groups involved in educational reform, and the dynamics of
these groups may affect how education is politicized both locally and nationally
(Reimers, 2020a, 2020b). Integrated into Egypt’s national economic and social devel-
opment strategy and the 2014 constitution, education was identified as one of the
country’s top priorities for the next decade (Nassar, 2019). As Article 19 of the Egyp-
tian Constitution (2014) states, “The state commits to uphold its aims in education
curricula and methods, and to provide education in accordance with global quality
criteria” (Nassar, 2019). Article 19 also requires that government spending on the
education sector be “[E]qual at least 4% of GDP” (Oxford Business Group, 2020).
While this expenditure fell short of that target in recent years, it has gradually risen
while not yet reaching the 4% (Oxford Business Group, 2020). Through official docu-
ments, education is designated as a top priority in Egypt and is currently supported by
the Country President. However, different sources vary in their analysis of whether
there is a serious political will behind a massive education transformation like this.
Some sources see the support is evident through the funding and the space to create
such a change, and others see it unclear given the alarmingly rising inequity in the
country (Hamed, 2019). Additionally, there are competing interests for budget allo-
cations, both within the education sector and external to it (Nassar, 2019). Conse-
quently, there are questions as to whether the government has the means to finance
such ambitious reform plans (Nassar, 2019).


3.8.2.1   Social Engagement

The EDU 2.0 reforms require the alignment of key stakeholders and the development
of shared goals within a complex education system. Considering the various ideas,
understandings, and goals of these actors is essential in developing a reform strategy.
The interests of parents, for example, may be vastly different than those of teachers,
or of large bureaucracies. The misalignment of interests can have negative conse-
quences on the success of the reform strategy. For example, Egyptian teachers have
consistently advocated for increased salaries to contend with the challenges presented
by an already strained education system and have not yet received compensation in
line with international recommendations (World Bank, 2018). If the call for increased
salaries is consistently ignored, the government risks losing its current teachers, and
may be unable to recruit new teachers in the future—which will affect the reform’s
ability to be sustainable over time.
   A key advantage of educational change is the social transformation that often
comes with it, and the opportunity to reduce equity gaps while advancing societal
involvement. In many ways, education policy reflects the social contract between a
government and its citizenry. This is particularly important for a country like Egypt,
which has seen a significant decline in its social justice and human rights indices—
while growth in its economic sector mostly benefits the larger-income populace
(World Bank Education Statistics, 2021a, b). In a country with alarming inequities
like Egypt, social justice and reducing equity gaps need to be a central commitment
for reform (Zaki Ewiss et al., 2019).

66                                                                     N. Moustafa et al.

3.8.3 Psychological Perspective

An analysis of EDU 2.0 through the psychological perspective highlights how theo-
ries of learning relate to teaching pedagogy. It can provide insights on what students
should be learning, and the best practices for how they should be learning it (Reimers,
2020a, 2020b). Evidence-based learning theory is particularly salient for the EDU
2.0 reforms, which entail the re-evaluation of assessments, educational content, and
teacher training programs. Egypt’s CCIMD collaborated closely with several key
organizations to develop learning content and professional development initiatives
that are aligned with international frameworks and best practices in education.
    Currently, UNICEF’s Life Skills and Citizenship Education (LSCE) framework,
the DeSeCo 4-pillar learning dimension and skill outcomes, and UNESCO’s teacher
training framework are all mapped and benchmarked to international standards which
are mostly inspired by the International Baccalaureate (IB) system (El-Zayat, 2020).
As a result, the curriculum has a well-defined framework that states its standards,
goals, detailed units and themes, projects, and outcomes. The curriculum is also
aligned with the Global Education Movement’s goals and identified best practices,
with a focus on citizenship and sustainable development education (UNICEF, 2018).
This alignment with international education standards resulted in the formation of
a new curriculum that follows the widely known Western-centric psychology-based
education science perspective on how people learn (El-Zayat, 2020). On a policy
level, the clearly defined objectives and integration of CPD have allowed the CCIMD
to develop learning goals for each grade, and teacher training initiatives that target
teachers’ ability to deliver the curriculum’s objectives.
    An overarching objective for curriculum reform with EDU 2.0 was to develop
cohesive frameworks to improve the development of 21st-century skills. At each
stage of primary education, students should be able to demonstrate skills that improve
cognitive, socio-emotional, and behavioral understanding and ability (World Bank,
2018). Notably, Egypt’s adoption of the UNICEF’s LSCE framework was essential in
developing an underlying framework for curriculum and instruction. Egypt was the
first Arab country to use UNICEF’s framework and operationalize it at the national
scale, rather than as a separate curriculum unit or extracurricular activity (El-Zayat,
2020). Perhaps as a result, UNICEF’s framework is now used in 14 other Arab
countries.


3.8.3.1   Continuous Professional Development in the Psychological
          Perspective

In addition to defining the competencies that students should be learning, the psycho-
logical perspective also encompasses how teachers can be supported in helping
students develop these competencies (Reimers, 2020a, 2020b). The implementa-
tion of the new EDU 2.0 curriculum under a tight timeline and through a top-down

3 Education 2.0: A Vision for Educational Transformation in Egypt                   67

approach is challenging, particularly for teachers who are managing new concepts
and pedagogies which require behavioral change.
   The standard three days of professional training per term is not sufficient for
teachers to be supported in teaching effectively. Rather, additional CPD and on-
ground coaching is required for teachers to truly practice teaching the competencies
they are trying to develop in their students. As the goal of education in Egypt shifts
towards capacity building, teachers will have to help students understand that they
“[D]o not need to memorize and achieve certain grades” for high academic achieve-
ment (Egypt Today, 2018). Instead, teachers will have to develop teaching strate-
gies that support the competency-based approach that the new curriculum defines
(UNICEF, 2018). In terms of competency-based assessments, consideration of how to
assess students understand new ideas, solve problems, and retain information will
be essential to align the objectives of the curriculum with effective teaching strate-
gies, as well as in conveying to students that academic achievement will be more
broadly defined and assessed. As the new curriculum is developed, the psycholog-
ical perspective will require that the “[O]perational definitions and measurements of
the desired competencies” continue to be monitored and assessed (Reimers, 2020a,
2020b, p.12).



3.8.4 Institutional Perspective

The EDU 2.0 reforms were developed with the support of both international and
local partners. These partnerships were necessary to establish a unified Egyptian-
centered vision of educational reform, with a comprehensive view of the infrastruc-
ture needed to support it. The institutional perspective highlights how these partners
collaborated and aligned with one another to create a system of support, which made
implementation of the EDU 2.0 reforms possible (Reimers, 2020a, 2020b).
    To build institutional support, the MoETE obtained financial resources for projects
related to the EDU 2.0 reforms, such as a $500 million loan from the World Bank.
It also expanded its digital technology infrastructure by aligning the EKB with the
new curriculum and created a new partnership with a private internet company to
offer subsidized internet access to students. Furthermore, through its partnership with
USAID’s Teach for Tomorrow Project, the MOETE aims to develop the Teacher CPD
system into a teacher career ladder, with professional licensing and incentivization
mechanisms between 2020 and 2024 (USAID, 2020b).
    In terms of building the capacity of its bureaucratic bodies, the MoETE worked
closely with the CCIMD, its national curriculum development body, through training
and discussions with partners like Discovery Education and UNICEF (El-Zayat,
2020). Additionally, the World Bank project proposal includes a restructuring of
the National Center for Examinations and Educational Evaluations (NCEEE), with
the goal of enhancing its capacity as an assessment center, especially in terms of
administering computer-based assessments. (World Bank, 2018).

68                                                                     N. Moustafa et al.

3.8.4.1   Monitoring and Evaluation

The highly centralized nature of the Egyptian governance system, and its ability to
accurately monitor impact and outcomes, remains challenging. Data collection and
monitoring for such wide-scale change across so many levels of stakeholders presents
issues the MoETE has not yet fully contended with. For example, schools received
no communication regarding the roll-out of new textbooks in September 2018 until
August 2018 (Sharouda, 2020). Presently, there is no work plan in place to define
the reform’s objectives or to delineate the specific tasks for all partners (Sharouda,
2020). Teachers, supervisors, and parents constantly struggle to find the information
they need, often resorting to Facebook and WhatsApp groups to communicate and
inform one another (Sharouda, 2020). EDU 2.0 is an ambitious reform, requiring
significant capacity building and guidance on implementation. As such, the stake-
holders involved require clear objectives and communication to prioritize tasks and
develop a coherent alignment of the reform’s goals and implementation strategy.
   Another issue is a lack of a clear incentive structure, as well as a lack of
accountability mechanisms for school staff to create change. This is particularly
salient considering the Ministry’s announced inability to increase budgets for teacher
salaries, as well as its lack of capacity for recruiting teachers as permanent employees
(Hamdi, 2019). The system is also currently missing a comprehensive assessment
process, to deliver feedback on the performance of schools as learning organiza-
tions. Building on what exists at the school level, involving parents and teachers in
genuine communal participation, and considering more autonomous school gover-
nance models are all options that can be considered as the reform moves forward
(OECD, 2011; Sharouda, 2020).



3.8.5 Professional Perspective

From a professional perspective, the reforms can be analyzed according to their
ability to be guided by impactful instruction and expert knowledge (Reimers, 2020a,
2020b). This perspective highlights the ability of teachers to operate successfully, and
CPD generally. In the Egyptian context, it is essential to analyze not only teachers’
“[P]rofessional mindsets and skills,” but also the “necessary autonomy and voice”
for the new and unexpected challenges of the reform (Reimers, 2020a, 2020b, p.16).
    Reviewing the Teachers First program, it seems inclusive of key CPD components.
It is favorable to work on teachers’ behavior and mindsets ahead of launching a new
curriculum. Yet, the program was discontinued on the premise that it was successful
and could thus be moved into a sustainability stage (Teachers First, 2020). Arguably,
this perspective is unjustified, especially since behavioral change usually takes time,
intention, and multiple steps (Harvard Medical School, 2012).

3 Education 2.0: A Vision for Educational Transformation in Egypt                    69

   According to Marey et al. (2020), for example, supervisors had previously
conducted school visits and evaluated teachers’ performance based on a desig-
nated rubric that measured learning outcomes. Now, using the Discovery Educa-
tion teachers’ framework, supervisors assess teachers on the “GROW” model, which
encompasses effective listening, positive feedback, and assisting teachers’ profes-
sional development for mentoring other teachers. The supervisor role is designed
to move into a mentorship and support role. Arguably, it is risky to bet complex
objectives on six days of training a year, delivered in a cascade model: this raises
questions on priorities, efficiency, and strategy.
   These challenges are not presented to discount tangible achievements the reforms
have made so far. The adoption of a new curriculum, the creation of new educational
content, and the development of high-quality teacher training materials is no easy
feat, especially considering the timeframe in which they were delivered. Challenges
remain in the implementation of the reform goals. According to the 6,000 school
visit reports produced by Discovery Education, there are five common challenges
identified in schools—these include teachers’ guide utilization, teaching instructions,
community engagement, and training gaps.


3.8.5.1   Teacher Engagement

These remaining challenges, among others, hinder the system’s ability to achieve
the identified reform goals and objectives. For example, even though teachers’
guides and the PLJ platform offer effective information and teaching strategies, some
teachers lack understanding of the development vision, have the wrong conceptual
understanding, or persistently prioritize only knowledge-based objectives (Discovery
Education, 2018b). At the administrative level, the implementation is constrained by
a deficiency in the total number of teachers (especially at pre-primary levels), and the
difficulty of dividing the class into groups due to students’ density (Discovery Educa-
tion, 2018b). It is positive that MoETE and its CPD partners delve into addressing
these challenges. In this respect, the reform highlights the complexity of teachers’
behavioral change as a mechanism of implementing new reform.
    Contending with a top-down approach, it is critical to understand teachers’ voices
throughout the reform at the classroom level. To develop a culture of excellence
among teachers and provide motivation for teachers to follow EDU 2.0 PD objec-
tives framework, it is essential to consider teachers’ contributions to the educational
system, and to identify ways in which their feedback can be elicited and integrated
into sustainable change (Hamdi, 2019). Additional research is needed in under-
standing the impact of Egyptian teachers’ agency during the reform implementation
in the current central structure.

70                                                                       N. Moustafa et al.

3.9 Reform Status in the Time of COVID-19

COVID-19 accelerated the progress of the MoETE Education 2.0 reform plan, espe-
cially regarding utilizing digital infrastructure and technology integration. When the
MoETE ordered schools to close on 15th of March 2020, there was existing infras-
tructure to enable a transition to online learning (El-Zayat, 2020). The Egyptian
Knowledge Bank (EKB) already contained a robust database of educational mate-
rial that the Ministry could utilize to develop a focused strategy for teaching and
learning in the wake of the pandemic. This was extended to all grades starting from
pre-primary grades, where digital content was matched per unit for each subject
(El-Zayat, 2020). Moreover, the MoETE partnered with other technology compa-
nies such as Edmodo to deliver interactive sessions between teachers and students,
where more than 85% of teachers were registered by May 2020 (El-Zayat, 2020).
This would have been considered an unimaginable figure pre-pandemic and indicates
that stakeholder engagement significantly increased because of necessity. That said,
it is essential to highlight that there was apparent institutional unpreparedness with
the rapid implementation in March 2020. The implementation did not have proper
institutional support, as again, it was managed and run top-down. Teachers weren’t
equipped to teach or interact online, students and families were unfamiliar with online
learning, and there is a national shortage of access to proper digital infrastructure (El-
Zayat, 2020). This illuminates that critical next steps must yet be taken to fill the gaps
that remain in implementing policy to match conceptual plans with adequate grass-
roots support. In this sense, the pandemic will ultimately become a valuable case
study for the MoETE as it moves forward with refining and implementing its EDU
2.0 strategy on a larger scale.



3.10 Conclusion

Through a description of the EDU 2.0 reform and a critical analysis of what is known
about it and its results so far, this chapter draws parallels between the objectives of
educational reform and the factors which impact its implementation. Egypt’s unique
context is considered to highlight the specific conditions which have given rise to
the reform, and which may in turn be influenced by it. Information garnered from
international reports, an oral history archive, and national media sources allowed us
to discuss the reform process through multiple lenses and perspectives, and to draw
connections between the various stakeholders involved. Our analysis conveys that
the reforms have a bearing on many aspects of Egyptian life at both micro and macro
levels, as schools contend with new teaching and learning strategies, and while the
MoETE attempts to fundamentally shift how education is conceptualized throughout
the country.
   While the vision to integrate technology within a multidisciplinary curriculum in
Egypt is ambitious, COVID-19 has demonstrated that it may be possible with more

3 Education 2.0: A Vision for Educational Transformation in Egypt                              71

infrastructure, attention to equity and access disparities and the need for grassroots
support or buy-in. Moving forward, successful implementation of the reforms will
depend on the system’s ability to create sustainable change. Monitoring and evalu-
ation systems are needed, as is a cultural shift to engage the community and build
support, particularly among teachers and parents. As EDU 2.0 continues to be imple-
mented over the next decade, the reforms will undoubtedly be influential in defining
educational priorities and shaping the future of Egypt’s education system for gener-
ations to come. On the international level, Egypt’s reform implementation is poised
to contribute to education reform literature in low-middle income countries. With its
specific focus on kindergarten and primary students, Education 2.0 also can advance
the knowledge base in areas related to curriculum reform impact and technology
integration, especially in terms of teaching and learning for early grade levels.



References

Alan, S., & Varma, P. (2020). Strengthening the Egyptian education system: A recap from the
  global evidence for Egypt spotlight seminar on education. Available via The Abdul Latif Jameel
  Poverty Action Lab (J-PAL). https://www.povertyactionlab.org/blog/2-28-20/strengthening-egy
  ptian-education-system-recap-global-evidence-egypt-spotlight-seminar. Accessed 22 Sept 2020.
Boston College TIMSS & PIRLS. (2015). International reports. Available via Boston College Lynch
  School of Education. https://timssandpirls.bc.edu/. Accessed 15 Nov 2020.
Discovery Education. (2018a). Curriculum professional development report, Education 2.0.
  Unpublished report.
Discovery Education. (2018b). Supervisors report, Education 2.0. Unpublished report.
Discovery Education. (2018c). Schedule and attendance for 2018, Education 2.0. Unpublished
  report.
Discovery Education. (2018d). Education 2.0 supervisors’ primary PD overview, Education 2.0.
  Unpublished report.
Discovery Education. (2018e). Education 2.0 teachers’ primary PD overview, Education 2.0.
  Unpublished report
Discovery Education. (2019a). Egypt progress report, February 2019. Unpublished report.
Discovery Education. (2019b). Evaluation methods and tools for education 2.0: Kg 1, KG 2, P1.
  Unpublished report.
El Baradei, M., & El Baradei, L. (2004). Needs assessment of the education sector in Egypt. Center
  for Development Research (ZEF), University of Bonn.
Egypt Today. (2018). Exclusive interview: Education minister details new system. Available via
  Egypt Today. https://www.egypttoday.com/Article/1/61368/Exclusive-Interview-Education-min
  ister-details-new-system. Accessed 22 Oct 2020.
Egyptian Ministry of Education Information Center. (2019). Statistical yearbook 2019–2020. http://
  emis.gov.eg/Site%20Content/book/019-020/pdf/1.pdf. Accessed 22 Sept 2020.
Egyptian Knowledge Bank (EKB). (2020). About the EKB. https://www.ekb.eg/about-us. Accessed
  1 Nov 2020.
Elagati, M. (2013). Foreign funding in Egypt after the revolution. Available via FRIDE, AFA, and
  Hivos. https://www.files.ethz.ch/isn/162759/WP_EGYPT.pdf. Accessed 3 Nov 2020.
El-Zayat, N. (2020). Egypt: K-12 Egyptian knowledge bank study portal and new form of
  assessment. Available via World Bank https://documents1.worldbank.org/curated/en/191341599
  145436193/pdf/Egypt-K-12-Egyptian-Knowledge-Bank-Study-Portal-and-New-Form-of-Ass
  essment.pdf. Accessed 13 Nov 2020.

72                                                                                 N. Moustafa et al.

Ginsburg, M., & Megahed, N. (2008). Global discourses & educational reform in Egypt: The case
  of active-learning pedagogies. Mediterranean Journal of Educational Studies, 13(2), 91–115.
Hamdi, A. (2019). Assessment of Egypt’s new education reform system. Available via Egyp-
  tian Institute for Studies. https://en.eipss-eg.org/assessment-of-egypts-new-education-reform-sys
  tem/. Accessed 2 Dec 2020.
Harvard Medical School. (2012). Why behavior change is hard and why you should keep trying.
  Available via Harvard Heath Publishing. https://www.health.harvard.edu/mind-and-mood/why-
  behavior-change-is-hard-and-why-you-should-keep-trying. Accessed 2 Dec 2020.
Imagine Education. (2020). Teachers first for Egypt. https://www.imagine.education/casestudies/
  teachers-first-egypt. Accessed 20 Feb 2021.
Marey, R., Hesham, G., Magdd, A., & Toprak, M. (2020). Re-conceptualizing teacher evaluation
  and supervision in the light of educational reforms in Egypt. Social Sciences & Humanities Open,
  2(1).
Ministry of Planning and Economic Development. (2020). Egypt’s vision 2030: Sustainable
  development goals. Available via Egyptian Ministry of Planning and Economic Devel-
  opment. https://mped.gov.eg/EgyptVision?lang=en#:~:text=Egypt%20Vision%202030%20focu
  ses%20on,life%2C%20in%20conjunction%20with%20high%2C. Accessed 3 Mar 2020.
MOETE. (2015). Strategic plan for pre-university education. Available via UNESCO. http://www.
  unesco.org/education/edurights/media/docs/c33b72f4c03c58424c5ff258cc6aeae0eb58de4.pdf.
  Accessed 12 Dec 2020.
Mohamed, R. (2019). Education in Egypt. Available via WENR. https://wenr.wes.org/2019/02/edu
  cation-in-egypt-2. Accessed 21 Oct 2020.
Nassar, S. (2019). The right to education in Egypt. Available via Studies in Human Rights. https://hri
  ghtsstudies.sis.gov.eg/studies-reports/studies/the-right-to-education-in-egypt/. Accessed 21 Sept
  2020.
OECD. (2015). Schools for skills: A new learning agenda for Egypt. Available via Organisation
  for Economic Co-Operation and Development. https://www.oecd.org/countries/egypt/Schools-
  for-skills-a-new-learning-agenda-for-Egypt.pdf. Accessed 26 Sept 2020.
OECD. (2011). Lessons from PISA for the United States, strong performers and successful
  reformers in education: Available via OECD Publishing. https://doi.org/10.1787/978926409666
  0-en. Accessed 2 Sept 2020.
OECD/The World Bank. (2010). Reviews of national policies for education: Higher education in
  Egypt 2010. Available via Reviews of National Policies for Education, OECD Publishing. https://
  doi.org/10.1787/9789264084346-en.Accessed5Nov2020
Olson, F., Martin, O., & Mullis, S. (2008). TIMSS & PIRLS international study center, Boston
  College.
Oxford Business Group. (2017). How will Egypt reform its education system? Available via Oxford
  Business Group. https://oxfordbusinessgroup.com/overview/forging-ahead-new-reforms-invest
  ment-and-initiatives-are-aimed-fixing-ongoing-problems-and. Accessed 7 Nov 2020.
Oxford Business Group. (2020). What infrastructure will aid Egypt’s digital transformation? Avail-
  able via Oxford Business Group. https://oxfordbusinessgroup.com/overview/mobile-connection-
  new-legislation-and-continuing-investment-communications-infrastructure-set. Accessed 7 Nov
  2020.
PWC. (2018). Education sector in Egypt: Understanding Middle East education. Available via
  PWC. https://www.pwc.com/m1/en/industries/education/education-country-profile-egypt.html.
  Accessed 15 Sept 2020.
Reimers, F. (2020a). Audacious education purposes. Springer Open.
Reimers, F. (2020b). Educating students to improve the world. Springer Open.
Saavedra, J. (2019). Shaking up Egypt’s public education system. Available via World Bank. https://
  blogs.worldbank.org/education/shaking-egypts-public-education-system. Accessed 2 Sept 2020.
Sharouda. (2020). EDU 2.0 Research and Documentation Project (RDP) Oral History Collection
  (2020).Transcript with Manar Ahmed Sharouda of UNICEF. Edited by Linda Herrera, Cairo

3 Education 2.0: A Vision for Educational Transformation in Egypt                              73

Teachers First. (2020). Teachers first: An initiative of the MOETE. https://teachersfirstegypt.
  com/ar/. Accessed 20 Feb 2021.
UIS. (2020). Egypt education and literacy profile. Available via UNESCO Institute for Statistics.
  http://uis.unesco.org/en/country/eg?theme=education-and-literacy. Accessed 13 Nov 2020.
UNICEF. (2017). Children in Egypt: aged 0–17, census 2017. Available via United
  Nations Children’s Fund. https://www.unicef.org/egypt/media/5341/file/Children%20(English).
  pdf. Accessed 7 Nov 2020.
UNICEF MENA. (2017). Reimagining life skills and citizenship education in the Middle East and
  North Africa. Available via United Nations Children’s Fund. https://www.unicef.org/mena/rep
  orts/reimagining-life-skills-and-citizenship-education-middle-east-and-north-africa. Accessed
  17 Oct 2020.
UNICEF. (2018). A new learning agenda for the realization of SDG 4 in MENA. Available via
  United Nations Children’s Fund. https://www.unicef.org/mena/media/6231/file/Operationalizat
  ion%20of%20LSCE%20in%20Jordan.pdf%20.pdf. Accessed 19 Oct 2020.
UNICEF. (2019). Key achievements in the education reform. Available via United Nations Chil-
  dren’s Fund. https://www.unicef.org/egypt/press-releases/key-achievements-educational-reform.
  Accessed 30 Oct 2020.
UNICEF. (2020). Education in Egypt. Available via United Nations Children’s Fund. https://www.
  unicef.org/egypt/education. Accessed 3 Nov 2020.
United Nations. (2020). World Population Prospects—Population Division—United Nations.
  Retrieved January 6, 2022, from https://population.un.org/wpp/Graphs/Probabilistic/POP/
  TOT/818.
USAID. (2020a). Egypt basic education. Available via United States Agency for International
  Development. https://www.usaid.gov/egypt/basic-education. Accessed 5 Dec 2020.
USAID. (2020b). Teach for tomorrow. Available via United States Agency for International
  Development. https://www.usaid.gov/egypt/basic-education/teach-tomorrow. Accessed 10 Dec
  2020.
USAID. (2020c). Early grade learning. Available via United States Agency for International
  Development. https://www.usaid.gov/egypt/basic-education/early-grade-learning. Accessed 4
  Nov 2020.
Walsh, D. (2020). As Egypt’s population hits 100 million, celebration is muted. Available
  via The New York Times. https://www.nytimes.com/2020/02/11/world/middleeast/egypt-popula
  tion-100-million.html. Accessed 16 Sept 2020.
World Bank. (2018). Supporting Egypt education reform project. Available via World
  Bank. http://documents1.worldbank.org/curated/en/346091522415590465/pdf/PAD-03272018.
  pdf. Accessed 8 Sept 2020.
World Bank. (2019). Improving teaching and learning conditions in Egypt’s public schools. Avail-
  able via World Bank. https://www.worldbank.org/en/news/infographic/2019/08/06/improving-
  teaching-and-learning-conditions-in-egypts-public-schools. Accessed 22 Aug 2020.
World Bank. (2020). Egypt Arab rep data. Available via World Bank. https://data.worldbank.org/
  country/egypt-arab-rep. Accessed 22 Aug 2020.
World Bank Education Statistics. (2021a). Education expenditures. Available via World Bank
  Education Statistics. https://datatopics.worldbank.org/education/wDashboard/dqexpenditures.
  Accessed 11 Sept 2020.
World Bank Education Statistics (2021b) Country at a glance - Egypt, Arab Rep. Available via World
  Bank Education Statistics. https://data.worldbank.org/country/EG. Accessed 15 Sept 2020.
Zaki Ewiss, A., Abdelgawad, F., & Elgendy, A. (2019). School educational policy in Egypt: Societal
  assessment perspective. Journal of Humanities and Applied Social Sciences, 1, 55–68. https://
  doi.org/10.1108/JHASS-05-2019-004

74                                                                               N. Moustafa et al.

Nariman Moustafa is an international education consultant with a decade of experience. Based
in Cairo, Egypt, she is the founder and director of Mesahat: Liberating Learning Spaces, a collec-
tive of self-organized community learning spaces spreading tools, values and principles of self-
learning, democratic and justice-based education, envisioning the creation of lifelong learning
cities. In addition to being a steering member of the Ecoversities Alliance, a global collective
of learning experiences reimagining the future of higher education. Nariman obtained her Ed.M.
degree from the Harvard Graduate School of Education. Her research work is concerned with
cognitive justice and decolonial education.

Ebtehal Elghamrawy has a decade of experience in international development and education
reform. Until recently she was the programs manager and management committee member of
“Educate Me” (EM) foundation. There she launched and led the programs department. Prior to
that she worked as an implementer, project manager, and M&E consultant at UNICEF, Grameen
Creative Lab (Germany), Yunus Centre (Bangladesh), FHI360 INGO, TEDxCairo, and AIESEC
(Egypt, China). She has two master’s degrees- a joint European MA in Comparative Local Devel-
opment, and an Ed.M in International Education Policy from Harvard Graduate School of Educa-
tion. Her work and research focus on how to scale quality primary education interventions in
low-income contexts.

Katherine King holds a master’s degree in International Higher Education from Lesley Univer-
sity in Cambridge, MA and is currently working towards an Ed.D in higher education adminis-
tration at Northeastern University. She is employed as an Education Program Manager at Harvard
Medical School, working with students who are seeking advanced training in clinical service oper-
ations. Katherine has worked in international student services for five years, both with US citizens
studying abroad and with international students coming to the United States. Her interests include
internationalization of the higher education curriculum, international student services, and social
change via international exchange.

Yu (Claire) Hao is the Director of Education at Beijing Xinxuedao Education Group, a non-
profit organization that currently operates 25 K-12 schools across China. Claire has five years of
experience managing schools in China, and her works focus on supporting bilingual students and
teachers through curriculum development and professional development. Claire earned her B.A.
in Education and Physics from University of Cambridge, M.A. in Applied Linguistics from UCL
Institute of Education, and Ed.M. in International Education Policy from Harvard Graduate School
of Education.




Open Access This chapter is licensed under the terms of the Creative Commons Attribution 4.0
International License (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/), which permits use, sharing,
adaptation, distribution and reproduction in any medium or format, as long as you give appropriate
credit to the original author(s) and the source, provide a link to the Creative Commons license and
indicate if changes were made.
    The images or other third party material in this chapter are included in the chapter’s Creative
Commons license, unless indicated otherwise in a credit line to the material. If material is not
included in the chapter’s Creative Commons license and your intended use is not permitted by
statutory regulation or exceeds the permitted use, you will need to obtain permission directly from
the copyright holder.