Alberta Journal of Educational Research, Vol. 67.3, Fall 2021, 273-282




Roots of Collaborative Inquiry and
Generative Dialogue for Educational
Leadership
Robert James Smith, Koralia Petta, Christos Markopoulos
Southern Cross University


   The twin processes of collaborative inquiry and generative dialogue underpin two closely aligned
   and increasingly influential school leadership development programs, one in Alberta, Canada,
   and the other in New South Wales, Australia. This paper focuses primarily on the Australian
   program, the character of which has been strongly influenced by its Canadian predecessor. Of
   interest in the paper is the nature of the foundations of collaborative inquiry and generative
   dialogue, and the relationship of these processes to an expressed need for better leadership
   development in the Australian school sector. David Townsend and Pam Adams, who are
   principally responsible for generating a school leadership development model based on the use of
   both collaborative inquiry and generative dialogue, have sought to show how these two processes
   should function seamlessly, but there is more to be said about the nature of their relationship. This
   paper seeks to throw more light on the integral role played by generative dialogue in empowering
   collaborative inquiry in the context of school leadership development.

   Les processus jumeaux de l'enquête collaborative et du dialogue génératif sous-tendent deux
   programmes de développement du leadership scolaire étroitement alignés et de plus en plus
   influents, l'un en Alberta, au Canada, et l'autre en Nouvelle-Galles du Sud, en Australie. Cet article
   se concentre principalement sur le programme australien, dont le caractère a été fortement
   influencé par son prédécesseur canadien. Il s'intéresse à la nature des fondements de l'enquête
   collaborative et du dialogue génératif, ainsi qu'à la relation entre ces processus et le besoin
   exprimé d'un meilleur développement du leadership dans le secteur scolaire australien. David
   Townsend et Pam Adams, qui sont les principaux responsables de la création d'un modèle de
   développement du leadership scolaire basé sur l'utilisation de l'enquête collaborative et du
   dialogue génératif, ont cherché à montrer comment ces deux processus devraient fonctionner de
   manière transparente, mais il y a plus à dire sur la nature de leur relation. Cet article vise à mettre
   en lumière le rôle intégral joué par le dialogue génératif dans l'autonomisation de l'enquêt



Recent research about the importance of the role played by effective school leadership in
contributing to improved learning outcomes for students has given rise to an increased global
awareness of the need for school sectors to invest more heavily in school leadership development
(Leithwood & Jantzi, 2008). There has in the past been an assumption that models of leadership
and leadership development derived from non-school sources, whether in the bureaucracy of the
state, the disciplined world of the military, or the corridors of corporate capitalism are capable of
providing valuable insights for application in schools. This assumption is no longer accepted as



                              © 2021 The Governors of the University of Alberta                              273

R. J. Smith, K. Petta, C. Markopoulos



being soundly based. The purpose of schools is different, and the culture of schools is unique.
Models of leadership professed by charismatic contributors to an ever-expanding literature on the
topic tend to fall flat when put to the test within a school environment. Rarely are the prescriptions
advanced by the many contributors to this literature problematized in the context of a school
(Eacott, 2017). As Spillane (2006) has observed, the common response in schools is “I know all
that. Tell me how!” (p. 7). In response, school leaders often find themselves in leadership seminars
being given generic solutions for generic problems. The style of delivery is typically in the form of
what Adams and Townsend have described as being a “telling curriculum” (Adams & Townsend,
2016, p. 4).
    It is against this background that the leadership development processes of collaborative
inquiry and generative dialogue, as advanced by Adams and Townsend (2016), have attracted
strong support, first in Alberta (in Canada), and more recently in New South Wales (in Australia).
These processes engage school leaders in an active process of discovering answers to the key
questions facing them and their school community. They represent a major reversal of traditional
approaches to school leadership development. Evidence of their effectiveness in contributing to
leadership and school improvement is steadily accumulating (Townsend, 2015; see also other
papers in this Special Issue).
    This article is written against a background of engagement by the authors in the delivery of
the North Coast Initiative for School Improvement, which was inspired by the writings of Adams
and Townsend, and which sought to implement the processes of collaborative inquiry and
generative dialogue across a large cluster of public schools in the coastal region of northern New
South Wales (Chaseling et al., 2016, 2017). As participant observers in the Initiative, we now seek
to address the task of exploring the roots of both of these processes, and then examine how key
elements of each merge in this new and distinctive model for leadership development in schools.
The conceptual framework we adopt is that of distributed leadership (Spillane, 2006). This
perspective acknowledges that professional responsibilities may be undertaken variously by those
who do not have a strict line management role. The focus, therefore, is upon the processes through
which leadership is enacted in practice, by various actors working formally and informally at
different levels of responsibility within a defined network. Important here is the effectiveness of
the network, rather than the effectiveness of specific actions taken by designated leaders. This
perspective seems particularly relevant to the context within which collaborative inquiry and
generative dialogue have been introduced and applied within the framework of the North Coast
Initiative for School Improvement.
    In Australia, teacher registration at the designated level of “Leader” requires an ability on the
part of the individual concerned to meet a set of prescribed professional standards which assume
a high level of leadership skills across a wide range of domains (Australian Institute for Teaching
and School Leadership [AITSL], 2017). Lately, in this regard, there has been a growth of interest
in transformational leadership and instructional leadership as applied in school settings
(Campbell et al., 2019). Indeed, a recent issue of the long-running journal Australian Educational
Leader included various articles that specifically addressed classroom practices but did so from a
leadership perspective. Gaps remain, however, in the extent of empirical knowledge about the
links between school leadership and student achievement, which is surprising in light of the
wealth of data now available from standardized nationwide testing of student achievement,
principally in literacy and numeracy through the National Assessment Program—Literacy and
Numeracy (NAPLAN). There is also a tendency in Australia for school leaders and, even more so,
for authorities responsible for school systems, to cycle through different leadership approaches,


274

                           Roots of Collaborative Inquiry and Generative Dialogue for Educational Leadership



looking to make an impact on teacher professional development and student achievements but
seldom having sufficient resources to achieve an impact likely to produce sustained benefits. This
situation is contradictory. On the one hand, there is enormous energy invested in new approaches
to leadership, whereas on the other hand there is little evidence available that any of these
approaches have ever made much in the way of a continuing positive difference. This situation is
unlikely to be unique to Australia and the ongoing urge for impact is of the sort attempted to be
addressed by “leadership for learning” (Hallinger, 2009, p. 9). Admittedly the combined processes
of generative dialogue and collaborative inquiry, as adopted by the North Coast Initiative for
School Improvement, could potentially become one more leadership development fad. We have
an obligation, therefore, to examine these processes carefully before making claims of significant
effect.

                                     Collaborative Inquiry

Collaborative inquiry has been practiced to varying degrees in Australian school settings, though
more in the form of action research. Because of a more general familiarity with the concept, it will
be discussed first, and before addressing the process of generative dialogue.
    The roots of collaborative inquiry are in action research, where the emphasis is upon the
sequence of actions as one works on a research question, developing proposed action steps, then
implementing, while collecting evidence for analysis and reflection, before recommencing the
cycle. Collaborative inquiry differs in that its emphasis is upon the participants as co-
investigators. Although interest is in addressing a school-based or classroom issue with a focus
upon student learning (Donahoo, 2013), the specific inquiry might be prompted by a school
improvement strategy, and so the needs of administration or the particular system are often
significant. David Townsend and Pam Adams, in replacing the term action research with
collaborative inquiry in their work with teams of teachers in schools in Alberta, sought to better
describe the process as experienced by participants. For Townsend and Adams, “collaborative
inquiry occurs when a group of individuals commit to exploring an answer to a compelling
question, through a cyclical process of experimentation, purposeful action, and public reflection”
(Townsend & Adams, 2008, p. 55).
    Although the roots in action research are clear in many studies of collaborative inquiry, the
latter requires both a working with others as well as the distinctive insights that may thus emerge.
So close are the two structures that collaborative inquiry might be seen as a re-emphasis upon the
single cycle that is the core of the action research process. Langer and Colton (2005) proposed a
collaborative inquiry cycle consisting of four stages: observing and gathering information,
analyzing and interpreting the information, planning, and then acting. Sinnema and colleagues
(2011), on the other hand, simply explained that the process of collaborative inquiry consisted of
certain steps of collaboratively making decisions and taking actions. The process begins with the
identification of the problem to be solved and the setting of the goals to be achieved, followed by
the design and implementation of an intervention. Finally, the collaborative inquiry circle is
closed with collaborative reflection on the results of the implementation, and with deciding on the
required actions. Winkelman (2012) also presented collaborative inquiry as a process which
includes four main stages: identifying a focus question, gathering the data, analyzing the data,
and then making action decisions based on the data.
    In all these overviews, the research sequence is prominent, in contrast to the role of the group
being subordinated or at least implicit. Subsequently, Donohoo (2013) described a four-stage,


                                                                                                       275

R. J. Smith, K. Petta, C. Markopoulos



cyclical, collaborative inquiry model involving a group framing of the problem; collecting
evidence; analyzing the evidence; and, finally, sharing and celebrating a new understanding. The
importance of Donohoo’s characterization of collaborative inquiry is the focus on the group
process itself as being equivalent to the action research steps. The team works collaboratively
together to ask questions, develop theories of action, determine the necessary steps, and gather
and analyze evidence in order to assess the impact of its actions. The cyclical process ends up with
sharing and celebration, in which the group’s human needs are clearly foregrounded.
    Whether stated or implicit, group process is an important aspect of collaborative inquiry in
that it helps to build a community amongst its members. The social interactions within an
organization help to create shared meanings and encourage people to learn from, and to commit
to, one another in the manner of the theory of communities of practice (Lave & Wenger, 1991).
Forming a shared sense of inquiry-based identity, members thus become committed to a
knowledge domain, or to a shared endeavor, which goes beyond the specific tasks of the inquiry.
They regularly interact and engage in shared information, activities and discussions, and they
help each other, based on mutual respect, engagement and trust (Wenger et al., 2002). It is a
process which enables members to learn from each other.
    It has been argued that such collaborative action research supports the creation of a
community of practice, even among different stakeholders in education (Mitchell et al., 2009).
This diversity in community is important in that it suggests that a group’s professional
effectiveness can take precedence over hierarchical or supervisory structures. Also, as teachers
become familiar with research and its potential to improve classroom issues, so too, to some
degree, they become members of a research community, addressing and exploring larger
educational issues (Cantalini-Williams et al., 2015), with all the professional benefits and
confidence which that entails.
    From the school leadership perspective, Emihovich and Battaglia (2000) have examined the
development of collaborative cultures of inquiry. From interviews with practitioners, they
proposed that it was the shared contribution among all the participants in collaborative inquiry
that is the important and necessary component. This transcends organizational or hierarchical
roles: “The knowledge base generated from collaborative research must be perceived as one that
is mutually developed, where theory not only informs practice, but is shaped and reconfigured as
a result of practice” (Emihovich & Battaglia, 2000, p. 227). Based upon such shared ownership,
they made the early claim that school leadership cultures have the potential to provide the scaffold
for more meaningful reform in education.
    The potential benefit for students is often claimed in research studies. Collaborative inquiry,
for example, has been stated to be the most promising strategy for enhancing teaching and
learning (David, 2008/2009). However, rather than being convincingly present, the student
benefit is more often tantalizingly prospective. Predominantly, the focus is kept upon teachers,
having, for example, a shared vision and acting with confidence in judgements based on sound
data (Nelson et al., 2010). Even more specifically concerning teachers, collaborative inquiry was
presented as both a personal and interpersonal way of thinking, learning, and knowing by placing
reflection at the center of professional practice (echoing Schon, 1983), and enabling teachers to
observe data from multiple perspectives (Samaras, 2011). Highlighting the collaboration and
associated reflective practice, Kelly and Cherkowski (2015) found considerable benefits for
professional socialization and collegiality. Clearly these scholars and their professional
informants see an on-going need for collaborative inquiry for the enhancement of professional
work.


276

                           Roots of Collaborative Inquiry and Generative Dialogue for Educational Leadership



    So, with such clear promise, what challenges remain when educational leadership is involved?
As a process, collaborative inquiry largely remains silent on management issues such as
hierarchies, managerial power, and supervisory roles. Following Foucault’s linking of power,
knowledge, and subjectivity (Foucault, 1982), unequal power in school settings is likely to be
accompanied by unequal understandings and access to knowledge, as well as to differing priorities
being emphasized. Such inequalities and differences can affect who is in the team, as well as whose
values are to be matched and applied: the issues to be investigated, the choice of method, what
aspects are appropriate for reflection-based follow-up, what counts as success, and for whom.
With the addition of potentially confounding factors such as ethical dilemmas, change processes,
social justice, and emotional responses, there may be pressure for the participant with less power
merely to choose to comply. Thus, the overall process may look misleadingly smooth to the leader
or in a report, despite some participants choosing not to risk exposing their professional opinion
to their supervisor.
    Of course, open communication is presented as the means by which we can address all such
problems, yet this is not so readily achieved. In a comprehensive review of leadership practices in
Australian schools, Timperley (2015) argued that there was a need to have far more “professional
conversations” (p. 6) of the kind that might result in a sound basis for understanding and
integrating diverse points of view about matters of professional practice. She observed, however,
that there was a gap in this regard which was impeding appropriate and effective leadership across
the Australian school sector. From the United States, Shields and Edwards (2015) also made the
same general point, observing that dialogue had a potentially important role to play in promoting
meaningful and positive professional relationships within schools, as well as in promoting more
effective educational leadership.

                                      Generative Dialogue

Generative dialogue is a type of professional conversation where an active and committed listener
assists a professional colleague to develop a new perspective on an area of personal professional
challenge. Rather than being simply a discussion, generative dialogue is a clearly structured
conversation where the whole is purposeful, shaped towards generating new ideas, and does so
through being respectful of the colleague’s professional competence (Petta et al., 2019; Townsend
& Adams, 2008, 2016). Where generative dialogue differs from either mentoring or coaching is in
its mode of discussion.
    The notion of generative dialogue has deep conceptual roots developed from the counselling
profession. In its earliest form, Adler’s person-centered approach to clinical psychology proposed
that individuals were generally capable of developing insight and understanding regarding those
aspects of their personal psyche that had been giving rise to feelings of personal distress. Adler
asserted that, under guidance from an appropriately trained counsellor, individuals were capable
of contributing to their own healing process (Ansbacher & Ansbacher, 1956). Subsequently,
Rogers (1959) developed a distinctly client-centered approach to counselling which was intended
to enable individuals to develop the kinds of insight and understanding referred to by Adler.
According to Rogers, there were three foundational attributes of successful client-centered
counselling: genuineness, unconditional positive regard, and empathetic understanding on the
part of the counsellor. Later Rogers (1969) greatly broadened the scope of application of his
approach by proposing that these same attributes should characterize the way a teacher facilitates
student learning. In other disciplines, the one-to-one model of generative dialogue has been


                                                                                                       277

R. J. Smith, K. Petta, C. Markopoulos



applied across a range of professional contexts including business and adult education.
Importantly, it is now applied in school-leadership projects in Alberta and in Australia (Petta et
al., 2019).
     Mainly due to its variety of application in different disciplines-contexts, there is not a single
overarching well-accepted definition of generative dialogue. Instead, there are various
descriptions of the practice, and these share a number of characteristics in common (Petta et al.,
2019). Arising from work in adult education, Gunnlaugson (2006) described generative dialogue
as a “comprehensive and integrated practice of conversation that cultivates ways of knowing and
ways of being that serve the development of new knowledge and the transformation of adult
learners” (p. 2). The emphasis was placed on process in order to separate generative dialogue from
mere conversation. The importance of meta-awareness, rather than simply thoughts, was also
emphasized to support the notion of a developmental process: “Through meta-awareness of our
knowing, which is distinct from being merely self-conscious, the learner is subtly changed by this
process” (Gunnlaugson, 2006, p. 14). And so, a tentative claim is made explicit for generative
dialogue’s potential to support Adlerian change.
     Researchers from the area of business studies explained further the management of the actual
process of generative dialogue (Palmer et al., 2007). They identified three key factors: the paying
of close attention; a sense of curiosity linked to asking questions; and a sense of coherence with a
larger process (use of previous meeting minutes, reflection upon the process, etc.). They looked
to the emergence of the plural “we,” instead of the singular “I,” as a marker of success in the
collaborative thinking process.
     Based on their school improvement projects, Townsend and Adams (2009) referred to
generative dialogue more broadly as a practice with “the potential to create and sustain
organizational learning while providing increased opportunities for collaboration, recognition,
and celebration” (p. 138). Their account provides insights regarding the strong bond between the
processes of generative dialogue and collaborative inquiry. Moreover, they explicitly linked the
overall process with the broader studies of leadership and its roots in business and
administration.
     Counselling education next provided the context for a theoretical study based on the dialogical
self (Moir-Bussy, 2010). Here meta-awareness was stressed, as well as the growth of points of
contact and relationships between all involved. A slowing down of the dialogue was
recommended, and, when combined with silences within the sessions, still moments were seen as
powerful reflective opportunities, potentially leading to a higher-level awareness. This perspective
overlaps with the concept of transformational learning and, in particular, its focus on changing
“sets of fixed assumptions and expectations … to make them more inclusive, discriminating, open,
reflective, and emotionally able to change” (Mezirow, 2003, p. 58).
     Even more recently, counselling psychology provided insightful comment about limiting
imbalances of power. Where Adler and Rogers set the field with acknowledgement of the subject’s
contributory agency, now not only should the subjects feel competent and capable, but they
should also be treated as “the editors-in-chief of the meaning for their lives” (Strong et al., 2015,
p. 606), that is, they should be in command of their agency for change. This approach prioritizes
the judgement and responsibility of the subject, even with the inequalities of power in counselling
psychology settings. In educational leadership settings, even though all participants are
professionals, with generative dialogue the same primacy of the subject is supported.
     In summary, generative dialogue is a controlled process that clarifies, supports, validates, and
encourages. It has strategies that move one beyond discussion or reflection into the area of meta-


278

                           Roots of Collaborative Inquiry and Generative Dialogue for Educational Leadership



awareness, as well as strategies for limiting the inhibiting pressures of hierarchies or of unequal
knowledge. In professional contexts, generative dialogue is a process for enhancing respect for all
participants’ professional identity, voice, agency, and development (Petta et al., 2019).

                                            Conclusion

There are strong recent moves in Australia, but also more widely, to support the professionalism
of educators including through the application of professional standards for school leaders
(AITSL, 2017). However, the gulf preventing ready achievement of this empowering aim appears
to be in a lack of supporting detail on appropriate communication. For example, Hargreaves and
O’Connor’s Collaborative Professionalism looked to a broad “mutual dialogue” including
“difficult conversations” and being “always up for a good argument” (2018, pp. 114, 138). Nolan
and Molla (2017) concluded that a teacher’s professional capital comes through mentoring. The
distribution of leadership across a school assumes both an outstanding level of communication as
well as good will on the part of the school leader. For those with less power it must necessarily
mean some uncertainty, and so their adoption of independently empowered action towards
improved student learning can be only partial.
    Yet it is generally understood that to be part of a profession one must have “autonomy to make
informed discretionary judgements” (Hargreaves & Fullan, 2012, p. 80). This condition requires
considerable confidence and certainty. It would seem that generative dialogue offers a way to help
the subject to clarify their professional aims, skills, and even their identity. Based on this core
there is more independent empowerment, whether in action or in advice—finding the ways to
speak truth to power. The process can even be replicated informally. The repeated practice of
generative dialogue does itself provide some sustained modelling of process, which in turn has
the potential to make such acknowledgement and respect key characteristics of participants’
professional discussions with their other colleagues. When such communication then moves into
collaborative inquiry there is potential for effectiveness beyond what is achievable by a sole
professional operating confidently but independently.
    Where studies of collaborative inquiry have been largely silent on the nature of its necessary
communication, the structured approach of generative dialogue is well placed to perform that
communicative role. Indeed, the literature on generative dialogue, in describing its support for
the follow-up action phase, occasionally moves partly into the area of collaborative inquiry. The
bringing of the two together—generative dialogue and collaborative inquiry—is the distinctive
feature of Townsend and Adams’ now two-decades’-old work towards the establishment of a
successful school leadership development model in Western Canada (Adams, 2016; Adams &
Townsend, 2016; Townsend, 2015; Townsend & Adams, 2008, 2009). It offers a framework for
the application of emerging insights into curriculum, teaching, or educational support and also
offers a way to accommodate system-wide or hierarchy policy imperatives. Although the
combined generative dialogue and collaborative inquiry approach clearly offers support for
professional identity and agency, when it goes beyond the individual to be enacted in networks,
then its group-based impact would seem to have considerable power to effect positive educational
change.




                                                                                                       279

R. J. Smith, K. Petta, C. Markopoulos



                                          Acknowledgement

The study was conducted under human research ethics committee approval ECN-15-043,
awarded by the authors’ university.

                                              References

Adams, P. (2016). Preparing learning teachers: The role of collaborative inquiry. Canadian Journal of
    Action Research, 17(1), 20–35.
    https://pdfs.semanticscholar.org/8385/bb97c92ead3cc219691984ae2d7a875d9cfc.pdf
Adams, P., & Townsend, D. (2016). From action research to collaborative inquiry. Education Canada,
    56(3). www.edcan.ca/articles/from-action-research-to-collaborative-inquiry/
Ansbacher, H. L. & Ansbacher, R. R. (1956) (Eds.), The individual psychology of Alfred Adler: a
    systematic presentation in selections from his writings Basic Books, Inc.
Australian Institute for Teaching and School Leadership (2017). Australian professional standards for
    teachers. https://www.aitsl.edu.au/teach/standards#!
Campbell, P., Chaseling, M., Boyd, W., & Shipway, B. (2019). The effective instructional leader.
    Professional Development in Education, 45(2), 276–290.
    https://doi.org/10.1080/19415257.2018.1465448
Cantalini-Williams, M., Curtis, D., Eden-DeGasperis, K., Esposto, L., Guibert, J., Papp, H., & Roque, C.
    (2015). Exploring the benefits of a collaborative inquiry team in education (CITE) initiative to develop
    a research community and enhance student engagement. Brock Education, 25(1), 55–72.
    doi:10.26522/brocked.v25i1.439
Chaseling, M., Boyd, W. E, Smith, R., Boyd, W., Shipway, B., Markopoulos, C., Foster, A., & Lembke, C.
    (2017). Uplifting leadership for real school improvement—The North Coast Initiative for School
    Improvement: An Australian telling of a Canadian story. The Alberta Journal of Educational
    Research, 63(2), 160–174.
Chaseling, M., Smith, R., Boyd, W., Foster, A., Boyd, W. E., Markopoulos, C., Shipway, B., & Lembke, C.
    (2016). Collaborative inquiry driving leadership growth and school improvement. Creative
    Education, 7, 244–253. http://dx.doi.org/10.4236/ce.2016.72023
David, J. L. (2008/2009). Collaborative inquiry. Educational Leadership, 66(4), 87–88.
    http://www.ascd.org/publications/educational-leadership/dec08/vol66/num04/Collaborative-
    Inquiry.aspx
Donohoo, J. (2013). Collaborative inquiry for educators: A facilitator’s guide to school improvement.
    Corwin.
Eacott, S. (2017). School leadership and the cult of the guru: The Neo-Taylorism of Hattie. School
    Leadership and Management, 27(4), 413–426. https://doi.org/10.1080/13632434.2017.1327428
Emihovich, C., & Battaglia, C. (2000). Creating cultures for collaborative inquiry: New challenges for
    school leaders. International Journal of Leadership in Education, 3(3), 225–238.
    https://doi.org/10.1080/13603120050083918
Foucault, M. (1982). The subject and power. Critical Inquiry, 8(4), 777–795.
    https://www.jstor.org/stable/1343197
Gunnlaugson, O. (2006). Generative dialogue as a transformative learning practice in adult and higher
    education settings. Journal of Adult and Continuing Education, 12(1), 2–19
    https://journals.sagepub.com/description/ADU
Hallinger, P. (2009). Leadership for 21st century schools: From instructional leadership to leadership
    for learning. The Hong Kong Institute of Education.
    https://repository.eduhk.hk/en/publications/leadership-for-the-21st-century-schools-from-
    instructional-leader-3



280

                             Roots of Collaborative Inquiry and Generative Dialogue for Educational Leadership



Hargreaves, A., & Fullan, M. (2012). Professional capital: Transforming teaching in every school.
    Teachers College Press.
Hargreaves, A., & O’Connor, M. T (2018). Collaborative professionalism: When teaching together means
    learning for all. Corwin.
Kelly, J., & Cherkowski, S. (2015). Collaboration, collegiality, and collective reflection: A case study of
    professional development for teachers. Canadian Journal of Educational Administration and Policy,
    169, 1–27. https://journalhosting.ucalgary.ca/index.php/cjeap/issue/view/2811
Langer, G. M., & Colton, A. B. (2005). Looking at student work. Educational Leadership, 62(5), 22–27.
    http://www.ascd.org/publications/educational-leadership/feb05/vol62/num05/Looking-at-Student-
    Work.aspx
Lave, J., & Wenger, E. (1991). Situated learning: Legitimate peripheral participation. Cambridge
    University Press.
Leithwood, K., & Jantzi, D. (2008). Linking leadership to student learning: The contributions of leader
    efficacy. Educational Administration Quarterly, 44, 496–528.
    https://doi.org/10.1177/0013161X08321501
Mezirow, J. (2003). Transformative learning as discourse. Journal of Transformative Education, 1(1),
    58–63. https://doi.org/10.1177/1541344603252172
Mitchell, S. N., Reilly, R. C., & Logue, M. E. (2009). Benefits of collaborative action research for the
    beginning teacher. Teaching and Teacher Education, 25, 344–349.
    http://dx.doi.org/doi:10.1016/j.tate.2008.06.008
Moir-Bussy, A. (2010) Transformative counsellor education through dialogue: Hong Kong example. Asia
    Pacific Journal of Counselling and Psychotherapy, 1(2): 160–169.
    https://doi.org/10.1080/21507686.2010.504775
Nelson, T. H., Deuel, A., Slavit, D., & Kennedy, A. (2010). Leading deep conversations in collaborative
    inquiry groups. The Clearing House: A Journal of Educational Strategies, Issues and Ideas, 83(5),
    175–179. https://doi.org/10.1080/00098650903505498
Nolan, A., & Molla, T. (2017). Teacher confidence and professional capital. Teaching and Teacher
    Education, 62(Feb.), 10–18. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.tate.2016.11.004
Palmer, I., Benveniste, J., & Dunford, R. (2007). New organizational forms: Towards a generative
    dialogue. Organization Studies, 28(12), 1829–1847. https://doi.org/10.1177/0170840607079531
Petta, K., Smith, R. J., Chaseling, M., & Markopoulos, C. (2019). Generative dialogue: A concept analysis.
    Management in Education, 33(2), 53–61. https://doi.org/10.1177/0892020618780978
Rogers, C. R. (1959). A theory of therapy, personality and interpersonal relationships, as developed in the
    client-centered framework. In S. Koch (Ed.), Psychology: A study of science (pp. 184–256). McGraw
    Hill.
Rogers, C. R. (1969). Freedom to learn: A view of what education might become. Merrill.
Samaras, A. P. (2011). Self-study teacher research: Improving your practice through collaborative
    inquiry. Sage.
Schon, D. A. (1983). The reflective practitioner: How professionals think in action. Basic Books.
Shields, C. M., & Edwards, M. M. (2005). Dialogue is not just talk: A new ground for educational
    leadership. Lang.
Sinnema, C., Sewell, A., & Milligan, A. (2011). Evidence-informed collaborative inquiry for improving
    teaching and learning. Asia-Pacific Journal of Teacher Education, 39(3), 247–261.
    https://doi.org/10.1080/1359866X.2011.597050
Spillane, J. (2006). Distributed leadership. Jossey-Bass.
Strong, T., Ross, K. H., & Sesma-Vazquez, M. (2015). Counselling the (self?) diagnosed client: Generative
    and reflective conversations. British Journal of Guidance and Counselling, 43, 598–610.
    https://doi.org/10.1080/03069885.2014.996736
Timperley, H. (2015) Professional conversations and improvement-focused feedback: A review of the



                                                                                                         281

R. J. Smith, K. Petta, C. Markopoulos



   research literature and the impact on practice and student outcomes. Report for Australian Institute
   of Teaching and School Leadership. https://www.aitsl.edu.au/docs/default-source/default-
   document-library/professional-conversations-literature-review-oct-2015.pdf?sfvrsn=fc2ec3c_0
Townsend, D. (2015). Red Deer public schools: Administrative growth research and development
   project: Final report: Year III. Red Deer Public School District.
   https://drive.google.com/file/d/0B5vIChTtF9CfVWRRTXVTOE1TSzg/view
Townsend, D., & Adams, P. (2008). Being there: University faculty, school administrators, and teachers
   engaged in school improvement. Northwest Passage, 6(1), 53–64.
   https://pdxscholar.library.pdx.edu/nwjte/vol6/iss1/
Townsend, D., & Adams, P. (2009). The essential equation: A handbook for school improvement.
   Detselig Enterprises.
Townsend, D., & Adams, P. (2016). The generative dialogue.
   http://northcoastinitiative.weebly.com/resources.html
Wenger, E., McDermott, R. A., & Snyder, W. (2002). Cultivating communities of practice: A guide to
   managing knowledge. Harvard Business School Press.
Winkelman, P. (2012). Collaborative inquiry for equity: Discipline and discomfort. Planning & Changing,
   43(3/4), 280–293. https://education.illinoisstate.edu/planning/




Dr Robert James Smith was a practicing teacher for over twenty years, mostly in Secondary schools, but
also with experience in Primary as well as Technical education and in administration. This experience has
been in regional areas of Australia, where he helped to establish a regional professional association for
English teachers. As a Senior Lecturer at Southern Cross University, Australia, he has taken leadership in
subject English, and in university-wide academic accreditation. Currently he is that university’s Inaugural
Vice-Chancellor’s Fellow and is active in the professional development of the region’s school principals.
ORCID: 0000-0001-6134-9925

Koralia Petta is a PhD student at School of Education at Southern Cross University, Australia. She has a
multi-discipline background in Greece having been a teacher in Primary as well as an obstetric
nurse/midwife. Her previous research was a comparative analysis in teachers’ perceptions and
pedagogical practices concerning discipline, diversity and student’s evaluation. The main focus of her
current PhD research study is to determine the ways and the extent to which NSW North Coast school
leaders’ participation in a collaborative-inquiry and generative-dialogue process enhances their leadership
development. ORCID: 0000-0003-1866-6911

Dr Christos Markopoulos has extensive experience in mathematics education for undergraduate and
postgraduate education students in Europe (Greece) and in Australia. Currently a Senior Lecturer at
School of Education, Southern Cross University, he has developed and taught Mathematical Content
Knowledge for pre-service teachers. For the last five years, he has been involved in the North Coast
Initiative for School Improvement. With his colleagues, he has been awarded the SCU Excellence in
Community Engagement Award 2016. Moreover, Dr Christos Markopoulos was awarded the SCU Vice
Chancellor’s Citation Award 2017 for Outstanding Contribution to Student Learning. ORCID: 0000-
0002-8241-0817




282