Chalim Journal of Teaching and Learning
                                                                                              e-ISSN: 2798-1533
                                                                               Volume 3, Issue. 1, 2023, pp. 11-19




Islamic Boarding School Management in Forming The Religious
Character of Students
               Moh Komarodin*1, Ainur Rofiq2
               1
                 Institut Pesantren Kh. Abdul Chalim
               1
                 Institut Pesantren Kh. Abdul Chalim
               e-mail: mohhammadkomarudin@gmail.com

               Submitted: 10-03-2023         Revised : 01-04-2023         Accepted: 08-04-2023

               ABSTRACT. Education has a very strong position in preparing humans to live perfectly and
               happily. Coaching and monitoring for 24 hours for students is carried out by the Al-Hajar
               Karemejo Islamic Boarding School which is aimed at fostering their personality. This study aims
               to: 1) Explain the planning of Islamic boarding schools in improving the religious character of
               students, 2) Describe the management of Islamic boarding schools in improving the religious
               character of students, 3) Describe the supervision of Islamic boarding schools in improving the
               religious character of students, 4) Describe the evaluation of Islamic boarding schools in
               improving the character of Islamic boarding schools. religious students. The type of research used
               in this research is qualitative research with a case study approach and the data collection
               techniques used are observation, documentation, and interviews. The results of this study include
               1) Islamic boarding school planning in improving the religious character of students, 2)
               Management of Islamic boarding schools in improving the religious character of students, 3)
               Supervision of Islamic boarding schools in improving the religious character of students, 4)
               Evaluation of Islamic boarding schools in improving the religious character of students.
               Keywords: Management of Islamic Boarding Schools in Forming Religious Character in Pagu Kediri




INTRODUCTION
      Education is the process of changing a person's attitude and behavior, in an effort to
mature humans through efforts to guide, teach, and instill values and the basic outlook on life to
the younger generation so that later they become human beings who are aware and responsible
for their life tasks as human beings, in accordance with the nature, essence, and characteristics of
humanity (Fatimah et al., 2023; Uthman, 2023; Yamin et al., 2023).
      Thus, children must be educated so that they live in healthy and clean ways, have physical
health, and achieve maximum intellectual development. In addition, his personality is formed
naturally, which reflects the characteristics of honesty, truth, religious character, responsibility,
moral values, social, and other characteristics so that he can become a member of society (Amma
& Rifa’i, 2022; Ansori et al., 2022). So education has a very strong position in preparing people to
live perfectly and happily, to love their homeland, to be physically fit, to have perfect morals, to
have organized thoughts, to be refined in feelings, to be proficient in their work, to help others,
to speak a nice language, both orally and writing (Moch Fuad Hasan: 2021).
        Who is responsible for these students seems to be often questioned. Yet there is no doubt
that the head of the pesantren, the ustadzah, bears responsibility for the pesantren, just as there is
no denying that parents bear the greatest responsibility for teaching Religious Character to their

Moh Komarodin*1, Ainur Rofiq2


children and that pesantren, as well as other communities institutions, must assist and complete
this role. from the parents, especially if the parents fail to teach them Religious Character.
However, if students are in Islamic boarding schools, then they are under the responsibility of the
leadership of the Islamic boarding school (Saadah & Asy’ari, 2022; Saputro & Darim, 2022).
        Based on the above, education which is used as a tool to shape the personality of students
really needs Religious Character, because Religious Character is an influence designed to help
students to be able to face the environment. Religious character grows from the need to maintain
a balance between the tendencies and desires of the students to act in order to obtain something,
with the restrictions or regulations that have been agreed upon by the students who will live in the
Islamic boarding school with the board of the Islamic boarding school (Krisbiyanto & Nadhifah,
2022; Mubarok et al., 2022).
        The religious character of the santri is the most important element and the most effective
means of the educational process at Islamic boarding schools. Therefore, Religious Character
education must be upheld by everyone involved in Islamic boarding schools, both students,
teachers, and caretakers of the pesantren themselves. Religious Character concerns several aspects:
Religious Character courtesy, cleanliness, worship, boarding, dress, exercise, and language.
Everything absolutely must be obeyed since the first official santri became part of the Islamic
Boarding School.
        Al-Hajar Kapurejo Islamic Boarding School is one of the Islamic boarding schools in
Kediri Regency with a total of 1,000 students, and 400 students living in dormitories, and Al-Hajar
Kapurejo Islamic Boarding School is an example of Islamic Boarding School in Kediri Regency
that are able to apply Religious Character education in daily life -student day. This Pondok also
provides general science learning, is more comfortable, more open (not exclusive), and also has
differences from domestic public schools, where students live in places and subjects that are
religious in character with activities and stay humble. Nonetheless, continuous monitoring is
carried out (Aprilianto et al., 2023; Mumtahanah, 2020). With a strictly religious character, the Al-
Hajar Kapurejo Islamic Boarding School feels more conducive and orderly, and the atmosphere of
this environment can be used as an effective educational facility, everything that is seen, felt, and
done contains educational values, students are always encouraged to pay attention, research, and
read Islamic boarding schools, and are told to pay attention to how the kiai, teachers, and ustadz
live (Barnoto, 2020; Ikramullah & Sirojuddin, 2020; Rofiq & Nadliroh, 2021).
         Activity to other activities, from morning to morning again. All activities are organized and
neatly scheduled. The bells ring from time to time, starting from the morning wake-up bells,
congregational prayer bells, sports bells, breakfast bells, school bells, gathering bells and so on.
There are daily, weekly, monthly, and yearly programs. Everything went according to the schedule
and plans that had been set. The dynamics of life like this are almost similar to military education
programs (Amelia et al., 2022; Aprilianto et al., 2023). Al-Hajar Kapurejo Islamic Boarding School
is transparent and open to those who are not ready and not strong towards an atmosphere of a
religious character, meaning that they are welcome not to participate in the educational process at
this pesantren. Based on this, the researcher sees that the management of Islamic boarding schools
in improving the religious character of students in an Islamic educational institution is interesting
to study. Moreover, there are still many people who look at Islamic boarding schools with one eye,
they see Islamic boarding schools as old-fashioned, isolated, and backward Islamic educational
institutions. So what is the reason for being old-fashioned, if pesantren can progress and be able to
compete with other public and private educational institutions in this country? Not necessarily
careless management. Of course, there are many more perceptions about pesantren. Life behind
the walls of the boarding school is like a mystery. Many want to know how true life is in the
pesantren.



12 Chalim Journal of Teaching and Learning, Volume 3, Issue. 1, 2023, pp. 11-19

                                     Islamic Boarding School Management in Forming The Religious Character of Students


         Guidance and monitoring for 24 hours students are carried out by the Al-Hajar Kapurejo
Islamic Boarding School aimed at fostering their personality. With a 24-hour pattern of life,
students live in Asmara, boarding school administrators can control and direct their personality
according to Islamic personality. One of them is in terms of managing the Al-Hajar Kapurejo
Islamic Boarding School in implementing religious character education for its students. Another
reason, the management of strong religious character education for students will help carry out
maximum activities. And that is what is implemented by the Al-Hajar Kapurejo Islamic Boarding
School, where the religious character education of the students is designed and implemented, and
supervised in such a way that the students can follow it, so this cannot be separated from the
management in it, therefore, "Poncho Management Islamic Boarding Schools in Forming the
Religious Character of Santri at the Al – Hajar Kapurejo Islamic Boarding School, it is very
interesting to study.

METHOD
       This study aims to understand and describe in depth the management of religious character
education for students at Al-Hajar Kapurejo Islamic Boarding School. The targets to be analyzed
in this research are planning, implementing, and supervising religious character education for
students in boarding schools. So the approach used by researchers in this study is a qualitative
approach (Moleong: 2006). Qualitative research is research that is used to explore phenomena
that occur in the field. Qualitative research is a study that is intended to describe and analyze
phenomena, events, social activities, attitudes, beliefs, perceptions, and thoughts of people both
individually and in groups. (Sukmadinata: 2007) Based on the description above, in the research
entitled "Management of Islamic Boarding Schools in Improving the Religious Character of
Santri at Al-Hajar Kapurejo Islamic Boarding School", the researcher chose to use a qualitative
approach with a descriptive analysis type of research.
        The data to be collected in this study is data that is in accordance with the focus of the
research, namely data on the management of religious character education for students at the Al-
Hajar Kapurejo Islamic Boarding School. There are two types of data collected, namely primary
data and secondary data. Primary data is data obtained directly from the source, such as from
informants or observed events, and the like. While secondary data is data obtained from
information processed by other parties, such as all kinds of documents. (Wahid Murni: 2008)
        In this study, the researchers used the following methods: Observation (Kartono: 1990)
Interview (Arikunto: 2010), and Documentation. The data obtained from the research were then
analyzed in stages. After collecting data, the steps of this research strategy are the use of data
analysis that is appropriate and relevant to the subject matter. Data reduction took place
continuously during the research, even before the data was actually collected, the anticipation of
data reduction was already evident when deciding on the conceptual framework, research areas,
research problems, and determining data collection methods. During the data collection, there has
been a reduction stage, then making a summary, coding, and tracing the theme. This process
continues until after data collection in the field, even at the end of making a report so that it is
completely compiled (Mardiyah: 2012).

RESULT AND DISCUSSION
      This research is directed to be able to describe the real conditions in the field regarding the
management of Islamic boarding schools in the religious character of the students at Al - Hajar
Kapurejo Pagu Islamic Boarding School. In particular, the focus of this research includes
planning, management, obstacles, and solutions to the religious character of the santri.



                               Chalim Journal of Teaching and Learning, Volume 3, Issue. 1, 2023, pp. 11-19 13

Moh Komarodin*1, Ainur Rofiq2


      Pondok pesantren management works with a supportive base of parents, teachers, and
community members to mobilize initiatives. their efforts are broadly focused along two
dimensions: first, reaching out to parents and the community to strengthen bonds between local
education professionals and those they serve, and second, working to expand the professional
capacity of individual teachers, to promote a coherent professional community and to direct
resources power in improving the quality of teaching.

Religious Character Education Planning for Santri

        Planning for the discipline of santri education largely determines the final results and goals
to be achieved by Islamic boarding schools, and it can become a guide for every implementer of
santri discipline education activities to be carried out at a practical stage. Interviews with the
leadership of the lodge revealed that: Interview with Pondok Leaders Gus Mukhas, S.Pd. I:
       “In planning the formation of a religious character, I plan the rules that must be applied,
       then I convey them to all students to follow and obey. If not followed according to the
       rules, students who violate these rules will get sanctions/penalties.”
        In my opinion, disciplinary planning must be planned properly, to make students who are
highly disciplined and responsible for what they do.
Ustadz Gus Abdul Halim An - Naji, one of the madrasa teachers stated:
       “I have an idea as a reference for achieving an expected goal, our goal is the Realization of
       the Al - Hajar Kapurejo Pagu Islamic Boarding School which excels in academic and non-
       academic fields based on faith and piety and akhlakul karimah. and the purpose of this
       Islamic boarding school is to increase effective coaching for future leaders who are creative
       and innovative in mastering science and technology on the basis of faith and piety and
       akhlakul karimah, a growing appreciation of Islamic religious teachings with the aim of
       ahlussunnnah wal jama'ah, growing a spirit of excellence students of Al - Hajar Kapurejo
       Pagu Islamic Boarding School in working, mastering science and technology with Arabic
       and English as the ingredients, Increasing achievement motivation and high discipline.”
       Furthermore, an interview with Ustadzah Qoni'atun Iah, S.Pd, one of the Al-Hajar Pagu
Madin teachers. In this connection, it is stated that:
       “For the curriculum, the Al - Hajar Pagu Islamic boarding school already has a curriculum
       containing a number of religious subjects the Islamic boarding school which must be
       delivered to students or students. Given individual differences, of course, the breadth and
       depth will affect students in each educational unit. In the education program at Al - Hajar
       Kapurejo Pagu Islamic Boarding School, the number of hours of lessons per week/week for
       religious subjects and Islamic boarding schools is 12 hours. Setting the learning load
       according to the time allocation that has been determined in the curriculum structure, each
       child is possible to add learning hours outside of the regular study hours. arranged in the
       weekly lesson schedule. This is because all students live in the Al - Hajar Kapurejo Pagu
       Islamic Boarding School dormitory. All students of the Al – Hajar Islamic Boarding School,
       both male and female, in morning all study at a formal madrasa, namely at MTs – MA
       Hasan Muchyi which is not far from the Islamic Boarding School from 07.00 am to 14.15.”
Management
        Management is a translation of the word "management", carried away by the swift flow of
adding the word collection into Indonesian, the English term then in Indonesia becomes
management. Management comes from the word to manage which means to regulate,
arrangements are made through a process and are arranged based on the sequence of management
functions. So management is a process to realize the desired goals through its aspects including

14 Chalim Journal of Teaching and Learning, Volume 3, Issue. 1, 2023, pp. 11-19

                                     Islamic Boarding School Management in Forming The Religious Character of Students


planning, organizing, actuating, and controlling. The management carried out by the leadership of
the Al - Hajar Pagu Islamic boarding school is in accordance with its vision and mission.
Management is carried out by compiling an educational calendar and adjusting it every year by
madin to regulate learning activities. Study time settings refer to the educational calendar of the Al
- Hajar Kapurejo Pagu Islamic Boarding School.
Obstacle
Ustadzah Durotul Aziah, S.Pd.I, said:
      “Of course there are obstacles in managing the formation of the religious character of
      students, such as students who still violate the rules in the implementation of discipline.
      Thus, the solution must be action starting from compiling data, planning, organizing,
      implementing, up to monitoring and evaluation. then management produces something and
      that something can be a source of refinement and improvement in the management of
      santri discipline.”
        Of course there are obstacles in managing the formation of the religious character of
students, such as students who still violate the rules in the implementation of discipline. Thus, the
solution must be action starting from compiling data, planning, organizing, implementing, up to
monitoring and evaluation. then management produces something and that something can be a
source of refinement and improvement in the management of santri discipline.
        Obstacles tend to be negative, namely slowing down the rate of something that is done by
someone. In carrying out activities there are often several things that become obstacles to
achieving goals, both obstacles in program implementation and in terms of its development. It is a
series of obstacles that a person experiences in learning. According to Rochman Natawijaya in
Sutriyanto, learning barriers are things or events that contribute to a condition that hinders their
application during the learning process.
        The principal as a leader must be able to: Generate a strong will with enthusiasm and
confidence in subordinates in carrying out their respective duties. Provide guidance and direction
to subordinates as well as provide encouragement, spur and stand in front for progress and
provide inspiration to achieve goals. The principal is the key to the success of a school he leads by
carrying out all his roles and responsibilities as a school leader. And must always strive to improve
teacher competence to achieve the goals of the school.

Discussion
      Pondok pesantren management works with a supportive base of parents, teachers, and
community members to mobilize initiatives. Their efforts are broadly focused along two
dimensions: first, reaching out to parents and the community to strengthen bonds between local
education professionals and those they serve; and second, working to expand the professional
capacity of individual teachers, to promote a coherent professional community and to direct
resources in teaching quality improvement.
Religious Character Education Planning for Santri
        In preparing the planning for the formation of the religious character of students at
Islamic boarding schools there must be the following things, namely: (1) Planning is always
forward-oriented, meaning that the formation plan must be able to predict the values that will
occur in the future based on an analysis of past and present situations and conditions. (2) Planning
is something that is deliberately born and not accidental, as a result of mature and intelligent
thinking that originates from the results of previous explorations. (3) Planning requires real action
from the leadership as well as teachers and students at Islamic boarding schools. (4) Planning must



                               Chalim Journal of Teaching and Learning, Volume 3, Issue. 1, 2023, pp. 11-19 15

Moh Komarodin*1, Ainur Rofiq2


be meaningful, that is, by planning the efforts to be made in order to achieve the goals that have
been set previously to be more effective and efficient
       The planning process is a series of logical steps used by educational implementers with
related parties to make decisions, these decisions can be short, medium and long-term. But what
needs to be underlined, planning is a process that does not end when the plan has been
determined. Activities or activities that have been produced through the planning process then
need to be implemented as a bridge to achieve the goals to be achieved. Therefore, in planning
the discipline of santri education, institutional sensitivity and logical sharpness are needed in
sorting and selecting, making connections between imagined reality and Islamic boarding school
resources, and formulating actions deemed necessary to achieve the desired results..
Management of Santri Discipline Education
          Setiap usaha yang dilaksanakan untuk memberikan penjelasan tentang apa, mengapa, dan
how to carry out functions and tasks, especially those related to policies or policies given in the
face of various contingencies. This activity needs to equalize the perceptions of implementers so
that there are no obstacles or discrepancies that can thwart the achievement of goals, identify the
right strategy, provide guidance, and increase morale. The briefing activity takes the form of: (a)
explaining orders, (b) giving instructions for implementation, (c) giving opportunities to improve
skills, (d) giving opportunities to take initiative, and (e) giving corrections so that each personnel
works efficiently.
          Motivation is a strength, energy, power, or a complex situation and readiness within the
individual to move towards a certain goal, either consciously or unconsciously. Motivation is a
force that is influenced by other factors, such as past experiences, intelligence levels, physical
abilities, environmental situations, life goals, and so on. According to Gibson, in considering
motivation, it is necessary to pay attention to physiological, psychological and environmental
factors as important factors. In every individual, there is a tendency that is spontaneous, this
impulse arises by itself and is not caused by the individual on purpose, is natural and works
automatically.
         Leading implies influencing others to do as the leader wants. So what is meant by leading
is the process of influencing people or groups to act as expected to achieve goals effectively and
efficiently. The elements of this leadership definition contain: (a) there are people/groups who are
influenced, (b) there are actions expected, (c) there are goals to be achieved, and (d) there are ways
to achieve them, namely effective and efficient.
        Communication is the process of sending or receiving messages from one person to
another, either directly or indirectly, orally, in writing or in non-verbal language. The person who
communicates is called the communicator. People who are invited to communicate are called
communicants. People who are able to communicate effectively and efficiently are called
communicative. A communicative person is a person who is able to convey messages to others,
either directly or indirectly, to other people, either directly or indirectly, in writing, verbally, or in
non-verbal language so that other people can receive information in accordance with the desired
expectations.
         In the curriculum structure of the Al - Hajar Kapurejo Pagu Islamic Boarding School, it
contains a number of subjects related to religion in Islamic boarding schools that must be
delivered to students or students. Given individual differences, of course, the breadth and depth
will affect students in each educational unit. In the education program at Al - Hajar Kapurejo Pagu
Islamic Boarding School the number of lesson hours per week / week for general subjects is 20
hours, while for religious subjects and Islamic boarding schools 24 hours Arabic language is used
as the official language that must be used in everyday life in Pondok Pesantren Al - Hajar
Kapurejo Pagu.

16 Chalim Journal of Teaching and Learning, Volume 3, Issue. 1, 2023, pp. 11-19

                                     Islamic Boarding School Management in Forming The Religious Character of Students


        Setting the learning load according to the time allocation that has been determined in the
curriculum structure, it is possible for each educational unit to add learning hours outside of the
study hours that have been regulated in the weekly lesson schedule. This is because all students
live in the Al - Hajar Kapurejo Pagu Islamic Boarding School dormitory. The use of additional
teaching hours takes into account the needs of students in achieving competency, in addition to
utilizing other subjects that are considered important but are not included in the content structure.
With the additional time, the education unit is allowed to make adjustments, for example holding a
remedial program for students who have not reached the minimum learning completeness
standard.
        In organizing classes, education is based on local and global advantages, including
Education based on local and global advantages is education that takes advantage of local
advantages and the need for global competitiveness and aspects of the economy, culture, language,
information and communication technology, ecology, and others. all of which are beneficial for
the development of student competence, the curriculum for all levels of educational units can
include local and global excellence-based education, local and global excellence-based education
can be part of all subjects and can also be local content subjects, excellence-based education Local
education can be obtained by students from other formal education units and/or non-formal
education units.
         The local content that characterizes the Al - Hajar Kapurejo Islamic Boarding School Pagu
and is determined in the Al - Hajar Islamic Boarding School environment is Education in the Al -
Hajar Islamic Boarding School environment with the language of instruction and daily interaction
is Arabic in the style of the book and Indonesian, To realize the desire this desire, the Al - Hajar
Islamic Boarding School instills the aqidah of ahlussunnah wal jam'ah which is the main education
for students of the Al - Hajar Islamic Boarding School Kapurejo Pagu. The curriculum applied is
the Islamic boarding school curriculum using Arabic in the style of the book, and added to the
skills values so that students after graduation can live independently in the midst of society. These
skills include; skills in computers, fashion, economics, agriculture, plantations, and animal
husbandry Study time.

CONCLUSION
         Planning for student discipline education, planning regulations that must be applied, then
conveying to all students to be followed and obeyed. If it is not followed according to the rules,
students who violate these rules will get sanctions/punishments accordingly, to make students
who are highly disciplined and responsible for what they do. Discipline management has complied
with the regulations set, management is carried out by compiling an educational calendar and
adjusted annually by the school to regulate learning activities. study time arrangements refer to
content standards and are adjusted to the Al - Hajar Pagu Islamic Boarding School calendar, the
needs of students, and the community. While there are obstacles in the formation of a religious
character, for example, there are students who violate the rules in the implementation of
discipline. Thus, the solution must be followed up starting from compiling data, planning,
organizing, and implementing, up to monitoring and evaluation. Then management produces
something that can be a source of refinement and improvement in the management of the santri
discipline.


BIBLIOGRAPHY

Arikunto Suharismi, 2006 Prosedur Penelitian Suatu Pendekatan Praktik, Jakarta:Rineka Cipta.

Sukmadinata Nana Syaodih, 2007 Metode Penelitian Pendidikan, Bandung: Remaja Rosdakarya.

                               Chalim Journal of Teaching and Learning, Volume 3, Issue. 1, 2023, pp. 11-19 17

Moh Komarodin*1, Ainur Rofiq2


Mardiyah, 2012 Kepemimpinan Kiai dalam Memelihara Budaya Organisasi, Malang: Aditya
       Media.

Moch Fuad Hasan Metarum, Abdul Majid “Manajemen Strategis Supervisi Kepala Sekolah dalam
      Membangun Pendidikan Karakter di Madrasah Ibtidaiyah Swasta” Dirāsāt: Jurnal
      Manajemen dan Pendidikan Islam, Vol. 7, No. 1, Juni 2021. Hal. 23-34.

Moleong Lexi J., 2006 Metodologi Penelitian Kualitatif, Bandung Remaja Rosdakarya.

Wahidmurni, 2008. Cara Mudah Menulis Proposal dan Laporan Penelitian Lapangan, Malang:
      UM Press.

Kartini Kartono, 1990. Pengantar Metodologi Research Sosial, Bandung: Mandar Maju.

Mardiyah, 2012. Kepemimpinan Kiai dalam Memelihara Budaya Organisasi, Malang: Aditya
       Media.

Amelia, C., Aprilianto, A., Supriatna, D., Rusydi, I., & Zahari, N. E. (2022). The Principal’s Role
        as Education Supervisor in Improving Teacher Professionalism. Nidhomul Haq : Jurnal
        Manajemen Pendidikan Islam, 7(1), Art. 1. https://doi.org/10.31538/ndh.v7i1.2075
Amma, T., & Rifa’i, M. A. (2022). Knowledge as A Factor That Affects The Validity and Interest
        in Carrying out Islamic Law. Nazhruna: Jurnal Pendidikan Islam, 5(2), Art. 2.
        https://doi.org/10.31538/nzh.v5i2.2337
Ansori, A., Rohmatulloh, D. M., Sudrajat, D., Am, S. A., & Utami, S. (2022). Digital Innovation
        in Pesantren Education: Prediction to Welcome Global Islam Awakening. Nazhruna:
        Jurnal Pendidikan Islam, 5(2), Art. 2. https://doi.org/10.31538/nzh.v5i2.2222
Aprilianto, A., Rofiq, M. H., Sirojuddin, A., Muchtar, N. E. P., & Mumtahana, L. (2023).
        Learning Plan of Moderate Islamic Religious Education in Higher Education. Al-Mada:
        Jurnal Agama, Sosial, Dan Budaya, 6(1), Art. 1. https://doi.org/10.31538/almada.v6i1.2792
Barnoto, B. (2020). Merespon Perubahan Dalam Pemenuhan Kebutuhan Sumber Daya Manusia
        Di SMP Negeri 1 Pacet. Munaddhomah: Jurnal Manajemen Pendidikan Islam, 1(1), Art. 1.
        https://doi.org/10.31538/munaddhomah.v1i1.27
Fatimah, F. S., Asy’ari, H., Sandria, A., & Nasucha, J. A. (2023). Learning Fiqh Based on the
        TAPPS (Think Aloud Pair Problem Solving) Method in Improving Student Learning
        Outcomes. At-Tadzkir: Islamic Education Journal, 2(1), Art. 1.
Ikramullah, I., & Sirojuddin, A. (2020). Optimalisasi Manajemen Sekolah Dalam Menerapkan
        Pendidikan Inklusi di Sekolah Dasar. Munaddhomah: Jurnal Manajemen Pendidikan Islam, 1(2),
        Art. 2. https://doi.org/10.31538/munaddhomah.v1i2.36
Krisbiyanto, A., & Nadhifah, I. (2022). Pengaruh Lokasi dan Citra Sekolah Terhadap Keputusan
        Siswa Memilih Sekolah di Sekolah Menengah Atas Negeri. Academicus: Journal of Teaching
        and Learning, 1(1), Art. 1.
Mubarok, M., Nizam, M., & Fitriani, F. (2022). Analisis Penerapan Metode Pembelajaran Bahasa
        Arab Kelas IV. Academicus: Journal of Teaching and Learning, 1(1), Art. 1.
Mumtahanah, L. (2020). Integrasi Nilai Multikultural Dalam Pembelajaran Pendidikan Agama
        Islam Di Sekolah Dasar. Nazhruna: Jurnal Pendidikan Islam, 3(1), Art. 1.
        https://doi.org/10.31538/nzh.v3i1.461

18 Chalim Journal of Teaching and Learning, Volume 3, Issue. 1, 2023, pp. 11-19

                                   Islamic Boarding School Management in Forming The Religious Character of Students


Rofiq, M. H., & Nadliroh, N. A. (2021). Analisis Evaluasi Pembelajaran Aqidah Akhlak Dalam
       Sistem Kredit Semester Di Madrasah Tsanawiyah Cerdas Istimewa Amanatul Ummah.
       FATAWA:          Jurnal       Pendidikan        Agama         Islam,     2(1), Art.    1.
       https://doi.org/10.37812/fatawa.v2i1.269
Saadah, R., & Asy’ari, H. (2022). Manajemen Sekolah Berbasis Pesantren Dalam Membentuk
       Karakter Peserta Didik. Kharisma: Jurnal Administrasi Dan Manajemen Pendidikan, 1(1), Art.
       1.
Saputro, A. N. A., & Darim, A. (2022). Strategi Kepala Sekolah Dalam Kebijakan Pembelajaran
       Pada Masa Pandemi Covid-19 di Sekolah Dasar. Kharisma: Jurnal Administrasi Dan
       Manajemen Pendidikan, 1(1), Art. 1.
Uthman, Y. O. O.-O. (2023). Effective Repentance: Its Concept, Islamic Standpoint, And Way
       Of Its Application. At-Tadzkir: Islamic Education Journal, 2(1), Art. 1.
Yamin, M., Basri, H., & Suhartini, A. (2023). Learning Management in Salaf Islamic Boarding
       Schools. At-Tadzkir: Islamic Education Journal, 2(1), Art. 1.




                             Chalim Journal of Teaching and Learning, Volume 3, Issue. 1, 2023, pp. 11-19 19