Creating a Space for Innovative
Learning: The Importance of Engaging
the Users in the Design Process

Bodil Bøjer




Abstract Based on an empirical case study, this chapter puts forward the thesis that
in order for an innovative learning environment (ILE) to work as intended, three
things must be aligned: teaching (the teacher), space (the designer) and organisation
(the school management). Ideally, when designing new ILEs all three factors are
considered in the design process in order to ensure a common goal: creating the best
space for innovative learning. In reality, this rarely happens and the users are left with
a physical learning environment where the intentions do not always match educators’
expectations and established practices. To remedy this dilemma, the chapter proposes
an additional activation phase in the design process after implementation—that is,
the early use phase of a new build—where the intentions of the space are translated
into actions, and refinements negotiated through discussions with the users through a
participatory process. The purpose of this phase is to match pedagogies with spatial
possibilities. The methodology used is Research through Design.



Introduction

Space shapes us but we are also affected by the way we interact with and act within
the space. Within learning environment contexts, the interdependence between the
physical space, innovative teaching and the organisation of a school is often over-
looked when designing ILEs. This may be because there are often expectations that a
new spatial design will automatically change the way we teach and learn. However,
we know that simply changing the space is not enough (Imms & Byers, 2017); the
intentions of the space can only be fully realised if the users of the learning environ-
ments are aware of and support the pedagogical principles informing the provision of
these spaces (Burke, 2016). Unfortunately, the pedagogies that a project is expected
to facilitate often remain unstated, or may even be unknown by those who are to use
the facilities (Jamieson, Fisher, Gilding, Taylor, & Trevitt, 2000).

B. Bøjer (B)
Institute of Visual Design, The Royal Danish Academy of Fine Arts, Schools of Architecture,
Design and Conservation (KADK) and Rune Fjord Studio, Copenhagen, Denmark
e-mail: bobo@kadk.dk

© The Author(s) 2021                                                                          33
W. Imms and T. Kvan (eds.), Teacher Transition into Innovative Learning Environments,
https://doi.org/10.1007/978-981-15-7497-9_4

34                                                                               B. Bøjer

    Blackmore, Bateman, Loughlin, O’Mara, & Aranda (2011) argue the way a
building is inhabited is at least as important as the quality of its design. But on this,
there is no convincing body of research that proves any causal link between a new
learning space and pedagogic change (Mulcahy, Cleveland, & Aberton, 2015); space
and furnishing do not automatically lead to certain actions or learning processes. That
is because such change is mostly about relationships and changing cultures and prac-
tices (Blackmore et al., 2011). Arguably, the use of space depends on the receiver
(Kirkeby, 2006) and the organisation of the school. Beghetto & Kaufman (2014)
point out that the organisation of, or leadership within a school plays a key role in
establishing an environment supportive of creativity, which is why just changing the
physical settings or pedagogical methods does not guarantee innovative learning. A
good learning environment requires congruence between physical space, pedagogical
practices and the organisation of the school (Ricken, 2010).
    In this chapter, an ILE is understood to be the combination of an innovative
space that supports a wide range of learning needs and situations, often through
the provision of a highly flexible interior and purpose-built furniture and innova-
tive teaching and learning. The terms ‘innovative teaching’ and ‘innovative learning’
are used throughout this chapter to denote teaching and learning activities that in
combination and through their focus on deep-learning foster the so-called ‘Twenty-
first Century learning skills’ of creativity, collaboration, communication and critical
thinking in students and assist in the best possible student learning outcomes, as
explained by Mahat, Bradbeer, Byers, and Imms (2018). Hence, innovative teaching
and learning strategies are about engaging the students in situated and inquiry-based
learning, allowing for experimentation and immersion in subjects of interest (Tang-
gaard, 2014). The physical design of ILEs range from large open spaces to highly
flexible arrangements of classrooms that can be reconfigured into different kinds of
learning spaces (Imms, Mahat, Byers, & Murphy, 2017). Imms and Byers (2017)
describe three types of learning spaces that are found in many educational institu-
tions today:’formal’ or traditional classrooms focused on largely didactic pedagogies,
student-centred spaces focused on transactional approaches to instruction and a ‘third
space’, where social activities overlap informal and active learning activities. These
new learning environments provide the infrastructure to inspire teachers to recon-
ceptualise and rethink their teaching. It seems clear that ILEs require a new way of
teaching (Imms, Cleveland, & Fisher, 2016) due to their particular spatial layouts that
do not support ‘classical’ teacher-centred teaching. Instead, ILEs provide a physical
setting for collaboration, experimentation and exploration, which are central activi-
ties (amongst others) in learning processes that foster creativity and innovation (Craft,
2005; Cropley, 2001; Tanggaard, 2014).

Creating a Space for Innovative Learning …                                          35

A Participatory and Practice-Based Research Approach

Designers tend to be separated from the final users of the physical environment by
facility management professionals, which makes the renegotiation of architecture-
pedagogy assumptions quite difficult, according to Jamieson et al. (2000). However,
to establish the best conditions for innovative learning, it is my thesis that align-
ment between teaching (the teacher), space (the designer) and organisation (school
management) is necessary, as illustrated in Fig. 1.
   To create this alignment, I propose a participatory form of design processes
where both users (teachers and students) and school management are included in
the design process regularly to align needs, wishes and intentions continuously in
order to assure ownership and use of the space. Blackmore et al. (2011), drawing
on Higgins, Hall, Wall, Woolner, and McCaughey (2005) and others, emphasise that
‘participatory or generative design involving students and teachers needs to continue
throughout all phases—from design to evaluation—in order to achieve sustainable
impact within a rapidly changing context’ (p. 37). User involvement tends to improve
the understanding of needs, resulting in a more suitable building (Clark, 2010; cited
in: Könings, Bovill, & Woolner, 2017). I will elaborate on this in the following
chapter, based on a specific case where a new ILE was designed at a municipal
primary and lower secondary school near Copenhagen, Denmark in collaboration
with the design agency Rune Fjord Studio. To maintain the privacy of the employees
and students the school is only referred to as the municipal school.
   The research approach used in this particular case is Research through Design
(RtD), which allows the researcher to generate new knowledge through processes that
simultaneously develop, test and improve design in relation to a specific spatial envi-
ronment. The role of the designer is thereby merged with the role of the researcher.
The methodology of RtD was first described by Christopher Frayling in 1993 and
covers a research approach where the design process in itself becomes a way to


Fig. 1 An alignment
between teaching (the
teacher), space (the designer)
and organisation (the school
management) is necessary in
order to establish the best
conditions for innovative
learning. Diagram by Rune
Fjord Studio

36                                                                                B. Bøjer

acquire new knowledge. RtD investigates the research inquiry from the practitioner’s
methods and acknowledges practice as a means of gaining new knowledge, which
in this project means developing concrete spatial environments while working in
an iterative dialogue with a physical material and the users that reflect back on the
research. Research reflections are generated in action (Schön, 1983) through the
design process and concrete design proposals.



The Assignment and the Intentions of the New ILE

In 2016, the design company Rune Fjord Studio was asked to design an ILE in a
street-space connecting classrooms used by 3rd to 5th-grade students at a municipal
school in Copenhagen, Denmark. The street-space can be explained as an open
learning space, big enough for activity and circulation, that cannot be closed into
classrooms and is exposed to major traffic as the primary access to other learning
spaces (Dovey & Fisher, 2014). The new premise was as for this development to be
used for both formal and informal learning and free play during regular school hours
and after school activities, which meant that it had to cover many different functions
and transform easily.
   Jamieson, Dane and Lippman (2005) claim that spaces outside the classroom
cease to exist as transition spaces and become learning spaces in their own rights
when they are layered for different ways of learning. Learning environments outside
the classroom tend to be less constrained by the educational traditions and habits
that often reign in the classroom, I would argue. Transformed into a layered environ-
ment with various workstations, these spaces potentially provide opportunities for
promoting individual, one-to-one, small group and large group activities where the
student takes on a more active role in the learning process. According to research,
certain pedagogical strategies allow the students to actively engage in the learning
process and become immersed in a topic of interest over a longer time as well as
experiment, play and examine open-ended problems promote critical thinking and
help develop creative and innovative skills (e.g. Craft, 2005; Cropley, 2001; Tang-
gaard, 2014). To support this, the space was redesigned with different activity zones,
flexibility and diversity in workstations that allow for many types of activities and
learning styles as opposed to the original interior consisting only of groups of chairs
and tables (see Figs. 2, 3, 4 and 5). A set of purpose-built furniture aimed at supporting
the needs and ideas of this particular school as well as innovative learning was espe-
cially developed for the space. This included two transformable co-creation cabinets
designed as potential tools in innovative processes, one as a mobile design studio
and the other as a tool for presentation (see Fig. 6).

Creating a Space for Innovative Learning …                                                 37




Fig. 2 The original learning environment at the municipal school. Drawing by Rune Fjord Studio


A Participatory Design Process to Align Teaching, Space
and Organisation

The triad of relations between teaching (teacher), space (designer) and organisation
(school management) served as the starting point for the design process of the new
ILE. A graphic diagram of the design process, inspired by the Double Diamond
model by the British Design Council (Council, 2007), served as a tool to keep track
of when to involve the different stakeholders in the project. The diagram visualised
the four phases of the design process (see Fig. 7), Understand & Discover, Analyse
& Define, Develop & Design and Production & Implementation, which respectively
opened and closed the process through divergent and convergent thinking (for more
information about design processes see for example Lawson, 2006).
   The intentions were to involve all key stakeholders directly or indirectly during
the design process on a regular basis. In reality, this was not possible because of
budgets, tight deadlines and teachers’ workloads. Könings et al. (2017) describe how
participation in the design of learning environments is crucial in order to account for
the different expectations and perceptions of stakeholders, but might be limited by
contrasting expertise, cultures and priorities—or in this case, project restrictions and
other circumstances.

38                                                                                       B. Bøjer




Fig. 3 The innovative learning environment at the municipal school, divided into 3 activity zones:
Quiet Zone, Social Zone and Group Zone with a diversity of workstations and flexible furniture.
Drawing by Rune Fjord Studio


    Initial insights into the needs, wishes, organisation and pedagogies of the munic-
ipal school were obtained from the school management prior to the design process,
and regular communication between school management and designers were held
throughout the project. In addition to this, ethnographic methods such as photo-
mapping and observations were performed during the pre-design phase to collect
empirical data that served as a groundwork for the spatial design.
    Most user involvements took place during the first phase in which two workshops
were held with a group of users to collect information that could lay the foundation for
the designing of the space. Only one teacher, two pedagogues (the teachers working
in the afterschool club) and school management participated in the first workshop
(all teachers were invited) and approximately 30 students and parents took part in
the second workshop. The other teachers were informed about the design process
regularly by the school management with an invitation to comment on the design but
had no direct contact with the designers.

Creating a Space for Innovative Learning …                                                39




Fig. 4 Diners for collaborative work in the group zone. Photographer: Filipa Pita, Rune Fjord
Studio


Without Keys the Spaces Are Hard to Unlock

The ILE at the municipal school was designed as an active street-space, connecting
the nine classrooms with the rest of the school and the outside playground. This
typology, where classrooms still play the main part in the teaching and learning
situations, arguably requires less from the teachers in terms of changed pedagogies
compared to open-plan learning spaces. Still, the teachers in this case experienced a
high level of difficulty adjusting to the possibilities and limitations of the new space
(personal communication, 17 Aug, 7 Nov, 11 Nov 2017), which will be explained
further in the following sections. In contrast to this, the students intuitively adapted
to the possibilities of the ILE, choosing freely amongst workstations when given the
chance (vice-principal, personal communication, 13 June 2017).
    Three months after implementation the designers returned to observe the use of
the ILE and experienced a large variation in how much space was used by the different
classes. Whereas one teacher took advantage of the variety of workstations in the
ILE by working in a dynamic flow between the classroom and the ILE, others stayed
inside the classroom for the whole day or used it sporadically. The transformable
co-creation cabinets remained unused.
    Subsequently, the designers met with the teaching team during one of their
monthly departmental meetings to discuss and evaluate the intentions behind the
design. During this meeting, the designers discovered that not only were many
teachers unaware of the intentions behind the spatial design, they did not even know
that they were allowed to use the co-creation cabinets, to the extent of not having
access to the units’ keys. Furthermore, the teachers found it hard to manage the use
of the ILE, being nine classes sharing the new facilities. In an attempt to activate the

40                                                                                      B. Bøjer




Fig. 5 Learning landscape and high table in the social zone where many learning activities can be
accommodated simultaneously. Photographer: Filipa Pita, Rune Fjord Studio


ILE, the teachers were subsequently encouraged to use the space and purpose-built
furniture according to intentions and to share experiences with each other on their
monthly team meetings in order to inspire and create a joint work culture.
   One year later, when revisiting the school, very little had changed in terms of
pedagogical practices. Before redesigning the space, the teachers had fixed rules
about where and how many students from each class to let out into the street-space.
These rules were back in use, which meant that the ILE was not being used according
to activity and affordance of the space or learner needs, but according to a teacher
made division and teacher needs. The co-creation cabinets remained unused. Lackney
(2008) explains this retreat to old practices as a result of the teachers not being trained
in how to utilise the affordances of the space; they retreat to the safety of default
practices (Cited in: Byers, Imms, & Hartnell-Young, 2014).

Creating a Space for Innovative Learning …                                                 41




Fig. 6 Co-creation cabinets. Photographer: Filipa Pita, Rune Fjord Studio




Fig. 7 A design process model in four phases by Bodil Bøjer and Rune Fjord Studio, inspired by
the Double Diamond model by the British Design Council

42                                                                            B. Bøjer

Participatory Processes Are not Uncomplicated

In retrospect, more effort should have been made to involve the teachers in the
design process that would arguably create a common vision and perhaps facilitate
the proposed alignment illustrated in Fig. 1. School management easily engaged in the
process, presumably because they were the contracting authority, but it was difficult
to engage the teachers. This resulted in very limited direct communication between
teachers and designers. The exact reasons for this are unknown, but prospectively the
challenge will be to secure the involvement of all parties during the design process
of new learning environments.
    The difficulty of aligning the space with the teachers’ usual way of teaching
indicates that the intended partnership between teaching, organisation and space
did not happen during the design process. With the exception of one teacher, they
were neither directly nor indirectly involved in the design process, resulting in a
mismatch between design intentions and pedagogical practices, limited awareness
of the intentions of the space, and a lack of ownership for the new design. While any
transition from one teaching method to another is complicated, greater involvement in
the design process arguably makes this transition easier and increases the chance that
new designs and pedagogies correspond. Jamieson et al. (2005) stress the importance
of bringing together the key stakeholders during the design process, which demands
a visionary strategy for the project prior to the design phase to establish a common
language and an overall understanding of the teaching strategy and different learning
activities. Furthermore, they claim that the teachers should be guided into using the
new types of learning spaces, which is backed up by Lackney (2008). Similarly,
Blackmore et al. (2011) emphasise that new built spaces will not move teachers
to innovative pedagogies unless they are prepared and provided with the necessary
skills, tools and resources to change their practices.



An Additional Phase to Activate the Space

Therefore, I propose that a fifth phase, called here Delivery and Activation, is added
to the design process (see Fig. 8) with the purpose of handing over and activating
the project in collaboration with the users. The aim of this phase would be to match
spatial possibilities with pedagogical practices. Very often, the interaction between
creators and users of learning spaces abruptly ends as soon as a new design has been
implemented, which leaves the users with a spatial design they might not know how
to use. Without a strong leader and a common vision to push the project forward, the
new design risks becoming an obstacle instead of an asset for teachers and students.
   As explained earlier, the intentions of a new spatial design can be difficult to
decode. During ‘Delivery & Activation’ the intentions of the space are translated
into actual pedagogic and learning actions, the nature of these negotiated with the
users, preferably students and teachers, through a participatory process. This needs

Creating a Space for Innovative Learning …                                                         43




Fig. 8 The design process model with a fifth phase for delivery and activation by Bodil Bøjer and
Rune Fjord Studio


to be recognised as an ongoing process where a common language and culture are
established because activation is never totally finished. School design is ongoing
(Blackmore et al., 2011) as it constantly develops and transforms with its users. As
concluded by Higgins et al. (2005, p. 3)
   …in a changing world no design solution will last forever, so the process of user involvement
   must be continually refreshed and iterated to support ongoing change. This approach has the
   added benefit of sustaining the meta-cognitive and motivational power of user involvement
   in creating the environment over time.

    The actual content of this phase requires further development. It is likely there is
no one way to do this, with the phase looking different in each learning space and
according to different pedagogical strategies. Könings et al. (2017) propose facilita-
tion and visual activities as a means to engage participants and encourage the sharing
of ideas. In this particular research project, a participatory toolkit to help unlock the
potential of ILEs based on perspectives of co-design is currently being explored
in several Danish schools. The aim is to examine whether co-design methods can
help create a higher level of spatial awareness and competencies, thereby poten-
tially becoming a tool in the design process when designing new learning spaces,
or a tool for activation of already existing spaces in appropriation with the users.
The term co-design refers to design activities where designers and non-designers
work together to develop new designs. The co-design approach has been chosen as
it actively includes the participants in the design activities and has the potential to
initiate a discussion about abstract pedagogical philosophical issues through a very
concrete subject like e.g. the layout and experience of a learning space. Co-design
differs from other discussions about possible futures by actively exploring what to

44                                                                                          B. Bøjer

achieve and how to achieve it in combination, using a broad repertoire of tools and
techniques (Brandt, Binder, & Sanders, 2012; Sanders, Brandt, & Binder, 2010).



Conclusions

ILEs are being built across the world in order to foster twenty-first- century learning
skills such as creativity and collaboration. In this chapter, I have proposed that in
order for the ILEs to work as intended and to become a tool for improved pedagogical
practices, three things must correspond: teaching (the teacher), space (the designer)
and organisation (the school management). This has been exemplified in a case
study at a Danish school, where a design process model was used in an attempt to
engage all participants in the design process of a new ILE and through this create
accordance between teaching, space and organisation to ensure a common goal:
innovative learning.
    Experience from the process showed that changing space did not automatically
change pedagogical practices. The teachers never really participated in the design
process and as a consequence, they did not know the intentions of the space nor how to
use it. Based on this, I propose that, ideally, all stakeholders should be involved in the
design process from the start-up phase to align teaching, space and organisation. In
reality, this might not be possible due to the size of the school, budgets, time, workload
and other factors. In this particular case, the teachers did not have time to participate
in the design process, a product of the teachers’ heavy workloads. To compensate
for this, the chapter proposes that the design process should also include a process
of activation after implementation of the physical design. In this phase, the users and
the designers would work together to activate the new physical frames in relation
to pedagogical practices. The purpose would be to match pedagogies with spatial
possibilities and to provide the teachers with the necessary skills, tools and resources
to change their practices in order to be able to use the space as a pedagogic tool for
teaching and learning. The goal would be to help the teachers experience the space
as an asset of their pedagogical practices, and not an obstacle. For this to happen,
it is necessary to gain more knowledge about the interplay between the physical
environment and pedagogical practices in order to create a common language and
ways to activate the ILEs.

Acknowledgements Data utilised in this research was obtained in adherence to the required ethical
protocol of the author’s host institution. All images and diagrams are the property of the author, or
the author has obtained consent to use them from the appropriate copyright owner.

Creating a Space for Innovative Learning …                                                            45

References

Beghetto, R. A., & Kaufman, J. C. (2014). Classroom contexts for creativity. High Ability Studies,
  25(1), 53–69. https://doi.org/10.1080/13598139.2014.905247.
Blackmore, J., Bateman, D., Loughlin, J., O’Mara, J., & Aranda, G. (2011). Research into the
  connection between built learning spaces and student outcomes (0759406642). Retrieved from
  http://dro.deakin.edu.au/eserv/DU:30036968/blackmore-researchinto-2011.pdf.
Brandt, E., Binder, T., & Sanders, E. B.-N. (2012). Ways to engage telling, making and enacting. In
  Routledge international handbook of participatory design (pp. 145–181). Routledge, New York.
Burke, C. (2016). Quiet stories of educational design. In K. Darian-Smith & J. Willis (Eds.),
  Designing schools: Space, place and pedagogy (pp. 191–204): Routledge.
Byers, T., Imms, W., & Hartnell-Young, E. (2014). Making the case for space: The effect of learning
  spaces on teaching and learning. Curriculum and Teaching, 29(1), 5–19. https://doi.org/10.7459/
  ct/29.1.02.
Clark, A. (2010). Transforming children’s spaces: Children’s and adults’ participation in designing
  learning environments. Routledge.
Council, D. (2007). Eleven lessons: Managing design in eleven global companies-desk research
  report. Retrieved from http://www.designcouncil.org.uk/sites/default/files/asset/document/Ele
  venLessons_DeskResearchReport_0.pdf.
Craft, A. (2005). Creativity in schools: Tensions and dilemmas. USA and Canada: Routledge.
Cropley, A. J. (2001). Creativity in education & learning: A guide for teachers and educators. Great
  Britain: Kogan Page.
Dovey, K., & Fisher, K. (2014). Designing for adaptation: The school as socio-spatial assemblage.
  The Journal of Architecture, 19(1), 43–63.
Frayling, C. (1993). Research in art and design. In Royal College of Art Research Papers, 1.
Higgins, S., Hall, E., Wall, K., Woolner, P., & McCaughey, C. (2005). The impact of school environ-
  ments: A literature review. Retrieved from https://www.ncl.ac.uk/media/wwwnclacuk/cflat/files/
  impact-school-environments.pdf.
Imms, W., & Byers, T. (2017). Impact of classroom design on teacher pedagogy and student engage-
  ment and performance in mathematics. Learning Environments Research, 20(1), 139–152. https://
  doi.org/10.1007/s10984-016-9210-0.
Imms, W., Cleveland, B., & Fisher, K. (2016). Pursuing that elusive knowledge about what works in
  learning environment design. In W. Imms, B. Cleveland, & K. Fisher (Eds.), Evaluating learning
  environments: Snapshots of emerging issues, methods and knowledge (pp. 3–16). Rotterdam,
  Netherlands: Sense Publishing.
Imms, W., Mahat, M., Byers, T., & Murphy, D. (2017). Type and use of innovative learning environ-
  ments in Australasian schools. ILETC Survey 1 (0734053819). Retrieved from https://minerva-
  access.unimelb.edu.au/handle/11343/219467.
Jamieson, P., Dane, J., & Lippman, P. (2005). Moving beyond the classroom: Accommodating the
  changing pedagogy of higher education. Paper presented at the Refereed Forum Proceedings of
  the Australian Association for Institutional Research.
Jamieson, P., Fisher, K., Gilding, T., Taylor, P. G., & Trevitt, A. (2000). Place and space in the design
  of new learning environments. Higher Education Research & Development, 19(2), 221–236.
  https://doi.org/10.1080/072943600445664.
Kirkeby, I. M. (2006). Skolen finder sted. KTH.
Könings, K. D., Bovill, C., & Woolner, P. (2017). Towards an interdisciplinary model of practice
  for participatory building design in education. European Journal of Education, 52(3), 306–317.
  https://doi.org/10.1111/ejed.12230.
Lackney, J. A. (2008). Teacher environmental competence in elementary school environments.
  Children Youth and Environments, 18(2), 133–159.
Lawson, B. (2006). How designers think: The design process demystified. Routledge.

46                                                                                         B. Bøjer

Mahat, M., Bradbeer, C., Byers, T., & Imms, W. (2018). Innovative learning environments and
  teacher change defining key concepts—Technical Report 3/2018. Retrieved from https://minerva-
  access.unimelb.edu.au/handle/11343/216292.
Mulcahy, D., Cleveland, B., & Aberton, H. (2015). Learning spaces and pedagogic change: Envi-
  sioned, enacted and experienced. Pedagogy, Culture & Society, 23(4), 575–595. https://doi.org/
  10.1080/14681366.2015.1055128.
Ricken, W. (2010). Arkitektur, pædagogik og sundhed. (PhD). Kunstakademiets Arkitektskole.
Sanders, E., Brandt, E., & Binder, T. (2010). A framework for organizing the tools and techniques of
  participatory design. Paper presented at the Proceedings of the 11th biennial participatory design
  conference.
Schön, D. (1983). The reflective practitioner. Great Britain: Basic Books.
Tanggaard, L. (2014). A situated model of creative learning. European Educational Research
  Journal, 13(1), 107–116. https://doi.org/10.2304/eerj.2014.13.1.107.


Bodil Bøjer (Denmark), PhD, is a Research Fellow at The Royal Danish Academy of Fine Arts,
School of Design. Her research examines the relationship between learning space design and
pedagogical practices from a design perspective with a particular focus on participatory design
processes, methods and tools. Bodil completed her Industrial PhD, ‘Unlocking Learning Spaces
– an examination of the interplay between the design of learning spaces and pedagogical prac-
tices’ in 2019, where she used a Research through Design approach in several design experi-
ments in collaboration with the Danish design agency Rune Fjord Studio and The Royal Danish
Academy of Fine Arts, School of Design. She is a member of the European research network
Drapes (Design, Research and Practice in Educational Spaces) and currently involved in the Euro-
pean research project, CoReD (Collaborative Redesign with Schools). Moreover, Bodil holds an
MA in Art History and Aesthetics and Culture and has 10+ years of practical experience working
with spatial design.




Open Access This chapter is licensed under the terms of the Creative Commons Attribution 4.0
International License (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/), which permits use, sharing,
adaptation, distribution and reproduction in any medium or format, as long as you give appropriate
credit to the original author(s) and the source, provide a link to the Creative Commons license and
indicate if changes were made.
    The images or other third party material in this chapter are included in the chapter’s Creative
Commons license, unless indicated otherwise in a credit line to the material. If material is not
included in the chapter’s Creative Commons license and your intended use is not permitted by
statutory regulation or exceeds the permitted use, you will need to obtain permission directly from
the copyright holder.