ICESRE
                                   5th International Conference on Education and Social Science Research (ICESRE)
                                   Volume 2022




                                   Conference Paper

                                   Assessing School Management In Santa
                                   Theresia Kindergarten, Central Java
                                   Aloysia Yesi Wulandari, Swantyka Ilham Prahesti*, Nufitriani Kartika Dewi,
                                   Aryo Tamtomo, Sih Restu Novia
                                   Early Childhood Education Teacher Education S1 Study Program / Faculty of Computer and
                                   Education, Ngudi Waluyo University, Indonesia
                                   ORCID ID
                                   Swantyka Ilham Prahesti: https://orcid.org/0000-0001-9482-338X

                                   Abstract.
                                   This study aims to determine the management of education in Santa Theresia
                                   Kindergarten. This study uses a descriptive method with a qualitative approach. The
                                   research subjects are principals, teachers, and parents. The subjects were selected
                                   through a purposive sampling technique. Data were analysed by systematically
                                   searching and structuring interview transcripts, recordings, photos, and documents.
                                   The results showed that the planning of educational programs at the Santa Theresia
Corresponding Author: Swantyka     Kindergarten school, in general, has been well prepared. Additionally, the management
Ilham Prahesti; email:
                                   organization in Santa Theresia Kindergarten, in general, has reflected a relevance
swantykailham@unw.ac.id
                                   between the abilities and skills of personnel and educational needs. Lastly, The
Published 21 December 2022         implementation of education in Santa Theresia Kindergarten is directed at the learning
                                   process running well, effectively, and fun. In general, of the eight pre-set standards,
Publishing services provided by
                                   several standards are doing well, namely financing standards, content standards,
Knowledge E
                                   process standards, educators and education personnel standards, infrastructure
   Aloysia Yesi Wulandari et       standards, and financing standards. At the same time, the standard that requires
al. This article is distributed    more attention is the standard of assessment because teachers are not consistent in
under the terms of the Creative    conducting the assessment
Commons Attribution License,
which permits unrestricted use     Keywords: Kindergarten, School management, educational program
and redistribution provided that
the original author and source
are credited.


Selection and Peer-review under
the responsibility of the ICESRE
                                   1. Introduction
Conference Committee.
                                   Early Childhood Education (PAUD) is an education that is shown for preschool-aged chil-
                                   dren so that children can develop their potential from an early age, namely by providing
                                   educational stimuli to help children’s physical and spiritual growth and development.
                                   Further, education at the kindergarten level is shown and designed to serve and improve
                                   children’s intellectual, social-emotional, linguistic, and physical development (1). This is in
                                   line with the purpose of preschool education, or kindergarten level, to facilitate optimal
                                   and comprehensive growth and development of the child following the norms and
                                   values of life adopted (2).

How to cite this article: Aloysia Yesi Wulandari, Swantyka Ilham Prahesti*, Nufitriani Kartika Dewi, Aryo Tamtomo, Sih Restu Novia, (2022), “Assessing
School Management In Santa Theresia Kindergarten, Central Java” in 5th International Conference on Education and Social Science Research                 Page 88
(ICESRE), KnE Social Sciences, pages 88–99. DOI 10.18502/kss.v7i19.12433

                                                                                                             ICESRE




                               Early Childhood Care and Education (ECCE) management quality reflect professional
                         governance quality by optimally utilizing all management aspects. Moreover, an ECCE
                         valley that runs effectively and efficiently requires optimal structuring, regulation, and
                         management from a manager. Therefore, in managing quality ECCE institutions, it is
                         necessary to have planning, organizing, implementing, and the need for control as a
                         manager/head action (3) such as managing a quality learning environment. The purpose
                         of education in ECCE is essential for certain parties directly involved in the management
                         of the learning environment in ECCE. Conceptually, the formulation of the purpose of
                         education in ECCE can be listened to and learned from the formulation of laws and
                         government regulations governing the implementation of education at that level, as
                         well as through the stated educational curriculum document that is being implemented.
                               Management is a process to realize the expected goals. Management is also a
                         particular skill to carry out an activity, either with others or through others in achieving
                         an organizational goal (4). Meanwhile, (5) said that management is an activity carried
                         out together and a person or group to achieve an organization’s goals. Specific to
                         education, management is defined as an activity of combining educational resources to
                         be centralized to achieve predetermined educational purposes (6). With management, a
                         principal can act as an administrator in carrying out the mission, a manager in combining
                         educational resources, and a supervisor in fostering teachers in the teaching and
                         learning process. ECCE management consists of the words ”Management” and ”ECCE”.
                         The word Management comes from Latin, namely ”Manus” which means ”Hand” and
                         Agree which means ”To Do” (7). The word is then combined into the verb Manager,
                         which means ”To Handle”. The word Managere was then translated into English into
                         Management with the verb “To manage”. So that in the end Management in Indonesian
                         is solved with the word management, which means management.
                               Meanwhile, ECCE based on the Minister of Education and Culture Number 137 of
                         2014 concerning National Standards for ECCE, Chapter I, Article I, Number 10 states
                         that Early Childhood Education is a coaching effort shown to children from birth to the
                         age of 6 (six) years which is carried out through the provision of educational stimuli
                         aimed at helping physical and spiritual growth and development so that children have
                         the readiness to enter the next level. To ensure quality ECCE units, it is necessary to be
                         well managed to know the extent of the quality of ECCE, accreditation must be carried
                         out (8). On the other hand, accreditation is critical because it improves the quality or
                         quality of education. Quality ECCE is expected to produce quality future generations.
                         There are eight accreditation standards for the ECCE level, namely: Child Develop-
                         ment Achievement Level Standards (STPPA), Content Standards, Process Standards,



DOI 10.18502/kss.v7i19.12433                                                                                Page 89

                                                                                                             ICESRE




                         Educators and Education Personnel Standards, Facilities and Infrastructure Standards,
                         Management Standards, Financing Standards, Assessment Standards. The purpose of
                         accreditation can also provide an overview of the level of school performance (9) which
                         is used as a tool for coaching, developing and improving schools both in terms of
                         quality, effectiveness, efficiency, productivity, and innovation, and is very important for
                         the sustainability of the institution itself.



                         2. Method

                         This study focuses on efforts to analyze phenomena related to achieving 8 (eight)
                         national standards for education at Santa Theresia Ungaran Kindergarten. The series
                         of research activities that the author carried out was through initial activities, namely by
                         observing the object of research, looking for documents, and continuing by conducting
                         interview activities at sources that could provide information about the data that the
                         author needed in research and discussion later. The subjects of the study that the
                         authors referred to were principals, teachers, and parents. The study subjects were
                         taken through the purposive sampling technique, which is to choose samples based on
                         the research objectives so that in the implementation of the interviews carried out
                         directed following the research targets. Data analysis in qualitative research is the
                         process of organizing the sequence of data into a pattern, category, and situation of data
                         description. Data analysis systematically searches and structures interview transcripts,
                         recordings, photographs, and documents. To then be interpreted and given meaning
                         in order to increase the understanding of research towards the research focus, which
                         is then presented as a research result.



                         3. Result and Discussion

                         The PAUD Management Research was carried out on Thursday, April 7, 2022 at Santa
                         Theresia Kindergarten located on Jalan Diponegoro No. 741 Ungaran. The selection of
                         Santa Theresia Kindergarten is based on the fact that the institution was accredited
                         A in 2018, the institution has three services, namely Child Care Center (TPA), Kinder-
                         garten (TK) and Playgroup (KB) and is often used as a place for observation or student
                         internships. In Santa Theresia Kindergarten, it has implemented the standards for the
                         implementation of ECCE: Child Development Achievement Level Standards (STPPA),
                         Content Standards, Process Standards, Educators and Education Personnel, Facilities
                         and Infrastructure, Management, Financing, and Assessment Standards.


DOI 10.18502/kss.v7i19.12433                                                                                Page 90

                                                                                                               ICESRE




                         3.1. Standards of The Level of Achievement of Child Development

                         In the standard level of achievement of child development, schools need to detect chil-
                         dren’s growth such as weight data according to age, height data according to height, and
                         head circumference information according to age and gender. The school only detects
                         children’s development by providing a recapitulation of developmental achievement
                         data measured using several instruments: DDTK, KMS, KPSP (Pre-screening Question-
                         naire for development in the SDIDTK book), other related sources.
                               From the results of an interview with the principal at Santa Theresia Ungaran Kinder-
                         garten, the application of the child development achievement level standard (STPPA),
                         there are a number of things that support the STPPA process. As there are data on
                         weight, height, by age. Every child has a DDTK (Early Detection of Child Growth and
                         Development) book. The school also collaborates with puskesmas to check children’s
                         health every few months. The school also uses the SDIDTK application (Simulation of
                         Early Intervention Detection of Growth and Development). In this application there is
                         Early Detection and Intervention of Child Growth and Development to detect growth
                         disorders in children, power tests with (TDD), detection of behavioral and emotional
                         deviations, early detection of autism in children and early detection of GPH. Child
                         development can also be seen as a whole in the maternal and child health book
                         (MCH), healthy menju card (KMS). The school also collaborates with puskesmas to
                         conduct health checks for students at school such as dental, ear, oral examinations.
                         After conducting an investigation, the school reports the results of the examination to
                         parents for follow-up as there are those who that must be immediately referred to the
                         hospital.



                         3.2. Conten Standards

                         The content standard contains KTSP (Education Unit Level Curriculum) which con-
                         tains learning materials, learning methods, KTSP references, services according to age
                         groups according to DAPODIK (Basic Education Data). In its planning, Santa Theresia
                         Kindergarten compiled the 2013 curriculum (K13) using national standards following
                         the 2013 Curriculum for Early Childhood Education at the Minister of Education and
                         Culture number 146 of 2014 Santa Theresia Kindergarten also has the Maria Servant
                         of God curriculum as a guideline that is instilled during teaching activities, namely the
                         values of spirituality to students, namely faith, loyalty, humility, and community. Currently,
                         Santa Theresia Kindergarten is also in the process of implementing the Independent


DOI 10.18502/kss.v7i19.12433                                                                                   Page 91

                                                                                                             ICESRE




                         Curriculum (IKM). Evaluation and preparation of the Curriculum is carried out with the
                         principal and teachers during work meetings to prepare school programs for the next
                         school year.



                         3.3. Process Standards

                         In the standard process, there is learning planning such as semester programs, RPPM,
                         RPPH, supervision of learning activities, parental involvement, communication between
                         parents and educators, unit meetings/activities involving parents in child development
                         reports (report cards), photos, direct communication during meetings or other media.
                         From the results of the interview with the principal
                               ”Supervision is usually the implementation, we supervise kbm, there is administrative
                         supervision, so I am in classes. We have made a schedule for what the teachers are
                         supervised, then I wait for the teachers to teach whether it is in accordance with the
                         plan that has been made. If administrative supervision means that we will look at
                         the administration of the class, whether the RPP exists, then other supporting books
                         assessment books, anecdotal notebooks, initial symptom books. What is valued is from
                         teaching him whether according to the plan that has been made then there is also the
                         administration. Now it will be different if we use an independent curriculum, sometimes
                         not in accordance with the rpp.” (interview with principal)
                               The principal and teachers prepare semester programs during work meetings for the
                         preparation of school programs for the new academic year, the availability of Learning
                         Preparation Plan (RPP) documents either daily or weekly, supervision documents carried
                         out by the principal to teachers, documents on child development reports, communi-
                         cations made by parents and teachers, and minutes of meetings with parents. In the
                         standard process, there is also parental involvement in ECCE institutions (9). For the
                         involvement of parents in ECCE i.e. attending parent meetings both online / ofline,
                         parents are involved in school programs such as The Patron’s Name Party and School
                         Birthday activities and Parenting activities.
                               ”Yes, if we do parent meetings during this pandemic via Zoom meeting, if online
                         we invite parents, it has not been done because it is possible, but this sees that the
                         situation is good, so maybe later in this school year we still invite parents to socialize
                         the parent program and we will also socialize it later for the collection of the diploma,
                         we also invite parents. Communication between students and parents ” is carried out
                         through the grub of class groups using whatshapp, if there is a consultation usually
                         also use private chat with educators. There are also those who come here directly and


DOI 10.18502/kss.v7i19.12433                                                                                Page 92

                                                                                                             ICESRE




                         then consult with the educators as well, and it is more targeted if they meet directly
                         than through chat later it will be different from what is said by typing, the message is
                         different.” (interviews with teachers and parents)



                         3.4. Standards Of Educators And Education Personnel

                         Educators are members of the community who are devoted and appointed to support
                         the implementation of education (10). Included in the education staff is the head of an
                         educator, educator, and education staff. The competency standards of educators and
                         education personnel include four components: 1) pedagogic competence, 2) personality
                         competence, 3) social competence and, 4) professional competence.
                               At the standard of educators and education personnel at Santa Theresia Kinder-
                         garten, there are eight educators and four education staff. There are seven education
                         personnel who have S1 academic education qualifications, one educator who has
                         high school qualifications, and one educational staff with S1 academic qualifications.
                         Educators and Education Personnel at Santa Theresia Kindergarten also attend training
                         that supports their education such as attending PAUD tiered training, technical training
                         for ECCE educators or other relevant training both organized by the Ministry of Education
                         and Culture, Dinas and Foundations.
                               In the standards of educators and education staff at Santa Theresia Kindergarten,
                         documents such as data, certificates, diplomas, and award certificates are already
                         available. Educators and education staff have also been included in Dapodik (Basic
                         Education Data) and have accounts to access various applications/platforms such as
                         PPM (Merdeka Mengajar Platform). Educators are also actively involved in organizations
                         such as IGTKI / HIMPAUDI.
                               Table 1 shows the educators and education staff working in Santa Theresia Kinder-
                         garten, containing position, date of birth, educational qualifications, and year of starting
                         work. This data was derived from the result of observation in Santa Theresia Kinder-
                         garten.



                         3.5. Standards Of Facilities And Infrastructure

                         In supporting teaching and learning activities, Santa Theresia Kindergarten has infras-
                         tructure standards in accordance with applicable regulations such as the availability of
                         inventory list documents, play facilities, and Dapodik. Santa Theresia Kindergarten has


DOI 10.18502/kss.v7i19.12433                                                                                Page 93

                                                                                                                   ICESRE




                                                        Table 1: Teacher and Employee Data.

                                    No Subject's Code   Position         Place and Certificate    Year of start-
                                                                         date of birt             ing work
                                    1.   AS             Pricipal         Magelang, S1 PAUD        17 Juli 2006
                                                                         18 April 1969
                                    2    RS             Teacher          Kab Smg, 23 S1 PAUD      01   Oktober
                                                                         Maret 1970               1991
                                    3    Ch. YA         Teacher          Wonogiri, 23 SMA         01 Juli 2015
                                                                         Juli 1973
                                    4    Ch. TS         Teacher          Kab Smg, 18 S1 PAUD      14 Juli 2014
                                                                         April 1971
                                    5    YMS            Teacher          Semarang, S1 PAUD        16 Juli 2012
                                                                         28    Maret
                                                                         1980
                                    6    SMR            Teacher          Bogor, 31 Juli S1 PAUD   14Juli 2018
                                                                         1986
                                    7    MDS            Teacher          Kab     Smg, S1 PAUD     15 Juli 2012
                                                                         816     Sept
                                                                         19971
                                    8    CSR            Teacher          Tegal      25 S1 PAUD    24 Juli 2000
                                                                         April 1974
                                    9    MIS            Teacher          Temanggung,S1 PAUD       01 Nov 2018
                                                                         17   Maret
                                                                         1995
                                    10   SI             Administration   Kab Smg, 14 S1           01 Agust 2010
                                                                         Juni 1967
                                    11   AYW            Administration   Semarang, 1 SMK          01 Sept 2017
                                                                         Juli 1999
                                    12   RK             Cleaning         Semarang, D3             1 Agustus 2019
                                                        Service          14 Nov 1975




                         facilities, namely blocks, materials, media and tools for the development of art and cul-
                         ture, stationery, painting tools, materials, media and role-playing tools, materials, media
                         and cooking utensils, media materials and tools for spiritual development, materials,
                         media and tools for the physical development of motor skills, materials, media and
                         tools sourced from the natural/surrounding environment, external games (sandboxes,
                         titian boards, swings, seesaws, slides, rotary bowls), children’s reading books.
                               Santa Theresia Kindergarten also has a DAPODIK application (Basic Data of Stu-
                         dents). The institution has updated Dapodik data on the availability of electricity or
                         other lighting, water installations, toilets with clean water, and installation of tanan
                         washing facilities with running water, P3K facilities. For infrastructure in Santa Theresia
                         Kindergarten, bagunanan is available in the ECCE unit, data on land area in Dapodik
                         and document evidence mentions the land area. Data on the status of land in Dapodik
                         there is evidence of the legality of land use, having data on the availability of play or
                         learning spaces.


DOI 10.18502/kss.v7i19.12433                                                                                       Page 94

                                                                                                           ICESRE




                               It also has a swimming pool, drumband, musical instruments and dance costumes to
                         support school programs such as extracurriculars at Santa Theresia Kindergarten. The
                         management of infrastructure facilities in Santa Theresia Kindergarten is to carry out
                         planning such as the procurement of goods that have been made in the RABS (School
                         Budget Plan), planning for the maintenance of infrastructure, Organizing (Organizing)
                         Santa Theresia Kindergarten has a team of sarpas ara infrastructure facilities that carry
                         out according to the main duties and functions in the infrastructure section. Control
                         (Controling) so that the work runs following the vision and mission and objectives,
                         there is the supervision of infrastructure. The implementation (Actuating) encourages
                         all school residents to carry out and realize the plan that is realized through various
                         briefings and motivations.




                                                    Figure 1: Standard of Facilites (Play Ground).




                         3.6. Management Standards

                         In Santa Theresia Kindergarten, in implementing Management Standards, namely unit
                         planning to compile the academic unit’s vision, mission, and objectives, plans for educa-
                         tional unit activities in one year, and the current year’s academic calendar made by the
                         institution. In organizing at Santa Theresia Kindergarten, it has an organizational struc-
                         ture of the ECCE unit with a description of the main tasks and functions, has the order
                         of educators and education staff. Its implementation at Santa Theresia Kindergarten
                         manages the admission of new students (PPDB), Learning, Competency Development
                         of Educators, and Education Personnel.




DOI 10.18502/kss.v7i19.12433                                                                              Page 95

                                                                                                       ICESRE




                                                  Figure 2: School made education celendar.




                         3.7. Financing Standards

                         In Santa Theresia Kindergarten, the budget plan (RAB), the availability of investment
                         costs, operational costs, and documents on the personal expenses of ECCE units in the
                         academic year. Santa Theresia Kindergarten has standard operating costs every school
                         year, preparation of the RAB for every work meeting, investment costs and financial
                         documents. Financial administration is available, namely bookkeeping documents (cash
                         books, income records, expense records) and compiling financial statements (monthly
                         or annually). Every month send financial statements, and make accountability reports
                         that are sent to the foundation and BOP reports in the service.




DOI 10.18502/kss.v7i19.12433                                                                          Page 96

                                                                                                               ICESRE




                         3.8. Assessment Standards

                         Assessment (Assessment) in early childhood (AUD) is used to evaluate learning devel-
                         opment and prepare further learning materials. Assessment is used to determine the
                         learning progress achieved by students in carrying out various developmental tasks as
                         well as things that are of interest and attention to students (11). The assessment will give
                         an idea of what learners can and cannot do within the development scope appropriate
                         to their age.
                               Assessment is a part that should be the center of attention in learning, closely related
                         directly to the Curriculum developed by educators on learning. Assessment of students
                         for, an educator helps know the needs of students who are in a period of growth and
                         development so that effective and efficient educational programs can be held. Providing
                         assessment and evaluation must be objective in measuring each student’s academic
                         development and growth (12).
                               In carrying out the Child Development Assessment in Santa Theresia Kindergarten
                         with observations and interviews, make checklists, anecdotal notes, works, documen-
                         tation and other forms of assessment. Child development reports are made every
                         semester in accordance with aspects of child development, namely moral, cognitive,
                         physical motor, language, art, social-emotional religious values. Assessment documents
                         are already available. In conducting assessments, educators face several obstacles,
                         namely time constraints and obstacles from students themselves. These obstacles give
                         rise to assessment results that have not been able to describe the development of
                         students. Therefore, educators need to prepare an assessment schedule for students
                         in a structured manner.



                         4. Conclusion

                         Management is the activity of planning, organizing, directing, and controlling all activities
                         in an organization or institution. The importance of management in one ECCE institution
                         is to provide maximum service for students, smooth work programs, and in accordance
                         with the school’s goals, vision, and mission. The reason is the existence of management
                         activities in ECCE institutions to run effectively and efficiently, which is shown to all com-
                         ponents and activities of the institution, both students, educators, and the environment
                         in an orderly, planned and systematic manner. The management at Santa Theresia
                         Kindergarten is in accordance with the 8 PAUD standards that have been applied
                         to date, and the management is good. Meanwhile, the standard that requires more


DOI 10.18502/kss.v7i19.12433                                                                                   Page 97

                                                                                                            ICESRE




                         attention is the assessment standard because the teacher is inconsistent in conducting
                         assessments; educators need to prepare a schedule to provide evaluations to students
                         so that the assessment runs on time.



                         Acknowledgement

                         For the first and foremost, the writer would like to express we deepest gratitude for
                         God. Thank you very much to Ngudi Waluyo University for funding research activities
                         so that we can participate in international conference activities. Thank you to Santa
                         Theresia Kindergarten Ungaran who is willing to be a place for research and support
                         for the smooth writing of this article. We also thank the organizers and reviewers



                         References

                          [1] Maryana R, Rachmawati Y. Pengelolaan lingkungan belajar. Prenada Media; 2013.

                         [2] Suryana D, Rizka N. Manajemen pendidikan anak usia dini berbasis akreditasi
                               lembaga.

                         [3] Nurhafizah N. Pelatihan pembuatan media pembelajaran anak usia dini menggu-
                               nakan bahan sisa. Early Childhood: Jurnal Pendidikan. 2018;2:44–53.

                         [4] Wijoyo H. Socialization of the Accreditation Asessment System (SISPENA) of the
                               National Accreditation Board for Early Childhood Education (PAUD) and Non Formal
                               Education (PNF) in Bengkalis, Riau Province. Jurnal Humanities Pengabdian Kepada
                               Masyarakat. 2020;1:23–29.

                         [5] Bredekamp VS. The reliability of the instruments and procedures of a national
                               accreditation system for early childhood programs (volumes i and ii). University of
                               Maryland, College Park; 1985.

                         [6] Seefeldt C. Teacher certification and program accreditation in early childhood
                               education. The Elementary School Journal. 1988;89:241–251.

                          [7] Ray A, Bowman B, Robbins J. Preparing early childhood teachers to successfully
                               educate all children: The contribution of state boards of higher education and
                               national professional accreditation organizations. Chicago: Erikson Institute; 2006.

                         [8] Musa S, Uthartianty R. The efforts of early-childhood education managers in
                               achieving accreditation to improve the quality of education organization. Journal
                               of Nonformal Education. 2019;5:138–144.


DOI 10.18502/kss.v7i19.12433                                                                                Page 98

                                                                                                         ICESRE




                         [9] Cobbold C, Boateng P. How confident are kindergarten teachers in their ability to
                               keep order in the classroom? A study of teacher efficacy in classroom management.
                               Journal of Education and Practice. 2016;7:181–190.
                         [10] Zebua M, Siburian P. Training management model of kindergarten teacher in Medan.
                               4th Annual International Seminar on Transformative Education and Educational
                               Leadership (AISTEEL 2019); 2019 Dec. Atlantis Press; 2019. p. 593–595).
                         [11] Rukhiyah Y, Notosudjono D, Sunaryo W. Evaluation of PAUD (early childhood edu-
                               cation) accreditation program in Serang City. Research, Society and Development.
                               2020;9:e9759109455.
                         [12] Surahman S. The role of BAN PAUD AND PNF in improving academic quality. Aksara:
                               Jurnal Ilmu Pendidikan Nonformal. 2022;8:879–886.




DOI 10.18502/kss.v7i19.12433                                                                             Page 99