Journal of Economics and Management Sciences; Vol. 3, No. 1; 2020
                                                                              ISSN 2576-3008 E-ISSN2576-3016
                                                                              https://doi.org/10.30560/jems.v3n1p13


      Educational Leadership Effectiveness. Is it a Matter of a Leader’s
              Characteristics, Behaviors, or Leadership Style?
                                               Andreas Dimopoulos1
1
    Department of Economics, Faculty of Social, Political, and Economics Sciences. University of Thrace, Greece
Correspondence: Andreas Dimopoulos, Fragma Thermis, Thessaloniki 57001, Greece. Tel: 30-6936-346617. E-
mail: job1j yahoo.gr, info andreasdimopoulos.gr


Received: January 9, 2020; Accepted: February 17, 2020; Published: February 22, 2020


JEL Classification Codes: J48, I25, JA23, I20, I28.


Abstract
Leadership in education has been examined in depth until nowadays regarding among others the most common
models of leadership, the personal characteristics and profile of charismatic leaders, the principal leadership style
and behavior. Notwithstanding, to the best of our knowledge so far, there is space for additional examination as
far as for educational leadership effectiveness regarding these factors. This study aims to investigate the outcomes
of educational leadership considering the most important components of leadership which are the leader
characteristics’, behaviors’ and the most common exercised styles. Furthermore, a purpose of this study is to
explore interconnections and correlations among leader characteristics’, behaviors, leadership styles and
effectiveness. According to literature review, there is no clear answer in the question of which one component
among leadership styles’, personal characteristics’ and behaviors’ is more significant and contribute more to
leadership effectiveness. Research has shown that all these elements are fundamental and are considered all
important for educational effectiveness. It is also argued that there is a strong interconnection between them as
individual parts in an integrated system, which each one separately has its relative influence in educational
leadership effectiveness. Also, there is a broad tendency for agreement according to which educational leadership
effectiveness depends on many other factors apart from characteristics’, styles and behaviors’, such as timing,
special conditions, legislation, personnel qualifications, expected outcomes’ importance, facilities and many others.
Apart from these independent factors it is worth to mention that different leadership styles have different positive
or negative outcomes to different stake holders. Therefore, it is hard to isolate and to define which of those
components are more significant for leadership effectiveness.
Keywords: education, leadership, management, efficiency, effectiveness, styles, characteristics
1. Introduction
1.1 Statement of the Problem and Purpose of the Study
Numerous endeavors until now have attempted to assess and survey leadership outcomes and educational
leadership effectiveness across the world in, primary and mainly in secondary and higher education tiers. Many
studies have been made in leadership exploring leaders’ characteristics, behaviors and styles but exploring the
contribution of each one of these components to leadership effectiveness still remains significant. The primary
issue in this research is to explore the effectiveness of leadership regarding these basic components and correlations
among them. A further aim of this study is to accompany the research with an appropriate assessment questionnaire
for educational leadership effectiveness using metrics and relative criteria to leaders’ actions and behaviors.
1.2 Interpretation of Educational Leadership
The issue of leadership and its results has occupied mankind over time from antiquity to today, and been considered
by researchers, scholastics, scientists, business and associations executives, private and public sectors, politicians
and governments, organised societies and informal organisations, military structures, educational organizations.
The interpretation and analysis of the concept of leadership has been made at times either on the premise of the
qualities of the leader personality, or on the basis of the behavior of the leaders, either on the basis of the result
obtained and the style of command, or with 'hybrid' models that they combine the above theories. Also, schools so
as to check improvement process frequently look at the different initiative factors that assume a considerable job

                                                         13                             Published by IDEAS SPREAD

jems.ideasspread.org                Journal of Economics and Management Sciences                      Vol. 3, No. 1; 2020


in school effectiveness (Bruggencate, Luyten, Scheerens, & Sleegers, 2012). This research aim to create reflection,
make inferences on educational leadership, associating the effectiveness of leadership with the characteristics of
the leaders, the leadership models, their behaviors and correlations among them.
1.3 Educational Leadership Effectiveness
Ordinarily there are an assortment of inquiries concerning leadership, administration, for instance if this is effective,
or what are the elements that characterize it as effective, or whether the characteristics of the leader or the
leadership style are those that determine its effectiveness, or more simply when a leader is able or not, adequate
or inadequate. This research endeavors to depict and investigate the effectiveness of educational leadership
regarding the educational leaders, personal characteristics, leadership styles’ and behaviors
2. Method
2.1 Research Design
In this study an extensive relative literature review in educational leadership has been directed, so as to investigate
inside and out the most important components of educational leadership. More specifically subject of this research
is whether educational leadership effectiveness depends on the posses off leader personal characteristics, the
applied specific behaviors, or the appropriate styles and witch one of these elements is considered to contribute
more to leadership effectiveness. This research is based exclusively in literature review with a purpose to set the
necessary research questions and to shape the framework about the most significant components of educational
leadership which according to other studies contribute more to effectiveness. In a subsequent survey, a relative
questionnaire will be presented regarding the level of significance in educational effectiveness of each one of the
most important components of leadership and the correlation among them with effectiveness. More specifically
with the questionnaire will try to assess the relative importance of leaders’ behaviors and evaluate which of these
particular components considered as more important and have greater impact in educational leadership
effectiveness, regarding teachers’ approach as participants stake holders in a real sample.
2.2 Research Questions
The general research hypothesis that this study try to answer is whether the effectiveness of the educational
leadership is a result of some particular characteristics that distinguish the successful leaders of education, or
whether the effectiveness of leadership is a product of specific leadership behaviors or of appropriate leadership
styles. There are three basic research questions on which we will attempt to answer, by quoting the conclusions of
other relevant research on the basis of the literature
Research question 1: If the results of the educational leadership which is implemented are influenced by the
personal characteristics of the leaders and what are these specific characteristics.
Research question 2: If the results of the educational leadership are influenced by the leadership exercised style
and behaviors and which are the main styles.
Research question 3: Which is the most significant component among characteristics’, styles and behaviors of
leadership effectiveness?
2.3 Educational Leadership is a Broad Interest
Τhe study of educational leadership is increasingly interesting. This is because, on the one hand, the results of the
educational function are methodically explored; on the other hand the leaders’ impact on results is sought
according to Leithwood and Riehl (2003).
Also another reason for the strongly intrigued within the field of education is that it has ended up requesting, there
are always changes, coming about in modern challenges for leaders. Leadership in school organisations has gotten
to be a need in educational policy worldwide. It is considered that plays a fundamental role in improving school
results and progress, by impacting the inspirations and capacities of instructors, as well as the school climate and
environment. Viable school administration is basic to move forward the effectiveness and value of tutoring (OECD,
2008). School pioneer is considered as one of the foremost influential components in the advancement of the
quality and identity of a school factors (Cohen, McCabe, Michelli, & Pickeral, 2009).
A great part of the past research exhibits that principal’s leadership style and aptitudes, influence a variety of
teacher qualities, from work satisfaction and effectiveness, to levels of commitment and scholarly accentuation
(Bird et al., 2009). It has high effect on the improvement of the consequences of the school, having the capacity to
impact the inspiration and execution of educators by making the suitable atmosphere and workplace environment
(Pont, Nusche & Moorman, 2008). Furthermore, research has proven that principal leadership can have indirect
but a significant, impact on student results (Hallinger & Heck, 1996; Marzano, Waters, & McNulty, 2005;

                                                          14                              Published by IDEAS SPREAD

jems.ideasspread.org                Journal of Economics and Management Sciences                    Vol. 3, No. 1; 2020


Robinson, Lloyd, & Rows, 2008). The growing expectations of individuals and organisations, within or outside
the education as well as from schools are viewed as the most significant component which builds the significance
of leadership in education (Hoy and Miskel, 2010). What's more, the various groups of individuals that are
'included' or are beneficiaries of any type of educational leadership for example educators, students, parents,
depend to an enormous degree on the choices of the educational leader as should be obvious from the posting of
the relevant literature.
2.4 Educational Leadership. Definitions
Over time many researchers globally tried to deliver the concept of educational leadership, resulting in many
different definitions depending on the way everyone approaches it. It is essential that some of them should be
mentioned in this respect. Through the listing of relevant definitions for the educational leadership and the analysis
of these, we can understand several of those particular components that are at the same time the effectiveness
criteria of the educational leadership. Therefore, realizing as good as possible the definition of educational
leadership and the individual important elements that compose it, such as actions, behaviors’ and styles, we can
understand better and distinguish these elements that judge a leadership as effective.
Educational leadership is the ability to steer the flow of the organization and staff in the operation of the school
contributing to the achievement of educational goals, and the role of school leaders is to recognize and synchronize
the staff to meet the needs of pupils with the ultimate goal of maximizing student successes (Adelman & Taylor,
2006). Educational leadership can imply as an influence process based on net values and beliefs that lead to a
school's vision. This vision is articulated by the school leader who seeks the commitment of staff and stakeholders
to an ideal school's best future, pupils and other interested parties (Bush, 2007). According to Spillane, Halverson
and Diamond, (2001) as educational leadership is characterized the recognizable proof, securing, distribution,
coordination and utilize of social components and cultural resources, which are considered essential for the
establishment of competent teaching and learning conditions. Another approach to the concept of educational
leadership indicates that teacher's leadership is defined as the process in which teachers are leaders not only within
the classroom, but also ‘outside’ of it, they identify their task and contribute to a community where teachers
become leaders and pupils, encourage their colleagues to adopt new educational practices, and accept
responsibility for achieving the goals as they are formed through the Leadership practices that adopt (Katzenmeyer
and Moller, 2001). Through their involvement in this field, educational leaders must also focus their attention on
improving teaching practices, judging their practices in collaboration with colleagues, be knowledgeable about
teaching programs and to be able to participate in their design, to choose the material to be used in their teaching,
to participate actively in decision making, to involve other educators in the fields of reflection and research, and
to evaluate their performance (Harris and Mujis 2005; Barth, 2011). According to OECD a study off Pont, Nusche
and Moorman, (2008) main responsibilities of school leaders be clearly defined and delimited to improve teaching
and learning in four significant domains of duty as key for school authority to improve student results: supporting,
assessing and developing teacher quality, target-setting, assessment and responsibility, strategic financial and
human resource management, working together with other schools. Numerous other studies have contributed to
the addresses of what constitutes effective educational leadership (Leithwood et. al., 2004; Heck & Hallinger,
2009; Murphy and Vriesenga, 2007; Darling-Hammond & Richardson, 2009). The main elements regarding
effectiveness which identified across them, suggest that an effective leader sets a clear strategic direction for both
instructional and organizational development as well, creates the parameters for improving student performance
and supports and develops people. Leadership at the school level is required to perform multi-dimensional roles
and a leader must be equipped with such capacities and aptitudes so as to realize the set targets (Lopez & Ensari,
2014)
If one could summarize these perspectives and reconcile key points, it would say that educational leadership
includes concepts relating to the knowledge, skills, abilities, characteristics, attitudes and behaviors of educational
leader, concurrently with results in specific directions. In this perspective, educational leadership is a broad
framework of actions, behaviors, skills, and objectives. In this framework leadership goes beyond of the narrow
limit of management and objectives such as the application of the rules of law, the allocation and management of
resources, the organization and coordination, which constitutes the administrative side of educational leadership.
Rather, educational leadership entails also competences such as stimulation, empowerment, influence, inspiration,
development of personnel, which respectively shape leadership styles and these consequently affect the formation
of school climate, working conditions, shaping behaviors’, culture, vision, that are the other essential side of
leadership.



                                                          15                             Published by IDEAS SPREAD

jems.ideasspread.org                 Journal of Economics and Management Sciences                      Vol. 3, No. 1; 2020


2.5 Characteristics and Distinct Traits of Effective Leadership
There are distinct traits for determining effective leadership. These traits as we will see later on are mainly related
to two components of the leader. The first component relates to the characteristics associated with leader’s
personality and the second component relates to leader’s behavior and leadership style witch deploys. The
perpetual question that concerns those who are puzzled about the issues of work and more generally about the
issues of management in companies and organisations relates to which of the characteristics or behaviors’ make
someone a leader in his place of work. Furthermore, while some exploration has moved from conventional attribute
or character based speculations, towards to a situational theory which directs that the condition wherein
administration is executed is dictated by the abilities and qualities of the leader (Avolio, Walumbwa, & Weber,
2009), every single modern hypothesis can grouped under one of the accompanying three points of view:
leadership as a procedure or relationship, leadership as a mix of characteristics or character attributes, or leadership
as specific behaviors or, as they are more in common referred to, leadership abilities. At this point it is therefore
appropriate to refer to some of these characteristics which according to the literature are referred to as important
or as common traits of successful leaders. Stogdill, (1974) as cited by Gosling and Dennison (2003) regarding the
distinctive attributes of people who have been considered as leaders showed the following essentials components
in making someone leader; intelligence and scholarship, physical traits, personality, social status and experience
and task-work orientation. He also identified the main leadership traits as follows: adaptable to circumstances,
alert to social conditions, ambitious and target achievement–oriented, cinfident, cooperative, decisive, reliable,
dominant with desire to influence others, energetic persistent, self-confident, tolerant of stress and ready to accept
accountability. The skills accordingly identified as follows: clever (intelligent) conceptually gifted, creative,
diplomatic and tactful, fluent in speaking, knowledgeable about group task, organized (administrative ability)
persuasive and socially skilled.
2.6 The Theory of Individual Characteristics and Effectiveness
A significant relationship was found between principals’ leadership skills and school effectiveness (Akinola
Oluwatoyin Bolanle, 2013). Skill, according a theory is used to indicate ability developed in the course of training
and experience. The common factor for the distinctive types of abilities is that the leader must combine the request
of a specific duty to the right skill which is viewed as vital for the effective achievement of the duty (Gregory,
2001). Peterson and Van Fleet (2004) suggested ten categories of skills essential for effectiveness. They were
technical, analytic, decision-making, human, communication, interpersonal, conceptual, diagnostic, flexible and
administrative skills. Another study recognised four general categories: cognitive, interpersonal, business and
strategic skills (Mumford, Campion and Morgeson, 2007). In an effort to approach the characteristics of the
effective leadership Hoy and Miskel, (2008) classify these characteristics into three categories: a) in the category
of personality (self-confidence, emotional maturity), b) in category related to job stimulation (task, expectation)
and c) in the category of leadership skills (administrative, interpersonal). Richter, Lewis and Hagar (2012), found
transformational, administrative and behavior management skills to be essential components that principal need
for accomplishments in an effective school.
The approach based on the personal characteristics of the leader was based on the belief that leadership is an
inherent gift that only important people possess and which gives them characteristics and qualities that make them
different of the others (Northouse, 1997). Studying the personality of important leaders from the field of politics,
religion and the army, scholars have resulted in certain characteristics of the leader, of which the following are
mentioned: intelligence, confidence, determination, credibility, sociability. It has emerged that the style of
leadership and the characteristics of the leader influence a range of attributes of the professors from their job
satisfaction and effectiveness, up to the levels of their active participation and the academic emphasis they give
(Bird et al., 2009), as well as their engagement in organisation and their work satisfaction (Aydin et al., 2013).
Furthermore, despite the fact that it has been seen that leader aptitudes might not directly affect students’ results,
his/her abilities can affect the important relationship with teachers (Cotton, 2003).
But the characteristics based approach has many weaknesses. One of them is the plethora of features that are
periodically presented as indicative of the leadership profile and the inability of scholars to agree on some of them.
Another weakness is the devaluation of other factors that coexist in the exercise of leadership, such as the different
circumstances, situations or people concerned. Also, the leadership approach based on the characteristics of the
leader receives criticism as to its credibility, because it has not succeeded in linking the characteristics and qualities
of the leader with specific results of the administrative process, such as for example can be to increase the
productivity and satisfaction of employees from the work they do (Northouse, 1997).



                                                           16                              Published by IDEAS SPREAD

jems.ideasspread.org                Journal of Economics and Management Sciences                    Vol. 3, No. 1; 2020


Thus, an evaluation of leader effectiveness based solely in his/her certain personal characteristics could not be an
effective, objectively and broader accepted model. However, aspects of leader’s personal characteristics’ should
be a part of a holistic leadership effectiveness evaluation process because these characteristics have significant
direct or indirect affects in many outcomes.
2.7 The Theories of Behavior and Effectiveness
In studies on the theory of the behavior of the leaders, characteristically was one by researchers at the University
of Michigan Lussier & Αchue, (2010) where emphasis was placed on the leader's behavior and not on his/her
features (atomic theory Characteristics) concluding that the combination of both dimensions leads to a more
effective leadership model. Respectively in the research of Leithwood et al., (2004) for the effect of the
effectiveness of school directors on learning outcomes was found that the actions that a director had to make to be
effective are the creation and maintain a competitive school, strengthen other parties, empower teachers to make
important decisions, provide educational orientation, develop and implement school improvement plans.
Respectively, McGregor, (2000) investigating the reasons that stimulate teamwork among educators, observes that
group leaders maintain and reinforce a culture of cooperation. These cultures share values and aim to move forward
instruction and learning so that to meet the requirements of pupils and to empowering teachers' professional
development.
The wrong leadership implementation, in relation to the above objectives which is to strengthen the group, is likely
to weaken the team collective effort of the members of a group (Robbins and Finley, 2000) and the failure to
maintain its effectiveness, as its members will not be able to coordinate and act harmoniously. The proper
implementation of leadership strengthens teachers in the effort to change mentality and to adopt a collaborative
teaching model, aiming at the development of effective groups in school organizations (Harris, 2009). Furthermore,
leadership is a key component in the development and sustainment of school climate (Bass & Riggio, 2006).
Respectively, according to Vos et al., (2012), an unhealthy school climate can lead to ineffectiveness. Owens
(2004), and Vos, van der Westhuizen, Mentz, and Ellis (2012) found that the behaviour of principals has particular
influence on school climate, as the certain strategies used to manage the campus, influence the experience of the
teachers and the total work climate. Also, the behavior of the principal, especially when it is supportive, collegial,
and not overly restrictive, can have a positive impact on student achievement through the impact this behavior has
on school climate and thus his or her teachers (Tschannen-Moran & Tschannen-Moran, 2011). Additionally, Bird
et al., (2009) discovered that teachers’ engagement-commitment levels were strongly related to their level of trust
in the school, their colleagues and their principal. Given the fact that the overall campus climate contains a critical
impact on the staff job satisfaction, it is of particular importance to evaluate organizational health to sustain
positive work performance (Vos et al., 2012).
2.8 Leadership is a Complicated Function
At this point, through the quotation of previous reports, it is understood that the exercise of leadership is based on
the characteristics of the leaders, which consequently interact with their behavior and the way leadership is applied.
Therefore, leader's behavior is a critical element but this behavior is correlating with leader’s personal
characteristics and traits. It seems that the behavior is that one which distinguishes leadership and is of prominent
importance combined with the characteristics of the leader. Besides according to Ulrich et al., (1999) the
phenomenon of leadership has been interconnected with the necessity of successfully achieving results and
defining as effective leadership: leading behavior x results.
Of course at this point raises the question, if the specific actions and attitudes of the leaders are influenced, or
come to a small or to a large extent from the characteristics of their personalities, or from skills and abilities that
leaders have, and consequently how these as characteristics cause, shape, reinforce or weaken such behaviors
respectively. This complex assumption result in the question as to whether the effectiveness of leadership, is
ultimately a result of characteristics or behaviors and vice versa, which still becomes more complicated in its
response. According to another research there are three major components of that clarify the discussion discourse:
(a) an attribute of an office or position, (b) a characteristic of a individual, and (c) a category of actual behavior
leadership (Katz and Kahn, 1978). In other words, there is a logical interaction between the leader's characteristics
and the way in which the leadership is exercised, which is manifested by specific behaviors’ and results. Hence,
the leadership in educational institutes is both simple and complex process (Leithwood et al. 2004). Another
research advocates stating that the leadership style which is exercised by school leaders is complex and plays a
necessary role in creating the culture in a school (Fullan, 2001). Moreover, as Valentine and Prater (2011) stated,
the principal’s role has become increasingly complex as the nature of society, political expectations, and schools
as organizations have changed.

                                                          17                             Published by IDEAS SPREAD

jems.ideasspread.org                Journal of Economics and Management Sciences                    Vol. 3, No. 1; 2020


Therefore, an evaluation of leader effectiveness based solely in his attitudes, behaviors’ could not be an effective,
objectively, crystal clear and broader accepted model. However, aspects of leader’s behaviour should be a part of
a holistic leadership evaluation process, because these skills and accordingly relevant behaviours’ have significant
direct or indirect affects in many outcomes through leadership styles that deployed.
3. The Theories of Leadership Models-Styles’ and Their Effectiveness
In the study on educational leadership, various models have emerged and developed in terms of the elements that
distinguish these models and their effectiveness. For instant Vroom (2000) believes that the style which a leader
deploy for making choices is considered as a significant component of effective leadership, which is recognized
as a technique utilized for improvement of the decision-making process. The leadership style has also been found
to have an influence on teachers’ motivational level (Eval and Roth, 2011; Waheed, Hussin, & Daud, 2018) and
job satisfaction, making a learning environment in school, to manage employee resources and to create a change
process in school (Waheed, Hussin, & Daud, 2018). More specific, teachers’ work satisfaction and engagement to
their work are in a direct relation with the leadership style employed by their principal (Hauserman & Stick, 2013).
Moreover, overwhelming evidence reveals how school educational leadership style influence instructors’
behaviors and their beliefs towards them. It has also been found a positive relationship among the leadership style
and effectiveness, but found no relationship with school performance (Ibrahim, & Al-Teneiji, 2013).
Agreeing to existing discoveries considering the leadership impact on staff, there are numerous definitions of
leadership and relative behaviors’, which do have an influence on their workers. Leaders who embrace both
transformational and transactional leadership practices are the foremost powerful leaders (Bass, 1985). Also, has
been found that teaching staff have had a high level of positive opinions regarding transformational and
transactional leadership qualities of school leaders (Avci, 2015). Moreover, leaders must also possesses
transactional leadership skills before deploys the style of transformational leadership and it proposed that basic
components of both transactional and transformational leadership were present in leaders who were effective (Bass,
1997). Transactional, transformational, inspirational, and instructional leadership styles are available, appear in
some way in most leaders, but seldom are they found to be exclusive. Bass and Avolio (1994) accepted that these
styles of transactional and transformational leadership are not dichotomous. They hypothesized that many of the
leader qualities of transactional leadership must be available before transformational attributes can develop.
Therefore, an indicative report of the most well known different leadership styles and their complimented behavior
is advisable firstly to consider the correlation with the effectiveness of these models and secondly to highlight that
different models’ of educational leadership have different results in different directions.
3.1 Transactional Leadership
Transactional leaders identify primarily tasks of the followers; build up the structure, emphasis on planned and
arranged work. Followers are compensated or punished to accomplish organizational targets (Hoy & Miskel, 2010).
Transactional leadership involves helping organizations through managing to achieve their current objectives
efficiently, such as by linking job performance to valued rewards and ensuring that employees have the resources
needed to get the job done (Avollio, & Bass, 1988). This leadership style is advantageous in managing the
organization, and in directing the system within the framework of mission, vision and values of the organisation
(Bass, 1997). However, this style has weakness in rearranging the organization and the institutional structure quick
in terms of innovation, entrepreneurship, reform and needs which are compulsory in today's competitive
environment, and in showing results beyond expectations by collaborating with the staff and acting with a team,
in a cooperative spirit (Yukl, 1989; MacKenzie et al., 2001). But transactional leadership practices also are less
likely to be positively correlated with teachers’ self-efficacy (Hipp, 1996; Nir & Krano, 2006; Walker & Slear,
2011). A study conducted by Walker & Slear (2011) concluded that contingent reward particularly, had negatively
correlation with teachers’ self-efficacy (pp. 52). But on the other hand, self-efficacy of teachers is a crucial factor
of their aims and behavior. The significance of leadership style in determining the self-efficacy of teachers is not
only pivotal to organizational climate and management; it is also crucial for teachers’ results and their performance.
Self-efficacy is considered a context-specific and multidimensional construct (Zimmerman & Clearly, 2006, pp.47)
3.2 Transformational Leadership
Leithwood (1994) contributed to the conceptualization of transformational leadership in educational situations. On
the premis of seven quantitative studies he has take out after conclusion (Leithwood, 1994, p. 506):
“Transformational leadership practices, considered as a composite construct, had significant direct and indirect
effect on progress with school-restructuring initiatives and teacher-perceived student outcomes’’. Studying the
effects of transformational leadership has identified as many as twenty studies which provided evidence of the
relationship between leadership and the teachers' outcomes (Leithwood et al., 1999). Many studies have undergone

                                                         18                             Published by IDEAS SPREAD

jems.ideasspread.org                Journal of Economics and Management Sciences                    Vol. 3, No. 1; 2020


examining the correlation among transformational leadership and various variables and showed that this style has
positive impact on: satisfaction (Griffith, 2004; Leithwood & Jantzi, 2008; Bolger, 2001), motivation (Griffith,
2004; Kruger, et al., 2007), commitment (Geijsel, et al., 2003; Yu, et al., 2002; Leithwood & Jantzi,
2002;Hauserman and Stick (2013) professional growth (Kruger, et al., 2007), school learning culture (Barnett,
McCorminck & Conners, 2001; Kruger, et al., 2007; Silins, Mulford & Zarins, 2002) school culture (Barnett &
McCormick, 2004), school climate (Blatt, 2002), student achievement (Griffith, 2004; Leithwood & Jantzi, 2008;
Marzano, Waters & McNulty, 2005; Chin, 2007; Politis, 2001; Finnigan and Stewart, 2009).
Also, the influence of transformational school leadership on pupil engagement is significantly positive (Leithwood,
et.al 2008). According, to Bass, (1985) the leadership of large historical forms over time was transformative and
not transactional. The Leadership model (Multi-Factor Leadership Questionnaire) developed by him and his
associates has shown that employees who give high marks to their leaders in transformational components, also
rate them as extremely effective, unlike those highly rated in trading components and considered less effective. As
stated by Bass (1985), elements which describe the conduct of transformational leaders are: individual
consideration, intellectual stimulation, inspirational motivation, and idealized influence. There is evidence based
on research which demonstrates a positive relationship between transformational leadership and school
environment, teachers’ job satisfaction, organizational commitment, development of an innovative climate in
schools and students’ achievements (Nguni, Sleegers & Denessen, 2006; Sun & Leithwood, 2012).
3.3 Pros, Cons and Differences Between Transformational and Transactional Leadership Style
Empirical research by Masi and Cooke (2000) looked at the effect of Transformational leadership and
Transactional leadership on adherent motivation, empowerment, and commitment to quality. They found that
transformational leadership tends to empower and motivate adherents, while transactional leadership tends to
suppress follower commitment to both quality and productivity. Burns’ (1978) about transformational leadership
theory has stated that this is different in basic elements from other theories of leadership due to its orientation to
long-term vision, by its concentration on personal followers' development and thus the transformation of the
followers into leaders and ethical agents. In particular, the mutual interaction between transformational leaders
and followers the level of morale and motivation of both is raised. The transformational leadership style has been
too criticized since its inclination to consider the leader as a hero, missing some significant leadership factors,
having questionable concepts and focusing on certain transactional practices (Leithwood, & Sun, 2012; Yukl,
1999). Moreover, Hauserman and Stick (2013) found that transactional leadership has limited capability for
success, while transformational leadership is considered to lead to advantageous long-term performance.
3.4 Distributed Leadership-Sharing Leadership
The school leadership that leads to effectiveness is the distributed leadership as effective school leaders take care
of the development of other leaders in the school area who will assume responsibilities in the present, and they
will continue their work in the future (Hargreaves & Fink, 2008). In addition, Spillane, (2005) argues that shared
leadership is not the "magic" recipe for all school problems, but a very useful tool for dealing with these and
finding solutions. The role also of the consultant of education in shared leadership can be significant by reinforcing
its effects (McCarty et al., 2014). Effective schools are considered those which provide opportunities for
professional development, and are made up of good leaders who encourage teachers to actively engage in changes
in their schools (Riley and MacBeath, 1998). Therefore, the role of the teacher must be redefined so that teachers
should be placed among the leaders of the school community and contribute to the implementation of effective
leadership practices and improvement of the learning process. On the other hand, regarding the importance of
distributive leadership for significant and long-term school reform, as Barnett et al. (2001) have found a visionary
head educator can really divert and distract teachers from focusing on teaching and learning, not to mention having
ownership of the vision!
3.5 Contingent Theory and Leadership Effectiveness
According to the contingent theory, the behavior of the leader is determined by the interaction of both his
personality and the situations prevailing in the wider environment. Fiedler's contingent theory argues that the
effectiveness of leadership is influenced by the circumstances in which the leader operates and briefly advocates
the view that "we can talk about a leader who is effective in a particular situation is not effective in another’’
(Fiedler, 1976). His research showed that when there are situations of high or low control, it is preferable for the
leader to be oriented towards a project. But in the case where we refer to an intermediate situation, it is preferable
for the leader to be oriented towards human relations. Therefore, there is no unique way of exercising leadership,
suitable for all situations. According to the contingency theory, no single leadership style is appropriate in all
situations. Success depends upon a number of factors, including leadership style, qualities of followers and

                                                         19                             Published by IDEAS SPREAD

jems.ideasspread.org                Journal of Economics and Management Sciences                    Vol. 3, No. 1; 2020


situational characteristics (Charry, 2012). In recent years it has been argued that single-dimensional leadership
models are no longer considered as key factors for school improvement (MacBeath, 2011). What is considered
necessary is the combination of many leadership theories, which achieve the most positive results (Riley and
MacBeath, 1998). However, there is an agreement that the ideal style of leadership depends on each situation that
is to be dealt with and varies, i.e. case (Bass, 1985).
With regard to which leadership model is most effective, we could say that there is no clear and absolutely correct
answer. This means, that the effectiveness of leadership standards in workplaces depends on many parameters
such as, special occasions, circumstances, possibilities, opportunities or threats of the environment, and the leader
should under the changes of the circumstances and the available data to adapt the leadership model accordingly,
by evaluating data, and prioritizing the goals that wants to achieve in a given time period. In conclusion, we would
say that no leadership model is a panacea, as most suitable and effective for all occasions and for all working or
operational areas. The appropriate combination of the required personal characteristics of the educational leader,
with the circumstances and data of the given time period, the characteristics of the group, and the objectives
pursued, is the one that enhances the efficiency. Summarizing another survey reinforce this, stating that the success
of educational leadership is assured when the implementation of leadership styles, fundamental principles and
methods are properly and fully implemented in the management of the school and that the leadership styles depend
on their application by parameters such as the size of the organism, the degree of interaction, communication
between members, the personalities of members, the commitment to the success of a common goal, the level of
decision-making (Amanchukwu et al., 2015). After all, according to (Bass & Bass, 2008) good leadership develops
through a never-ending process of personal study, education, training and concentration of related experience.
The leadership models exhibit significant conceptual overlaps, are not easy to clarify fully and although there are
distinct features between them, however, it is not possible to have an absolute ranking of a leader exclusively in
one, or other form. It is concluded that the various models of educational leadership produce different outcomes
to different recipients and their effectiveness depends generally on the circumstances and the specific conditions
under which educational leadership is exercised.
While comparing instructional, transformational, distributed and sustainable leadership styles, it is argued that
each of these leadership styles have their own merits and demerits; however, a ﬂexible leadership style having
elements of each, would be most appropriated and applicable (Mulford, 2008). Similarly, Hallinger (2003) argued
that the effectiveness of transformational and instructional leadership depends on school factors; however, if both
of them were integrated, the contribution would be better as an outcome.Bass (1998) believes that every leader
displays practices of both styles to some extent. Although, transformational and transactional leadership are at
opposite ends of the leadership continuum the two can be complementary (Leithwood & Jantzi, 2000)
Therefore the evaluation of the effectiveness of the educational leadership on the sole criterion of the applied
leadership style itself cannot be a credible, objective and generally accepted method. However, leadership style
should be a considerable part of a holistic leadership evaluation process, due to the influence that exert to many
stake holders and to direct or indirect effects that has in many outcomes’.
3.6 Evaluation of Educational Leadership Effectiveness could be Made in Various Criteria
The implementation of educational leadership style in an educational organization certainly has multiple effects to
many recipients’ and therefore its effectiveness must be explored in the light of the positive or negative influence
to all of them. A large number of the globally acknowledged attributes of school efficiency such as shared vision,
mission and achievement of goals, are the product of an effective school leadership (Catano & Stronge, 2006).
The role of leadership in education system is of critical importance for both the educational, school and the entire
education system, and its effectiveness has been explored in relation to ‘many’ different variables, such as the
school climate (Clifford et al., 2012; Allen, Grigsby, Peters, 2015) creating a sense of community in school (Beck
& Foster, 1999) and especially in relation to student outcomes, for example pupils' achievement (Henderson &
Mapp, 2002; Leithwood, 2002;· Leithwood et al., 2004; OECD, 2013; Allen, Grigsby, Peters, 2015; Portin, et al.,
2009) andteachers' expectations from the school leader (Thompson, 2017). As they say (Everard & Morris, 1999)
an effective director inspires, motivate students and teachers and promotes the offer of equal learning opportunities.
It has a stable administrative path, credibility-reliability, creates a climate of mutual respect, sets targets and
conducts them, has flexibility, and over take initiatives. It shows confidence, creates positive, pleasant and creative
climate, rationally manages the economics of the school, has the ability to guide students and enforce discipline,
has the ability to influence the members of the school community and to lead them to positive results, collect
information, cooperate with students, parents, academic, teaching staff and other bodies.



                                                          20                             Published by IDEAS SPREAD

jems.ideasspread.org                Journal of Economics and Management Sciences                      Vol. 3, No. 1; 2020


Therefore, an assessment of leader effectiveness based in objective, qualitative or quantitative criteria of
achievement towards targets which have been set from major stake holders, could be more reliable, objectively,
accountable, and wide accepted model. But such a model of evaluation should incorporate the leader’s
characteristics, behaviors and styles in order to be fulfilled.
3.7 Educational Leadership Effectiveness and Considerations
So far, it is understood that the effectiveness of educational leadership is a concept that can be identified with
sufficient, objectively to a large extent, multiple criteria and parameters both at administrative tasks and in teaching
outcomes such as development of the human capital of educational units, the level of their work satisfaction, the
formation of climate and attitudes, students’ performance and achievements.
But to achieve a well documented result, to a larger possible extent, is necessary to take into account as much as
possible, objective and measurable criteria considering the characteristics’ of the leader, his or her behaviors’ and
the leadership style. Accordingly, efficiency is the result of achieving the objectives that are come with by the
appropriate behaviors’, which in turn are influenced and shaped by the particular characteristics of school leaders
and their leadership style which is exercised.
In other words, when we think about the concept of effective educational leadership assessment, we should
consider this as a dynamic, complex function, based on foundations, such as the attributes of the personality of the
leader and the members of the team, culture and maturity of the group, with a set of explicit targets and the
objectives pursued respectively, in a specific time period, with a constructive, impartially and defined process.
3.8 Suggestion for an Educational Leadership Evaluation Model Based on Teachers Approach
Assessing the effectiveness of educational leadership is a process that involves many different stakeholders. In
particular when the evaluators’ of educational leadership effectiveness are the teachers, then the outcomes of
leadership that have a significant impact on them could be assessed towards their relative criteria regarding the
leader. These could be for example, the applied management and leadership style, the behavior, possessing of
certain important characteristics of the leader. These are basic leadership components that produce positive or
negative outcomes to them and to school organization, such as for example the school climate, the learning and
teaching environment, teamwork spirit, cooperation among teachers and administrative staff, shape of good or bad
working conditions, relations among students, teachers, parents and community, job satisfaction, staff engagement,
vision and eventually, overall school outcomes. Thus, leader’s characteristics and certain attributes such as for
example integrity, influence, persuasiveness, empathy, emotional intelligence, encourage, commitment,
empowerment, fairness, support, plays a pivotal role to exercised leadership style and to effectiveness.
4. Discussion
Educational leadership effectiveness is an issue that increasingly concerns the community of educators, researchers,
parents, students, education in general, and a large number of studies have undertaken on the issue of its effect on
the various addressees of this (McCarty et al., 2014; Aydin et al., 2103; Thompson 2017; Allen, Grigsby and Peters,
2015). This study has attempted to contribute to the commentary and meanings of the components of school
leadership, its effectiveness, the characteristics, behaviors and leadership styles. Emphasis was placed on the
correlation and interaction of these elements with each other, in the context of a literature review on the subject of
educational leadership. In addition, specific characteristics related to the effective exercise of leadership in the
field of educational units were reported, recorded and associated with the various leadership styles and
effectiveness.
With regard to the research questions and more specifically to the first question, arises through the quotation of
the relevant literature that indeed the characteristics of the leader, affect the result of exercised leadership directly
or indirectly because these characteristics’ enable, contribute, shape and influence the leadership style and
consequently the result itself.
Regarding the second research question, it is understood and perceived through the quotation of the relevant
literature that indeed the applied leadership style and behavior have a direct effect, because each of these styles
which mentioned briefly, work differently to the recipients, contributes, shapes and influences the performance of
members of a team to varying degrees, and ultimately each leadership style as we have seen, gives weight to
different goals (team development, vision, achieving result, empowering people, satisfying desires, responding to
motivation, implementing legislation, fulfilling regulations, etc.) Consequently, the result itself is different, since
the leadership style and the target set from this is different as a target from the beginning. These conclusions are
in line with the results of another research showed that there was a significant relationship of leadership styles with
school effectiveness. Accordingly, characteristics of leadership styles of school head teachers have correlation

                                                           21                              Published by IDEAS SPREAD

jems.ideasspread.org                Journal of Economics and Management Sciences                    Vol. 3, No. 1; 2020


with the characteristics of school effectiveness (Ijaz Ahmad Tatlah and Muhammad Zafar Iqbal, 2012) and each
style has its own merits (Mulford, 2008).
As for the third research question it is understood and documented through the quotation of the relevant literature
that the most significant component among characteristics’, styles and behaviors of leadership effectiveness cannot
be defined objectively and accurately. Regarding the concept of effectiveness of educational leadership, important
conclusions have emerged in principle in determining it, and also in how to measure and assess the effectiveness
of leadership with specific criteria, parameters.
In summary regarding the effectiveness of the educational leadership, we can say that the criticism and evaluation
of a leadership on its effectiveness can be interpreted but not measured objectively on the basis of the
characteristics of the leader who exercises it, in other words whether the leader possesses and to what extent some
or all of the characteristics mentioned in this study. Also, the effectiveness of the educational leadership can be
interpreted but not measured objectively on the basis of the leadership style applied by the leader and more
specifically, if the implementation of the leadership style that each time is examined, what finally achieves and to
what extent their respective objectives pursued. A combination of leadership styles, characteristics and relative
behaviors could bring better outcomes.
This is in line with other research that argues that an integrated leadership model that encompasses behaviors and
characteristics from transformational, transactional (Mulford, 2008; Hallinger, 2003), inspirational, and
instructional leadership styles can provide positive school based leadership (Bradley Smith, 2016). An integrated
leadership style approach has mutual beneficial effects on both teacher job satisfactions and in overall student
achievement, while “transformational leadership practices are not sufficient for effectiveness unless they are
combined with additional leadership behaviors such as those which are linked to instructional leadership (Menon,
2014). Besides according to other studies there is a need for integrated models of leadership (Leithwood & Sun,
2012).
Eventually, with a more accountable way, the effectiveness of an educational leadership can be interpreted and
judged more objectively on the basis of the results produced as compared to the objectives, criteria and targets
which are initially have been set. In such a process of evaluating the degree of effectiveness of the educational
leadership, specific characteristics of the leader, the leadership style he implements, as well as his behaviour,
should also be investigated in order to emerge from this process, what exactly are the areas where education
leadership lacks and which of them should be improved.
4.1 Policy Recommendations and Research Contribution
It is of a great importance to understand the way that educational leadership impacts many recipients such as
students, faculty personnel and teachers. Understanding the effects of educational leadership through its core
components, realizing the way and degree of influence that each exercises in the function of the educational
administration and its results, recognising which component is more important, can result in better acknowledge
of what an educational leader should do in order to enhance his or her competences, to disclose any weaknesses
and work on them for improvement, to change leadership style, or adopt other behavior which is more suitable to
given circumstances. Eventually the acknowledgment of leadership components influence in daily operation and
the successful combination among them, can help leaders to act in a more efficient manner improving to the best
the educational leadership outcomes.
This study might be helpful for teachers and school leaders in better understanding the significance of interaction
between leader characteristics, behaviors, styles and their impact to effectiveness accordingly. Leaders will
become aware to cope with the challenges of the time in regard to improve results, to uplifting and improving
school effectiveness, to be competitive and adoptive to the current changes of the times through this contribution.
Personal characteristic are essential, while different leadership styles and behaviors produce different results to
educational leadership stake holders. Thus, the art of combining them with successful manner may have greater
outcomes. This is in line with other study that concludes stating that leaders need to be able to adapt their style to
the situation and context, ensuring the results needed are achieved. Leaders need to have awareness of the areas in
which they are strong in as well as those where they need to develop or to work with someone who will complement
their style (Joyce Mary Claris and Sheela, 2015).
4.2 Further Research
It will be reasonable, and will be contributing to research the formulation and design of a specific questionnaire in
which all the educational stake holders such as students, teachers, and administrative staff could assess the relative
and comparative importance among them of the leader’s characteristics’, leadership styles’ and behaviors

                                                         22                             Published by IDEAS SPREAD

jems.ideasspread.org               Journal of Economics and Management Sciences                  Vol. 3, No. 1; 2020


regarding leadership effectiveness. An applied accordingly evaluation model to a real sample of these recipients
could explain the relative contribution significance of each one separated component to leadership effectiveness
outcomes.
References
Adelman, H., & Taylor, L. (2006). The school leader’s guide to student learning supports: New directions for
    addressing barriers to learning. Thousand Oaks, CA: Corwin Press.
Ahmet, A. (2015). Investigation of transformational and transactional leadership styles of school principals, and
   evaluation of them in terms of educational administration. Academic Journas, 10(20), 2758-2767.
   Educational Research and Reviews. https://doi.org/10.5897/ERR2015.2483
Akinola, O. B. (2013). Principals' Leadership Skills and School Effectiveness: The Case of South Western Nigeria.
    World Journal of Education, 3(5). https://doi.org/10.5430/wje.v3n5p26
Allen, N., Grigsby, B., & Peters, M. L. (2015). Does leadership matter? Examining the Relationship Among
     Transformational Leadership, School Climate, and Student Achievement. NCPEA International Journal of
     Educational Leadership Preparation,10(2). November 2015 ISSN: 2155-9635 © 2015 National Council of
     Professors of Educational Administration.
Amanchukwu, R. N., Stanley, G. J., & Ololube, N. P. (2015). A Review of Leadership Theories, Principles and
   Styles and Their Relevance to Educational Management. Management, 5(1), 6-14.
   https://doi.org/10.5923/j.mm.20150501.02
Avolio, B. J., Walumbwa, F. O., & Weber, T. J. (2009). Leadership: Current Theories, Research, and Future
    Directions.         Annual         Review        of     Psychology,        60(2009),         421-449.
    https://doi.org/10.1146/annurev.psych.60.110707.163621
Avollio, B. J., & Bass, B. M. (1988). “Transformational Leadership, Charisma, and Beyond.” In Emerging
    Leadership Vistas, edited by J.G. Hunt, H.P. Dachler, B.R. Baliga, and C.A. Schreisheim, 29-49. Lexington,
    MA: Lexington.
Ayhan, A., Yilmaz, S., & Şengül, U. (2013). The Effect of School Principals’ Leadership Styles on Teachers’
    Organizational Commitment and Job Satisfaction. Educational Sciences: Theory & Practice - 13(2) • Spring
    • 806-811 ©. Educational Consultancy and Research Center.
Barnett, K., & McCormick, J. (2004). Leadership and individual principal-teacher relationships in schools.
    Educational Administration Quarterly, 40(3), 406-434. https://doi.org/10.1177/0013161X03261742
Barnett, K., McCormick, T. & Conners, R. (2001). Transformational leadership in schools.Journal of Educational
    Administration, 39(1), 24-46. https://doi.org/10.1108/09578230110366892
Barth, R. S. (2011). "Teacher Leader." In Blair Hilty, E. (ed.) Teacher Leadership. The "New" Foundations of
     Teacher Education, pp. 22-33. New York: Peter Lang Publishing.
Bass, B. (1998). Transformational leadership: Industry, military, and educational impact. Mahwah, NJ: Erlbaum
    Associates.
Bass, B. M. (1985). Leadership and performance beyond expectations. Free Press; Collier Macmillan.
Bass, B. M. (1997). Does the transactional-transformational leadership paradigm transcend organizational and
    national boundaries? American Psychologist, 52(2), 130-139. https://doi.org/10.1037/0003-066X.52.2.130
Bass, B. M.,& Avolio, B. J. (1994). Improving organizational efectiveness through transformational leadership.
    Tousand Oaks, CA: Sage.
Bass, B., & Bass, R. (2008). The Bass Handbook of Leadership: Theory, Research and Managerial Application.
    New York: Simon & Schuster.
Bass, B., & Riggio, R. (2006). Transformational leadership. New York, NY: Taylor and Francis.
    https://doi.org/10.4324/9781410617095
Beck, L., & Foster, W. (1999). Administration and community: Considering challenges, exploring possibilities. In
    J. Murphy & K. S. Louis (Eds.), Handbook of research on educational administration (337-358). San
    Francisco: Jossey-Bass.
Bird, J., Wang, C., Watson, J., & Murray, L. (2009). Relationships among principal authentic leadership and teacher
     trust    and     engagement       levels.    Journal     of    School     Leadership,      19(2),    153-171.
     https://doi.org/10.1177/105268460901900202

                                                        23                            Published by IDEAS SPREAD

jems.ideasspread.org                Journal of Economics and Management Sciences                    Vol. 3, No. 1; 2020


Blatt, D. A. (2002). A study to determine the relationship between the leadership styles of career technical directors
     and school climate as perceived by teachers. Dissertation in Education Leadership. West Virginia University.
Bolger, R. (2001). The influence of leadership style on teacher job satisfaction. Educational Administration
    Quarterly, 37(5), 662-683.https://doi.org/10.1177/00131610121969460
Bradley, S. S. (2016). The Role of Leadership Style in Creating a Great School. SELU-Saskatchewan Educational
    Leadership Unit Research Review JournalResearch Review Journal, 1(1), 65-78.
Bruggencate, G., Luyten, H., Scheerens, J., & Sleegers, P. (2012). Modeling the influence of school leaders on
    student achievement: How can school leaders make a difference? Educational Administration Quarterly,
    48(4), 699-732. https://doi.org/10.1177/0013161X11436272
Burns, J. M. (1978). Leadership. New York: Harper & Row.
Bush, Τ. (2007). Educational leadership and management: theory, policy, and practice. South African Journal of
    Education EASA, 27(3), 391-406.
Canute, S. T. (2017). Teachers’ Expectations of Educational Leaders’ Leadership Approach and Perspectives on
    the Principalship: Identifying Critical Leadership Paradigms for the 21st Century. Journal of Organizational
    and Educational Leadership, 2(2), Article 3.
Catano, N., & Stronge, J. H. (2006). What Are Principals Expected to Do? Congruence Between Principal
    Evaluation       and      Performance    Standards.    NASSP      Bulletin,   90(3),    221-237.
    https://doi.org/10.1177/0192636506292211
Charry, K. (2012). Leadership Theories - 8 Major Leadership                           Theories.    Retrieved     from
    http://psychology.about.com/od/leadership/p/leadtheories.htm
Chin, J. (2007). Meta-analysis of transformational school leadership effects on school outcomes in Taiwan and the
    USA. Asia Pacific Education Review, 8(2), 166-177. https://doi.org/10.1007/BF03029253
Clifford, Μ., Menon, R., Gangi, T., Condon, C., & Hornung, K. (2012). Measuring School Climate for Gauging
     Principal Performance. A Review of the Validity and Reliability of Publicly Accessible Measures. American
     Institutes for Research. https://doi.org/10.1037/e572172012-001
Cohen, J., McCabe, E., Michelli, N., & Pickeral, T. (2009). School climate: Research, policy, practice, and teacher
    education. Teachers College Record, 111(1), 180-213.
Cotton, K. (2003). Principals and student achievement: What the research says. Alexandria, VA: Association for
     Supervision and Curriculum Development.
Darling-Hammond, L., & Richardson, N. (2009). Research review/teacher learning: What matters. Educational
     Leadership, 66(5), 46-53.
Eval, O., & Roth, G. (2011). Leadership and teachers' motivation: Self-determination theory analysis. Journal of
     Educational Administration, 49(3), 256-275. https://doi.org/10.1108/09578231111129055
Everard, K. B., & Morris, G. (1999). Effective educational administration. Patra: EAP.
Fiedler, F. E. (1976). The leadership game: Matching the man to the situation.Organizational Dynamics, 4(3), 6-
     16. https://doi.org/10.1016/0090-2616(76)90032-2
Finnigan, K., & Stewart, T. (2009). Leading change under pressure: An examination of principal leadership in low-
     performing         schools.      Journal      of      School       Leadership,        19(5),       586-618.
     https://doi.org/10.1177/105268460901900504
Fullan, M. (2001). Leading in a culture of change. San Francisco, CA: Jossey-Bass.
Geijsel, F., Sleegers, P., Leithwood, K., & Jantzi, D. (2003). Transformational leadership effect on teachers'
     commitment and effort toward school reform. Journal of Educational Administration, 41(3), 228-256.
     https://doi.org/10.1108/09578230310474403
Gosling, B. R., Manterano, J., & Denisson, P. (2003). A Review of Leadership Theory and Competency
    Frameworks.
Gregory, R. L. (2001). The Oxford Companion to the Mind. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Griffith, J. (2004). Relationship of principal transformational leadership to school staff job satisfaction, staff
     turnover, and school performance. Journal of Educational Administration, 12(3), 336-356.
     https://doi.org/10.1108/09578230410534667

                                                         24                             Published by IDEAS SPREAD

jems.ideasspread.org               Journal of Economics and Management Sciences                   Vol. 3, No. 1; 2020


Hallinger, P. (2003). Leading educational change: Reﬂections on the practice of instructional and transformational
     leadership. Cambridge Journal of Education, 33(3), 329-352. https://doi.org/10.1080/0305764032000122005
Hallinger, P., & Heck, R. (1996). Reassessing the principal's role in school effectiveness: A review of empirical
     research,        1980-1995.     Educational        Administration         Quarterly,       32(1),     5-44.
     https://doi.org/10.1177/0013161X96032001002
Hargreaves, A., & Fink, D. (2008). Distributed leadership: Democracy or delivery? Journal of Educational
    Administration, 46(2), 229-240. https://doi.org/10.1108/09578230810863280
Harris, A. (ed.) (2009). Distributed leadership:                 different   perspectives,    London:     Springer.
     https://doi.org/10.1007/978-1-4020-9737-9
Harris, A., & Mujis, D. (2005). Improving schools through teacher leadership. Mainhead: Open University Press.
Hauserman, C. P., & Stick, S. (2013). Te leadership teachers want from principals: Transformational. Canadian
    Journal of Education, 36(3), 184-203.
Heck, R. H., & Hallinger, P. (2009). Assessing the contribution of distributed leadership to school improvement
    and growth in math achievement. American Educational Research Journal, 46(3), 659-689.
    https://doi.org/10.3102/0002831209340042
Henderson, A. T., & Mapp, K. L. (2002). A new wave of evidence: The impact of school, family, and community
    connections on student achievement. Austin, TX: Southwest Educational Development Laboratory.
Hipp, K. A. (1996). Teacher Efficacy: Influence of Principal Leadership Behavior. Paper presented at the annual
    meeting of the American Educational Research Association. New York. (ERIC Document Reproduction
    Service No. ED396409).
Hoy, W. K., & Miskel, C. G. (2010). Eğitim yönetimi: Teori, araştırma ve uygulama (Çev. Turan S.). Ankara: Nobel
    Yayınları.
Hoy, W. K., & Miskel, G. C. (2008). Educational Administration: Theory Research and Practice. (8th edition) New
    York: Mc Graw-Hill. Irwin.
Ibrahim, A. S., & Al-Teneiji, S. (2013). Principal leadership style, school performance, and principal effectiveness
     in Dubai schools. Ιnternational Journal of Research Studies in Education, 2(1), 41-54.
     https://doi.org/10.5861/ijrse.2012.86
Ijaz, A. T., & Muhammad, Z. I. (2012). Leadership Styles and School Effectiveness: Empirical Evidence from
      Secondary Level. International Conference on Education and Educational Psychology (ICEEPSY 2012).
      Procedia - Social and Behavioral Sciences, 69, 790-797. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.sbspro.2012.11.474
Joyce, M. C. D’Sa, & Sheela, G. (2015). School Effectiveness In Relation to Leadership Behaviour. International
    Journal of Education and Psychological Research (IJEPR), 4(2).
Katz, D., & Kahn, R. L. (1978). The Social Psychology of Organizations (2nd ed.). New York: Wiley.
Katzenmeyer, M., & Moller, G. (2001). Awakening the Sleeping Giant. Helping Teachers Develop as Leaders, 2nd
    edn. Thousand Oaks, CA: Corwin Press.
Kruger, M., Witziers, B., & Sleegers, P. (2007). The impact of school leader variables on school level factors:
    Validation of a casual model. School Effectiveness and School Improvement, 18(1), 1-20.
    https://doi.org/10.1080/09243450600797638
Leithwood, J., & Jantzi, D. (2000). The effects of transformational leadership on organizational conditions and
     student      engagement.     Journal      of      Educational     Administration,      38(2),     112-129.
     https://doi.org/10.1108/09578230010320064
Leithwood, K. (1994). Leadership for school restructuring. Educational Administration Quarterly, 30(4), 498-518.
     https://doi.org/10.1177/0013161X94030004006
Leithwood, K. (2002). Organizational learning and school improvement. Greenwich, CT: JAI.
Leithwood, K. A., & Jantzi, D. (2002). Thoughts behind ‘Transfrmational leadership effect on school organization
     and student engagement with school. In M. Wallace (Ed.), Learning to read critically in educational
     management. Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage.
Leithwood, K. A., Jantzi, D., & Steinbach, R. (1999). Changing leadership for changing times. Buckingham, UK:
     Open University Press.

                                                        25                             Published by IDEAS SPREAD

jems.ideasspread.org               Journal of Economics and Management Sciences                   Vol. 3, No. 1; 2020


Leithwood, K., & Jantzi, D. (2008). Linking leadership to student learning: The role of collective efficacy.
     Educational Administration Quarterly, 44(4), 496-528. https://doi.org/10.1177/0013161X08321501
Leithwood, K., & Riehl, C. (2003). What we know about successful school leadership. Philadelphia, P.A.:
     Laboratory for students Success, Temple University.
Leithwood, K., & Sun, J. (2012). The Nature and effects of transformational school leadership: A Meta-Analytic
     review of unpublished research. Educational Administration Quarterly, 48(3), 387-423.
     https://doi.org/10.1177/0013161X11436268
Leithwood, K., Alma, H., & Hopkins, D. (2008). Seven strong claims about successful school leadership. School
     Leadership and Management, 28(1), 2742. https://doi.org/10.1080/13632430701800060
Leithwood, K., Louis, S., Anderson, S., & Wahlstrom, K. (2004). How leadership influences student learning:
     review of research. Minneapolis, MN, Center for Applied Research and Educational Improvement, University
     of Minnesota.
Lopez, E. S., & Ensari, N. (2014). The effects of leadership style, organizational outcome, and gender on
    attributional    bias    towards  leaders.   Journal    of     Leadership    Studies,   8(2),  19-35.
    https://doi.org/10.1002/jls.21326
Lussier, R. N., & Achua, C. F. (2010). Leadership: Theory, application, skill development (4th ed.). Egan, MN:
    Thompson South-Western. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.leaqua.2010.07.002
MacBeath, J. (2011). No lack of principles: leadership development in England and Scotland.School Leadership
   and Management, 31(2), 105-121. https://doi.org/10.1080/13632434.2010.525029
MacKenzie, S. B., Podsak, M., &Rich, G. A. (2001). Transformational and transactional leadership and sales
   person performance. J. Acad. Market. Sci., 29(2), 115-134. https://doi.org/10.1177/03079459994506
Marzano, R. J., Waters, T., & McNulty, B. A. (2005). School Leadership that Works: From Research to Results.
    Alexandria, VA: Association for Supervision and Curriculum Development.
Masi, R. J., & Cooke, R. A. (2000). Effects of transformational leadership on subordinate motivation, empowering
    norms and organizational productivity. Int J Organ Anal, 8, 16-47. https://doi.org/10.1108/eb028909
McCarty, D., Wallin, P., & Boggan, M. (2014). Shared Leadership Model for 21st Century Schools:Principal and
   Counselor Collaborative Leadership. National Forum of Educational Administration and Supervision Journal,
   32(4).
McGregor, J. (2000). The challenge of collaboration: what encourages joint work between teachers? Paper
   presented at the BELMAS Research Conference, Robinson College, Cambridge, UK, 29-31.
Menon, M. W. (2014). The relationship between transformational leadership, perceived leader efectiveness, and
   teachers'     job    satisfaction. Journal    of   Educational     Administration,     52(4),    509-528.
   https://doi.org/10.1108/JEA-01-2013-0014
Mulford, B. (2008). The leadership challenge: Improving learning in schools. Australian Education Review: ACER
    Press.
Mumford, T. V., Campion, M. A., & Morgeson, F. P. (2007). The Leadership Skills Strataplex: Leadership skill
   requirements across organisational levels. The Leadership Quarterly, 18(2007), 154-166.
   https://doi.org/10.1016/j.leaqua.2007.01.005.
Murphy, J., Vriesenga, M., & Storey, V. (2007). Educational Administration Quarterly, 1979-2003: An analysis of
    types of work, methods of investigation, and influences. Educational Administration Quarterly, 43(5), 612-
    628.https://doi.org/10.1177/0013161X07307796
Nguni, S., Sleegers, P. J., & Denessen, E. (2006) Transformational and transactional leadership effects on teachers'
    job satisfaction, organizational commitment, and organizational citizenship behavior in primary schools: The
    Tanzanian       case.     School     Effectiveness    and    School      Improvement,      17(2),     145-177.
    https://doi.org/10.1080/09243450600565746
Nir, A. E., & Krano, N. (2006). School principal’s leadership style and teachers’ self-efficacy. Planning and
     Changing, 37(3&4), 205-218.
Northouse, P. G. (1997). Leadership: Theory and Practice, Sage Publications, Thousand Oaks, CA.
OECD. (2008). Improving School Leadership. DIRECTORATE FOR EDUCATION Education and Training
   Policy Division. Retrieved from http://www.oecd.org/edu/schoolleadership-8

                                                        26                             Published by IDEAS SPREAD

jems.ideasspread.org               Journal of Economics and Management Sciences                   Vol. 3, No. 1; 2020


OECD. (2013). Synergies for Better Learning. An International perspective on evaluation and assessment. OECD
   reviews      of      evaluation      and       assessment       in      education.     Retrieved      from
   http://www.oecd.org/edu/school/synergies-for-better-learning.htm#Tables
Owens, R. (2004). Organizational behavior in education: Adaptive leadership and school reform. New York, NY:
   Pearson.
Peterson, T. O., & Van Fleet, D. D. (2004). The ongoing legacy of R.L.Katz: An updated typology of management
     skills. Management Decision, 42(10), 1297-1308. http://doi.org/10.1108/00251740410568980
Politis, J. (2001). The relationship of various leadership styles to knowledge management. Leadership &
     Organization Development Journal, 22(8), 354-364. https://doi.org/10.1108/01437730110410071
Pont, B., Nusche, D., & Moorman, H. (2008). Improving school leadership: Policy and practice (Vol. 1). Paris:
     OECD.
Portin, B. S., Knapp, M. S., Dareff, S., Feldman, S., Russell, F. A., Samuelson, C., & Ling Yeh, T. (2009).
     Leadership for Learning Improvement in Urban Schools. University of Washington. Retrieved from
     http://www.wallacefoundation.org/knowledge-center/school-leadership/district-policy-and-
     practice/Documents/Leadership-for-Learning-Improvement-in-Urban-Schools.pdf
Richter, M. M., Lewis, T. J., & Haggar, J. (2012). The relationship between principal leadership skills and
    schoolwide positive behaviour support: An exploratory study. Journal of Positive Behavior Interventions,
    14(2), 69-77. http://dx.doi.org/10.1177/1098300711399097
Riley, K., & MacBeath, J. (1998).Effective Leaders and Effective Schools. In MacBeath, J. (ed.) Effective School
     Leadership:         Responding          to         Change,         140-152.          London:           Paul
     Chapman.https://doi.org/10.4135/9781446252086.n9
Robbins, H., & Finley, M. (2000). Why teams don't work. What Went Wrong and How to Make it Right. Texere.
Robinson, V., Lloyd, C., & Rowe, K. (2008). The impact of leadership on student outcomes: An analysis of the
    differential effects of leadership types. Educational Administration Quarterly, 44(5), 635-674.
    https://doi.org/10.1177/0013161X08321509
Silins, H., Mulford, B., & Zarins, S. (2002). Organizational learning and school change. Educational
     Administration Qarterly, 38(5), 613-642. https://doi.org/10.1177/0013161X02239641
Spillane,     J.    P.   (2005).   Distributed Leadership.          The     Educational      Forum,69(2),143-150.
     https://doi.org/10.1080/00131720508984678
Spillane, J. P., Halverson, R., & Diamond, J. B. (2001). Investigating school leadership practice: A distributed
     perspective. School of Education and Social Policy. https://doi.org/10.3102/0013189X030003023
Sun,J., & Leithwood, K. (2012). Transformational school leadership effects on student achievement. Leadership
    and Policy in Schools 11(4), 418-451.https://doi.org/10.1080/15700763.2012.681001
Tschannen-Moran, M., & Tschannenen-Moran, B. (2011). Taking a strengths-based focus improves climate.
    Journal of School Leadership, 21(3), 422-448. https://doi.org/10.1177/105268461102100305
Ulrich, D., Zenger, J., & Smallwood, N. (1999). Results Based Leadership, Harvard Business School Press, USA.
Valentine, J., & Prater, M. (2011). Instructional, transformational, and managerial leadership and student
    achievement: High school principals make a diference. NASSP Bulletin, 95(1), 5-30.
    https://doi.org/10.1177/0192636511404062
Vos, D., van der Westhuizen, P., Mentz, P., & Ellis, S. (2012). Educators and the quality of their work environment:
     An analysis of the organizational climate in primary schools. South African Journal of Education, 32(1), 56-
     68. https://doi.org/10.15700/saje.v32n1a520
VROOM, V. H. (2000). Leadership And The Decision-Making Process. Organizational Dynamics, 28, 82.
   https://doi.org/10.1016/S0090-2616(00)00003-6
Waheed, Z., Hussin, S., & Bin Megat Daud, M. A. K. (2018). The best practices for school transformation: A
   multiple-case study. Journal of Educational Administration, 56(1), 88-103. https://doi.org/10.1108/JEA-11-
   2016-0136
Walker, J., & Slear, S. (2011). The impact of principal leadership behaviors on the efficacy of new and experienced
    middle school teachers. NASSP Bulletin, 95(1), 46-64. https://doi.org/10.1177/0192636511406530


                                                        27                             Published by IDEAS SPREAD

jems.ideasspread.org                Journal of Economics and Management Sciences                      Vol. 3, No. 1; 2020


Yu, H., Leithwood, K., & Jantzi, D. (2002). The effect of transformational leadership on teachers' commitment to
     change      in   Hong     Kong.    Journal     of     Educational Administration,       38(29),   112-129.
     https://doi.org/10.1108/09578230210433436
Yukl, G. (1989). Managerial leadership: A review of theory and research. J. Manage, 15(2), 251-289.
    https://doi.org/10.1177/014920638901500207
Yukl, G. (1999). An evaluative essay on current conceptions of effective leadership. European Journal of Work
    and Organizational Psychology, 8(1), 33-48. https://doi.org/10.1080/135943299398429
Zimmerman, B. J., & Cleary, T. J. (2006). Adolescents’ development of personal agency. The role of selfefficacy
   beliefs and self-regulatory skills. In F. Pajares & T. Urdan (Eds.), Self-efficacy beliefs of adolescents (pp. 45-
   69). Greenwich, CT: Information Age.


Dimopoulos G. Andreas Short CV (email:info@andreasdimopoulos.gr)
Andreas Dimopoulos is a PhD candidate at the Department of Economics of the Democritus University of Thrace.
He is author of the book “Labour Market-Conquer the position you deserve” 'Ziti’ Publications, while he has
announces and publications in several international conferences and international scientific journals. He addressed
a thorough research in issue of employment, integration of new entrants to the job market, employee selection
practices and human resources management and has implemented a large number of lectures in many educational
institutes’ on these issues. He worked for many years in large multinationals companies from various senior
managerial positions and has also a profound experience in consulting, mentoring and training in businesses,
combined with work experience in Greek Ministry of Education and National Center for Public Administration.


Copyrights
Copyright for this article is retained by the author(s), with first publication rights granted to the journal.
This is an open-access article distributed under the terms and conditions of the Creative Commons Attribution
license (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/).




                                                           28                             Published by IDEAS SPREAD