Revista Românească pentru Educaţie Multidimensională
ISSN: 2066-7329 | e-ISSN: 2067-9270
Covered in: Web of Science (WOS); EBSCO; ERIH+; Google Scholar; Index Copernicus; Ideas RePeC; Econpapers;
Socionet; CEEOL; Ulrich ProQuest; Cabell, Journalseek; Scipio; Philpapers; SHERPA/RoMEO repositories; KVK;
WorldCat; CrossRef; CrossCheck


2020, Volume 12, Issue 3, pages: 90-106 | https://doi.org/10.18662/rrem/12.3/311

                                          Abstract: The research objective was highlighting the
Educational                               importance that the headmaster’s leadership style and
Leadership – Roles                        the organizational environment have on teachers’
                                          perception regarding work performance achievement.
on Work                                   Thus, it is to be analysed whether those who are
Performance                               appointed in management positions understand the true
                                          meaning of the task they have and the strong impact
Otilia CLIPA1,                            their leadership style and their way of facing problems
Irina Cătălina HONCIUC2                   in the most unexpected moments can have on the
                                          entire organization. At the same time, it is to be studied
                                          which are the factors that influence the progress and
1University Ștefan cel Mare of Suceava,   performance of an organization, what is the level of
Romania                                   involvement of the human and material resources
2University Ștefan cel Mare of Suceava,
                                          necessary to obtain the proposed results and how we
Romania                                   can improve both the management activity and the
                                          relationships with the employees in order to achieve all
                                          the set objectives. In this regard, we conducted a
                                          research that aimed at highlighting the role of the
                                          headmasters’ leadership style, as perceived by teachers
                                          and the organizational environment, on how teachers
                                          perceive work performance. The results of this research
                                          may be the basis for future more thorough research,
                                          with a larger teacher sample, aiming at identifying a
                                          larger number of answers at the same questions and
                                          their interpretation, in order to verify if the present
                                          study hypothesis will be confirmed too.

                                          Keywords: school management; educational leadership; work
                                          performance; management style; organizational environment; leader.

                                          How to cite: Clipa, O., & Honciuc, I. C. (2020). Educational
                                          Leadership – Roles on Work Performance. Revista Românească
                                          pentru Educaţie Multidimensională, 12(3), 90-106,
                                          https://doi.org/10.18662/rrem/12.3/311

             Educational Leadership – Roles on Work Performance
                  Otilia CLIPA & Irina Cătălina HONCIUC


1. Introduction
      Studies showed that both leaders as well as managers have a major
responsibility regarding goals and objectives setting, as well as the activities
by which the employees succeed in fulfilling all the assignments. However, it
must not be overlooked the fact that between being a leader and a manager
there are some major differences. The Romanian publications define
management as “the human, informational, physical and financial resources
coordination in order to reach the organization’s primary goal – obtaining
products and services desired by a certain company segment” (Clipa & Clipa,
2019; Clipa & Greciuc, 2018b; Eval, & Roth, 2011). Leadership is defined as
being “a social influence process including an intentional dimension exerted
by one individual (or a group) on other individuals (or groups) aiming at
structuring the activities and relationships from a group or organization”
(Bush, 2015; Clipa & Greciuc, 2018a; Yulk, 2004). Regarding the fact that
the management or leadership can become more performing, the literature
highlights, first of all, the importance of the management style used by
leaders or managers in order to improve it and the managerial environment
in which each individual carries out its activity. In order to achieve this, both
a performing leader and an organizational environment, where respect,
achievements acknowledgement and positive human relationships prevail are
required.

2. Educational management
      Educational management is a field of study and activity which
observes the educational organizations way of functioning and leadership.
This area of interest does not have a unique, universal definition, as it
derives from more subjects among which sociology, political sciences,
economy and general management.
      Bolam (1999) asserts that the educational management is „ an
executive function aiming at putting into practice the approved policies”
and draws attention regarding the difference between educational
management and leadership, at the bottom of which lies „ the responsibility
for the policies development and where applicable, organizational
transformation” (Bolam, 1999).
      Bush opines that „educational management must take into account
especially education’s aims and objectives”. He is also the one asserting that
„the aims or the outputs offer fundamental milestones in supporting the
educational institutions management. The management aims at achieving

                                       91

Revista Românească pentru                                       September, 2020
Educaţie Multidimensională                                     Volume 12, Issue 3

certain educational objectives. If the connection between aims and
management is not clearly defined, there is the danger to slide towards
managerialism, highlighting the procedures at the expense of the educational
aims and values” (Bush, 2015; Bush et al., 2019; Eval & Roth, 2011).

2.1. Educational leadership
      The term of educational leadership is taken into account by Gunter
(2004) as deriving from the notion of „educational administration”, which
became „educational management”. Bolam (1999) sees this change as „a
paradigm change”. But still how can we define educational leadership?
Rima Bezede defines educational leadership as „an extension and
consolidation process of the professionalism by authorizing the teacher to
put forth its leader abilities and exercise leadership in his current activity, as
part of it” (Bezede, 2015). Yukl (2004) defines leadership as „a process of
social influence including an intentional dimension exercised by one
individual (or a group) on other individuals (or groups) aiming at
structuring activities and relationships from a group or organization”
(Bush, 2015; Clipa & Greciuc, 2018b; Yulk, 2004).
      The term of educational leadership was long studied in countries as
America, England, Wales, resulting in some projects as the one in 2008
from Cambridge University - International Teacher Leadership. The
projects initiators created a set of instruments and materials, in order to
support the teachers that are leaders, aiming at improving the teacher’s
professionalism (Bezede, 2015).
2.2. Manager vs Leader
       As Bush asserts (2015), the terminology used in order to describe
how a school leadership is administrated by the headmaster evolved in time
from the term „administration”, to „management”. Nowadays is
mentioned more as „leadership”, a way of describing what it actually means
to manage and improve the organizational environment in a school, assure
quality and meet the school’s clients need for development. Can we speak
about differences between management and leadership?
       Cuban (1988), reckons that one of the clearest differences between
the two terms is the fact that leadership is most of the times associated with
“change”, while management means „maintaining”. He supports his
statements explaining that leadership implies influencing people’s actions in
order to reach to desirable results. Any real leader will know to shape well
established structures, motivate the team in order to undertake and
successfully finish a task. Also, the leader will demand ingenuity, talent and

                                        92

                 Educational Leadership – Roles on Work Performance
                      Otilia CLIPA & Irina Cătălina HONCIUC

energy from the team. Regarding the manager’s activity, Cuban (1988)
thinks that his activity supposes keeping efficient the organizations current
activities, without aiming at a certain change „ although, often, the manager
claims leadership skills, its global task is maintaining and not change”
(Bush, 2015; Cuban, 1988).
       Regardless of any author’s opinion, it has to be highlighted that
leadership and management are equally important under the circumstances
in which a school aims at developing, performing and building an image to
ensure its credibility within the community. If we were to compare what a
leader and a manager do, we would have the following diagram:

         Figure no. 1: The differences between leader and manager
                 Source: Drawn by the author based on literature

                 Team                                        Aims at
                 worker                                     performan
                                                                ce

    Is                          Has                Sets                  Has
interested   LEADER           contribut          objectiv               employ
                                                    es
                                                            MANAGER       ees
    in                           ors
interactin
  g with
  people

        Has a             Relates                 Does         Authoritar
       charism            to his                 not get        ian style
         atic              team                  out of
        style                                      its
     Regardless of any author’s opinion, it has comfort
                                                  to be highlighted that
                                                  zone the circumstances
leadership and management are equally important under
in which a school aims at developing, performing and building an image to
ensure its credibility within the community. Regarding the educational
management and leadership, the key components of scholar achievement
and performance are both the headmaster’s management style and
organizational environment. During the last few years, the changes required
for the educational system were discussed, both from an organizational
point of view and schools’ management. Any teacher would like to work in
an environment of good cooperation between colleagues and be guided,
supported and motivated by an educational leader that has an auspicious



                                          93

Revista Românească pentru                                         September, 2020
Educaţie Multidimensională                                       Volume 12, Issue 3

management style in order to build and maintain a good image of the
school.
2.3. Management styles
       The management style is defined as the way a manager or a leader
know how to put to use its „knowledge, qualities and skills in its relations
to the employees and the actual development of these work processes”
(Nicolescu & Verboncu, 2008).
       In 1939, Kurt Lewin et al., sets three management styles, related to
each manager’s way to exert the executive power:
       • The autocratic – authoritarian style: the leaders make unilateral
  decisions, dictating work methods and do not accept the employees’
  participation to the initiation of their own actions. It is considered to be
  an efficient management style, but it can lead to tensions, complaints or
  even frustrations inside the organization, states which can result in some
  employees refuse to fulfil the manager’s tasks.
       • The democratic – participative style: the leaders let the group members
  choose their own working methods and involve them in decision making
  regarding each activity aim and objective. The management is flexible and
  responsible, and has a good leader -employees ‘cooperation, which makes
  every team member willingly work to reach the target goals.
       • The liberal or „laissez- faire” style: leaders leave the team the freedom of
  decision, give them the materials they need for their activities, they are not
  interested in the way the team’s activities evolve. This style generates the
  organization’s low efficiency.
       The studies showed that a leader does not take only one management
style, but it adjusts its own style to the situation the managed organization
faces. As a result of the researches, Lewin et al. (1939) concluded that the
democratic style is highly above the other two styles.
       The literature increasingly mentions about two other leadership
models, which influence the employees work performance. The two
models are: the transactional and transformational models. These two
models will be briefly described trying to highlight the influence each has
on the employees and their work performance.
       The transformational leadership has the following important
characteristics:
       • The leader recognizes its employees’ needs and tries to give them
  the possibility to improve and achieve performance.



                                         94

            Educational Leadership – Roles on Work Performance
                 Otilia CLIPA & Irina Cătălina HONCIUC

      • The employees are involved in activities from all points of view,
since the leader wants them to develop leader skills too.
      • The leader always looks for ways to make its employees aware of
the importance their level of involvement has in order to achieve the
objectives, encouraging also the team spirit.
      • Through his example of sustained effort, determination and
sacrifice, the leader encourages the employees to grow, achieve
performance above the expected limit, be motivated and show availability
to accept new challenges.
      „Leadership generates thus trust, respect and a willingness for team
work, together with the others in order to achieve the same objectives”
(Iliescu et al., 2008).
      The transformational and transactional leadership models are often
contrasting. Miller (2001) defines the scholar transactional model as „the
leadership in which the relations with the teachers are based on a change
of valuable resources” (Bush, 2015; Goleman, 2008; Miller, 2001).
        Judge and Piccolo (2004) distinguish between the three dimensions
of the transactional leadership, summing up the characteristics of each
dimension:
    • „ The circumstantial reward. The extent to which the leader makes
  constructive changes with his followers.
    • The management by exception - active. The active leaders monitor
  their followers, anticipate problems and undertake correction actions.
    • Management by exception – passive. Passive leaders wait until
  behaviour causes problems in order to take action” (Bush, 2015, p. 138).
        Avolio and Bass (1995) describes transactional leaders as the leaders
who know what to ask from their employees and make sure they carry out
their tasks (Bass, Avolio, Iliescu, Beldean & Sîntion, 2007). Also, the
leaders reward the employees or promise to reward them for carrying out
their tasks, disregarding sometimes the results. The same author asserts
that the transformational leadership completes the transactional and the
fact that „transformational actions cannot fully replace the transactional
ones, but when present, they are responsible for unique variations of the
performance levels, becoming often higher than the ones caused by the
active transactional leadership” (Iliescu et al., 2008). Menon (2014) felt
that managers make their mark on the management style through their
temper, character and skills [...]. Regarding education managers ‘style, it
can be defined as their own, specific way to act, in order to achieve the


                                     95

Revista Românească pentru                                   September, 2020
Educaţie Multidimensională                                 Volume 12, Issue 3

 objectives; these characterizes their activity and differentiate it from the
 activity of other study units managing teachers” (Menon, 2014).
        We ask ourselves most of the times which is the best management
 style in order to perform. It is specified in the literature that each
 manager has to adjust his style with respect to the situations they confront
 with.
2.4. The organizational environment and the teachers’ work
performance
      Romanian researchers, Nicolescu and Verboncu (2007) assert that
the organizational environment represents „the totality of the
organization’s social and human characteristics as a complex system: The
decision making practices along the hierarchy, collective management
bodies functioning, accomplishment of the enterprise social functions,
general work environment of stimulating work performance and taking part
in the management, cooperation relations between work teams,
departments, services, workshops, offices” (Constantin, 2008; Clipa &
Greciuc, 2018 a; Clipa & Clipa, 2019; Hatos, 2016).
      Organizational environment and its influence on the individual and
collective performance, was studied by many researchers before and after
The First World War reaching the conclusion that there is a number of
organizational environment factors that influence both the individual and
collective performances. Lewin, Lippitt and White (1939) assert that factors
as cordiality, roles structure, risk acknowledgement, responsibility,
colleagues and headmaster’s support, standards imposed by the
organization’s policies, as well as some conflictual situations that can
emerge, are definitive within the organizational culture, regarding work
performance. Schneider (1975), thinks that the objectives and how clear are
those to the employees, work environment, the degree of group affiliation,
autonomy or certain bureaucratic rules are other factors that can have a
decisive influence on the organizational environment and work
performance (Schneider, 1975).
      Building on the literature and the results of the studies presented
above, the paper aim is a comparative research of the organizational
environment in Romanian primary and middle schools, the management
style taken by the headmasters of four Romanian teaching institutions
(middle schools, from the rural and urban areas), teachers opinion
regarding the headmaster’s leadership style and their perception on the
work performance in the schools they teach at.


                                     96

             Educational Leadership – Roles on Work Performance
                  Otilia CLIPA & Irina Cătălina HONCIUC

3. Research objective
      The research objective was highlighting the importance that the
headmaster’s leadership style and the organizational environment have on
teachers’ perception regarding work performance achievement.
3.1.Research methodology
3.2.Research hypothesis
1) Teachers’ perception regarding work performance positively correlates
   to the type of school environment they teach at.
2) The organizational environment factors are directly responsible for the
   way teachers perceive work performance.
3) The way teachers perceive the headmaster’s leadership style positively
   correlates with their perception regarding work performance.
4) There is a significant difference between the ways in which teachers
   perceive work performance, with respect to the level of education they
   teach at.
3.3. Instruments and Procedure
     Research variables
a) Independent variables- school’s organizational environment, and its
   factors (task, structure, relations, motivation, support, management,
   change, performance), headmasters leadership style (transformational,
   transactional, passive/ avoidant)
b) Dependent variables- teachers’ perception on work performance.

       Sample
       This study was taken by 80 teachers (40 primary school and 40
middle school teachers), from two counties (Suceava and Botoșani) who
teach in the rural (40 teachers) and urban areas (40 teachers). As a training
level 4 of the teachers graduated a high school in the domain, 50 teachers
have a bachelor degree, 13 graduated masters, 12 have post-university
studies and 1 teacher has a PhD diploma. With respect to the teaching
degree, most of the teachers who were part of the study obtained the 1st
teaching degree.

3.4. Tools used
   A. Research tool applied to the headmaster


                                     97

Revista Românească pentru                                         September, 2020
Educaţie Multidimensională                                       Volume 12, Issue 3

       The research tool applied to the school headmasters in this research
was the MLQ Questionnaire (Multifactorial Leadership Questionnaire) 5X
Form version, designed by Bernard M. Bass and Bruce J. Avolio (2004), who
drawn more versions of this questionnaire and tested them on almost all
organizational levels in fields as industry, education, in governmental and
military organizations, in order to determine the leadership behaviour of the
managing persons. In Romania, the studies for the translation and
adaptation of this questionnaire began in 2005. This version of the
questionnaire comprises 45 items, scored on 12 scales: nine scales and sub-
scales assess leadership behaviours while three scales measure performance
and the results related to these behaviours. It must be highlighted also, that
these scales and sub-scales are grouped into four distinct categories:
transformational scales( the questions 10, 18, 21, 25, 6, 14, 23, 34, 9, 13, 26, 36,
2, 8, 30, 32, 15, 19, 29, 31), transactional scales ( the questions 1, 11, 16, 35, 4,
22, 24, 27), scales of passive/avoidant behaviour ( the questions 3, 12, 17, 20, 5, 7,
28, 33) and scales measuring the leadership results ( the questions 39, 42, 44, 37,
40, 43, 45, 38, 41) ( Iliescu et al., 2008). The answers given to each question
are measured on Likert scale, having the next values: 1- none, 2- very rare, 3-
sometimes, 4- often, 5- frequent or always.

    B. Research tools for teachers
       The set of four questionnaires applied to the teachers aimed at
assessing aspects related to the organizational environment, the perception
regarding work performance and the leadership style set by the school’s
headmaster.
       In order to assess the aspects related to the schools that were part of
the study organizational environment we applied the C.O.IV questionnaire
(Organizational Environment) created by Constantin T. and validated as a
result of its application on a sample of 566 subjects (general population).
The questionnaire comprises 40 items structured so that it could measure
the following factors from an organization: the task (clear objectives), structure
(efficient organization), relations (positive relations), motivation (the stimulating
motivation), support (performing support), management (efficient
management), change (attitude for change) and performance (general
performance). For the answers given to each question it was used a scale
from 1 to 7, 1 meaning never agree, and 7 – always agree (2- rarely agree, 3-
sometimes agree, 4- not agree, nor disagree, 5- often agree, 6- very often
agree). For each factor, the total score results from calculating the arithmetic
mean of the five assertions specific to each factor.


                                         98

                Educational Leadership – Roles on Work Performance
                     Otilia CLIPA & Irina Cătălina HONCIUC

        In identifying teachers’ perception regarding their activity
performance in school it was used a questionnaire with a summative scale –
The working place performance scale, designed by Griffin. The questionnaire has
27 items which assess the ability in accomplishing individual tasks, both as
a member of a team and an organization (1. You did adequately important
aspects of your work.; 12. You helped your colleagues when they asked you to, or they
needed it; 21. You discussed in a positive manner about the organization.), the
adaptability to the individual tasks, as both a member of a team and a
school organization (4. You’ve adjusted well to the changes in your main duties. 15.
You responded constructively to the changes related to the way your team works. 23. You
managed the changes related to the way the organization functions) and the pro-
activity in doing the individual and group tasks at school level (the
questions 7, 8, 9, 16, 17, 18, 25, 26, 27). For the answers to be registered 5
steps Likert Scale was used (1- to a minimum, 2- on a small scale, 3- to
some extent, 4- in a great measure, 5- to a greatest extent).
        The third questionnaire from the applied set - Identifying the
managerial style- asked them to answer 15 questions so that the answers
reveal the present situation at their working place in order to identify the
headmaster’s managerial style from the teachers’ point of view.A1 to 5 scale
was used in order to register the answers (1- total disagreement, 2- they do
not agree, 3- uncertain, 4- agree, 5- totally agree). The 15 questions of the
questionnaire were grouped to measure the headmaster’s control in school
(1. the manager controls everything so as not to mistake the group of teachers; 7. He agrees
listening to the teacher’s opinions even though he does not approve.), the accomplishing
of the managerial tasks (3. The manager frequently appeals to the teacher’s competitive
spirit in order to accomplish the tasks sooner; 11. The manager seeks for more and more
original solutions to carry out the tasks presenting them to the employees) and attitude
toward the other teachers (8. Discourages any discussion which affects work
environment; 13. The manager encourages establishing powerful liaisons between the
employees.).
        The fourth questionnaire the teachers were asked to fill in, aimed at
how teachers appreciate the relations to the school’s headmaster. The
questionnaire comprises 18 questions with answers on a scale from 1 to 5(1-
almost always, 2- always, 3- often, 4- sometimes, 5- almost never). The
questions were formulated so that the teachers may give information about
their objectives and tasks clarity, (3. It is very clear in everything he asks me to do;
9. It presents and explains to us the objectives and strategic orientation of the organization
we work at.), the way their work is appreciated and the support given by the
headmaster to each teacher (10. It gives me favourable conditions for my development
on this position; 13. It encourages an environment based on mutual trust and respect) and

                                             99

Revista Românească pentru                                        September, 2020
Educaţie Multidimensională                                      Volume 12, Issue 3

how the headmaster – teachers’ communication takes place (2. It creates a
favourable to communication environment. 5. It listens to my opinions before making a
decision which influences my branch.).
3.5. Procedure
      In order to collect the necessary data for our research, there were
applied two sets of questionnaires: one filled in by the headmasters from
each school which was part of the study and one set of four questionnaires
applied to the teachers. The questionnaires were applied through the paper
and pen method, with the help of eight volunteer teachers from the schools
involved in the study. The volunteers explained to the headmasters and
teachers the importance of giving answers that reflect their personal opinion
and the fact that the participation in this study is volunteer and the collected
data will be used for research only.

4. The Research Interpretation and Results
4.1. Hypothesis verification
        In order to verify the first hypothesis of the study, a Pearson
Correlation T test in SPSS was done, between the independent variable-
organizational environment and dependent variable – the teachers’ perception
regarding work performance.
Hypothesis I- Teachers perception regarding work performance positively correlates to
the type of school environment where they work.
        The results prove that teachers perception regarding work
performance positively correlates to the organizational environment inside
the school: (r =, 413, N = 80, p =, 000). Thus, the more the organizational
environment is positive the more performant the teachers perceive
themselves in their school activities. The size of the effect is medium. The
hypothesis is confirmed.




                                        100

               Educational Leadership – Roles on Work Performance
                    Otilia CLIPA & Irina Cătălina HONCIUC

      Table 1. Correlation analysis between the variables of the first
 hypothesis
                                                           Teachers perception
                                                       regarding work performance
                             Pearson
                                                                                 ,413**
                             Correlation
   Organizational
   climate                   Sig. (2-tailed)                                       ,000
                             N                                                       80

      The second hypothesis of the study aims at verifying whether the
factors of organisational environment are directly responsible for the
teachers’ work performance perception. To analyse the relation between the
factors that compose the organisational environment of a school and the
way the teachers perceive the work performance, we applied Pearson
correlation within SPSS software. The result of the analysis showed that
there is a positive correlation between the eight components of the
organizational environment and the teachers’ perception on work
performance. The size of the effect is average. The Pearson correlation data
are shown in the table below. Hypothesis is confirmed.

Table 2. The results of the Pearson correlation coefficient between independent variables
 –components of the organizational environment and dependent variable – perception of
                      the teachers regarding the work performance




                                           101

Revista Românească pentru                                             September, 2020
Educaţie Multidimensională                                           Volume 12, Issue 3

       The third hypothesis – the way the teachers perceive the leadership
style adopted by the director positively correlates with their perception on
work performance was also tested through Pearson correlation analysis, in
SPSS. The results indicated that there is a statistically significant positive
correlation between the two variables (r = , 313, N = 80, p = , 005). The
more teachers perceive the headmasters as performing leaders, the more
grows the level of their own perception regarding work performance. The
size of the effect is average. Hypothesis is confirmed.

  Table3- The results of the difference between the variable – managerial style of the
headmaster as perceived by the teachers and the variable – teachers’ perception regarding
                                   work performance
                                                             Teachers’ perception of
                                                               work performance

                                Pearson
   Headmaster’s                                                                  ,313**
                                Correlation
   managerial style as
   perceived by the             Sig. (2-tailed)                                    ,005
   teachers
                                N                                                    80

       The last hypothesis of the study aims at verifying whether there is a
significant difference between the way’s teachers perceive work performance
depending on the teaching level they profess in. We applied the t test for
independent samples. The result of the analysis showed that there is an
insignificant difference between the teachers from primary school (M= 4,38,
SD = ,682) and teachers from gymnasium (M = 4,34, SD = ,430) regarding
their perception on work performance: [ t (78) = 0,370, p = ,712]. These
results indicate the fact that the level a teacher teaches in gymnasium does
not influence its work performance. Hypothesis is infirmed.

5. Conclusions
      An adequate conception on school has to take into account its
fundamental elements as a social system and the way these elements are
organized for the whole to be coherent. The fundamental elements are not
only the persons that hold certain roles, but the behaviours of a large
number of stakeholders, organized in groups, whose cohesion is given by a
network of interpersonal relationships, managed by a structure invested with
authority (Antoniakis, 2003; Hatos, 2010).


                                           102

             Educational Leadership – Roles on Work Performance
                  Otilia CLIPA & Irina Cătălina HONCIUC

       With regard to the research questions and, more specifically, to the
first hypothesis, arises through the quotation of the relevant literature that
indeed the characteristics of the educational style of leadership, affect the
perfromance of the school directly or indirectly because these
characteristics’ enable, contribute, shape and influence the leadership
style and consequently the result itself. This result are underline the same
results with others authors ( Dimopoulos, 2020; Politis, 2001).
       With respect to the teachers perception regarding performance and
organizational environment, we can say that these are in a interdependence
report, since, the organizational environment may lead to performance or
may be the expression of a certain level of it, according to the leadership
style taken, by the interpersonal relationships inside the teacher team, as well
as the common objectives that all stakeholders involved in the schools
activity have. Also, the headmaster’sleadership style can result in
performance (Clipa & Greciuc, 2018a; Menon, 2014).
       As a conclusion, in order to have a performant education in Romanian
schools it is necessary to develop an open to change organizational
environment, with teachers eager to achieve performance, motivated by
leaders who know the art of efficient leadership for a school.

5.1. Strengths and limitations of the research
       Among the strengths of this research is the fact that it was proven
once again that we cannot be performant in our jobs if we do not have an
open organizational environment, dominated by efficient organization,
positive relationships, the support for achieving performance and a positive
attitude for change. Also, the second strong point is the fact that no matter
of the county and school in which the headmasters develop their activity,
they search for constructive relations to the teachers which teach in their
schools and combine the leadership styles so that the objectives and
performance standards could be achieved.
        The limitations of the research could stand in the fact that the
  schools involved in our study lie in geographical areas with a medium to
  low living standard, where sometimes the teachers make great efforts in
  order to achieve remarkable performances. Another limitation of the
  study might be that there were chosen only ten teachers from each
  school, five from the primary level and five from the gymnasium. The
  answers might have been influenced by the relations they have with the
  volunteer teachers that applied the questionnaires or with the headmaster.
        The results of this research may be the basis for future more
  thorough research, with a larger teacher sample, aiming at identifying a

                                      103

Revista Românească pentru                                               September, 2020
Educaţie Multidimensională                                             Volume 12, Issue 3

 larger number of answers at the same questions and their interpretation,
 in order to verify if the present study hypothesis will be confirmed too in
 the case of a more than 10 participants from each school.


References
Antoniakis, J. (2003). Why emotional intelligence does not predict leadership
        effectiveness: a comment on Prati, Douglas, Ferris, Ammeter and Buckley,
        The International Journal of Organizational Analysis, 11(4), 355-
        361. https://doi.org/10.1108/eb028980
Avolio, B. J. & Bass, B. M. (2004). Multifactor Leadership Questionnaire. Manual and
        sampler set (3rd ed.). Mind Garden.
Bass, B. M., Avolio, B. J., Iliescu, D., Beldean, F., & Sîntion, F. (2007). Technical
        and interpretative manual of the MLQ, Multifactor Leadership
        Questionnaire. Cluj-Napoca: Sinapsis
Bezede, R. (2015). Repere psihopedagogice ale leadershipului educațional [Psycho pedagogical
        frame for educational leadership]. Universitatea de Stat Moldova.
Bolam, R. (1999). Educational administration, leadership and management: towards
        a Research agenda. In T. Bush, L. Bell, R. Bolam, R. Glatter and P. Ribbins
        (Eds.), Educational Management: Redefining Theory, Policy and Practice. Paul
        Chapman Publishing.
Bush, T. (2015). Leadership și management educațional. Teorii și practici actuale [Leadership
        and educational management. Theories and best practices]. Polirom.
Bush, T., Bell, L. & Meddlewood, D. (Eds.), (2019). Principles of Educational
        Leadership and Management. Sage.
Clipa, O. & Clipa, A. L. (2019) Stress, coping and work performance. The European
        Proceedings of Social & Behavioural Sciences, LXVII, 1901-1907.
        https://doi.org/10.15405/epsbs.2019.08.03.234
Clipa, O. & Greciuc (Șerban) M-A. (2018a). Leadership, Motivation and
        performance in teaching. Journal of Innovation in Psychology, Education and
        Didactics, 22(1), 89-102 http://www.jiped.ub.ro/index.php/archives/2601
Clipa, O., & Greciuc (Şerban), M-A. (2018b). Relations of Style of Leadership and
        Achievement Motivation for Teacher. Revista Romaneasca pentru Educatie
        Multidimensionala, 10(4), 112-118. https://doi.org/10.18662/rrem/67
Constantin, T. (2008). Analiza climatului organizaţional [Analysis of Organisational
        climate] (pp. 171- 196). In E. Avram (Coord.), Psihologie Organizaţional
        managerială. Tendinţe actuale. Editura Polirom.
Cuban, L. (1988) The managerial imperative and the practice of Leadership in schools. State
        University New York Press.
Dimopoulos, A. (2020). Educational Leadership Effectiveness. Is it a Matter of a
        Leader’s Characteristics, Behaviors, or Leadership Style? Journal of Economics



                                            104

               Educational Leadership – Roles on Work Performance
                    Otilia CLIPA & Irina Cătălina HONCIUC

         and          Management          Sciences,       3(1),                    13-28.
         https://doi.org/10.30560/jems.v3n1p13
Eval, O., & Roth, G. (2011). Leadership and teachers' motivation: Self-
         determination theory analysis. Journal of Educational Administration, 49(3),
         256-275. https://doi.org/10.1108/09578231111129055
Goleman, D. (2008). Inteligența emoțională [Emotional Intelligence]. București: Editura
         Curtea Veche.
Gunter, H. (2004). Labels and labelling in the field of educational leadership.
         Discourse: studies in the cultural politics of education, 25(1), 21-41,
         https://doi.org/10.1080/0159630042000178464
Hatos, A. (2016). Romanian Educational Research on the Way of Becoming a
         Strategic Action Field. HERJ Hungarian Educational Research Journal, 6(2), 43-
         61, DOI: 10.14413/HERJ.2016.02.04
Hatos, A. (2010). The (Little) Effect that parents’ labour emigration has on their
         children’s school performance: a study of secondary school students in
         Oradea (Romania). The New Educational Review, 20(1), 85-96.
Iliescu, D., Mocanu, R., & Beldean, F. (2008). MLQ - Chestionarul Multifactorial of
         Leadership. Psihologia Resurselor Umane, 6(1), 47- 63. https://www.hrp-
         journal.com/index.php/pru/article/view/346
Judge, T. A., & Piccolo, R. F. (2004). Transformational and Transactional
         Leadership: A Meta-Analytic Test of Their Relative Validity. Journal of
         Applied     Psychology,   89(5),     755-768. https://doi.org/10.1037/0021-
         9010.89.5.755
Lewin, K., Lippitt, R., & White, R. K. (1939). Patters of aggressive behavior in
         experimentally-created “social climates.” Journal of Social Psychology, 10, 271–
         299. https://doi.org/10.1080/00224545.1939.9713366
Menon, M. W. (2014). The relationship between transformational leadership,
         perceived leader efectiveness, and teachers' job satisfaction. Journal         of
         Educational               Administration,               52(4),          509-528.
         https://doi.org/10.1108/JEA-01-2013-0014
Miller, J. S. (2001), Self‐Monitoring and Performance Appraisal Satisfaction: An
         Exploratory Field Study. Human Resource Management, 40, 321-332.
         https://doi.org/10.1002/hrm.1022
Nicolescu, O & Verboncu, I. (2007). Managementul organizației, București: Ed.
         Economică.
Politis, J. (2001). The relationship of various leadership styles to knowledge
         management. Leadership & Organization Development Journal, 22(8), 354-364.
         https://doi.org/10.1108/01437730110410071
Schneider, B. (1975). Organizational climate: Individual preferences and
         organizational realities revisited. Journal of Applied Psychology, 60(4), 459–
         465. https://doi.org/10.1037/h0076919




                                          105

Revista Românească pentru                                       September, 2020
Educaţie Multidimensională                                     Volume 12, Issue 3

Yukl, G. (2004). Tridimensional leadership theory: A roadmap for flexible, adaptive
        leaders. In R. J. Burke, & C. L. Cooper (Eds.), Leading in turbulent times:
        managing in the new world of work (pp. 75-91). Blackwell Pub.




                                       106