District school officials of the Kazan Province in the school management system in the first half of the 19th century




    DISTRICT SCHOOL OFFICIALS OF THE KAZAN PROVINCE IN THE SCHOOL
       MANAGEMENT SYSTEM IN THE FIRST HALF OF THE 19TH CENTURY

      FUNCIONÁRIOS DA ESCOLA DO DISTRITO DA PROVÍNCIA DE KAZAN NO
      SISTEMA DE GESTÃO ESCOLAR NA PRIMEIRA METADE DO SÉCULO XIX

FUNCIONARIOS ESCOLARES DE DISTRITO DE LA PROVINCIA DE KAZAN EN EL
  SISTEMA DE GESTIÓN ESCOLAR EN LA PRIMERA MITAD DEL SIGLO XIX



                                                                                           Guzel' Vazykhovna IBNEУEVA1
                                                                                           Aysylu Ilgizovna SHAKIROVA2



ABSTRACT: The relevance of the problem under study is conditioned by the need to explore
the bureaucracy of district schools in Kazan province during the first half of the 19th century,
making it possible to determine the contribution of these officials to the development of public
education. The article presents the conditions for implementing professional activities by staff
caretakers and the analysis of staff caretaker’s duties and their financial competence, and the
specifics of their position as civil servants in the public education system. The authors showed
that the practical activity of the district schools, their financial well-being (in the form of
additional contributions), and the management of the schools' entire economic part, reportedly,
depended on the personal qualities, abilities, and skills of a regular caretaker. The article
examines conflict situations between teachers of district schools, which became a characteristic
phenomenon for the entire educational system in the first half of the 19th century. The methods
of their elimination by staff caretakers were also considered. Determination of the factors for
establishing a staff caretaker institution and the principles of appointment to this position made
it possible to identify this role in organizing the system of district schools in Kazan province
during the first half of the 19th century. The authors showed that the staff caretakers controlled
almost all the activities of the Kazan province's district schools during the first half of the 19th
century, reporting, if necessary, about the shortcomings in their work to higher authorities.

KEYWORDS: Public education. Teacher. County schools. Kazan province. Charity.


RESUMO: A relevância do problema em estudo está condicionada pela necessidade de
explorar a burocracia das escolas distritais na província de Kazan durante a primeira metade
do século XIX, permitindo determinar a contribuição desses funcionários para o
desenvolvimento da educação pública. O artigo apresenta as condições para a realização da
atividade profissional dos zeladores de equipes e a análise das atribuições e da competência
financeira do zelador, bem como as especificidades da sua função como funcionário da rede
pública de ensino. As autoras mostraram que a atividade prática das escolas distritais, seu

1
  Kazan Federal University (KPFU), Kazan – Russia. Professor of the Graduate School of Historical Sciences and
World Cultural Heritage, Institute of International Relations. Doctor of Science in History. ORCID:
https://orcid.org/0000-0002-8157-9039. E-mail: guzel.ibneyeva@yandex.ru
2
  Kazan Federal University (KPFU), Kazan – Russia. Postgraduate Student of the Graduate School of Historical
Sciences and World Cultural Heritage, Institute of International Relations. ORCID: https://orcid.org/0000-0002-
5664-1910. E-mail: nasibullina-aysylu@mail.ru
RPGE– Revista on line de Política e Gestão Educacional, Araraquara, v. 25, n. esp. 2, p. 797-805, May 2021.      e-ISSN: 1519-9029
DOI: https://doi.org/10.22633/rpge.v25iesp.2.15266                                                                             797

                                         Guzel' Vazykhovna IBNEУEVA and Aysylu Ilgizovna SHAKIROVA




bem-estar financeiro (na forma de contribuições adicionais) e a gestão de toda a parte
econômica das escolas, relatórios, dependiam das qualidades, capacidades e habilidades
pessoais de um zelador regular. O artigo examina situações de conflito entre professores de
escolas distritais, que se tornaram um fenômeno característico de todo o sistema educacional
na primeira metade do século XIX. Os métodos de sua eliminação pelos zeladores também
foram considerados. A determinação dos fatores de constituição de uma instituição de
vigilância de pessoal e os princípios de nomeação para este cargo permitiram identificar o seu
papel na organização do sistema de escolas distritais na província de Kazan durante a primeira
metade do século XIX. Os autores mostraram que os zeladores controlavam quase todas as
atividades das escolas distritais da província de Kazan durante a primeira metade do século
XIX, relatando, se necessário, as deficiências em seu trabalho às autoridades superiores.

PALAVRAS-CHAVE: Educação pública. Professor. Escolas municipais. Província de Kazan.
Caridade.


RESUMEN: La relevancia del problema en estudio está condicionada por la necesidad de
explorar la burocracia de las escuelas distritales de la provincia de Kazán durante la primera
mitad del siglo XIX, lo que permite determinar la contribución de los funcionarios mencionados
al desarrollo de la educación pública. El artículo presenta las condiciones para la
implementación de actividades profesionales por parte de los cuidadores del personal y el
análisis de las funciones de los cuidadores del personal y su competencia financiera, y los
detalles de su posición como servidores públicos en el sistema de educación pública. Los
autores demostraron que la actividad práctica de las escuelas del distrito, su bienestar
financiero (en forma de contribuciones adicionales) y la gestión de toda la parte económica de
las escuelas, la presentación de informes, dependían de las cualidades, habilidades y destrezas
personales de los estudiantes. un cuidador habitual. El artículo examina situaciones de
conflicto entre los profesores de las escuelas distritales, que se convirtió en un fenómeno
característico de todo el sistema educativo en la primera mitad del siglo XIX. También se
consideraron los métodos para su eliminación por parte de los cuidadores del personal. La
determinación de los factores para el establecimiento de una institución de conserjería de
personal y los principios de nombramiento para este puesto permitieron identificar su papel en
la organización del sistema de escuelas de distrito en la provincia de Kazán durante la primera
mitad del siglo XIX. Los autores demostraron que los cuidadores del personal controlaban casi
todas las actividades de las escuelas de distrito de la provincia de Kazán durante la primera
mitad del siglo XIX, informando, si era necesario, sobre las deficiencias en su trabajo a las
autoridades superiores.

PALABRAS CLAVE: Educación pública. Maestro. Escuelas del condado. Provincia de
Kazán. Caridad.



Introduction

          Since the beginning of XIX century in the Kazan province, along with the growth of the
number of district schools, there has been an active process of creating and developing a multi-
complicated system of school management. Recently, there have been works showing the
Russian authorities' efforts to modernize the educational system in the XIX century, and factors
RPGE– Revista on line de Política e Gestão Educacional, Araraquara, v. 25, n. esp. 2, p. 797-805, May 2021.   e-ISSN: 1519-9029
DOI: https://doi.org/10.22633/rpge.v25iesp.2.15266                                                                          798

                  District school officials of the Kazan Province in the school management system in the first half of the 19th century




of the influence of innovative pedagogical ideas on school education (FAHRUTDINOVA,
2019; SHAMSUTDINOVA et al., 2019). Meanwhile, less attention is paid to the actors in the
organization of the public education system. An important link in the management of district
school system during the first half of the XIX century was represented by staff caretakers who
played a significant role for the formation and development of education in the Russian Empire.
The article examines the activities of staff caretakers who were on the periphery of the
administrative management, in cooperation with teachers, local authorities, the population, and
contributed to the increase of district schools and the maintenance of primary schools in a
decent condition.
          The problem of establishing the position of staff caretakers was fowarded by both
Russian and foreign researchers. The works by Hans (1963), McKeland (1979) and Flynn
(1988), who considered staff caretakers as one of the links in the educational management
system institutions of Russia during the first half of the XIX century, are of great importance in
the context of the chosen topic. The work by Wirtschafter (1994), covering the social structure
of the staff supervisors of public schools, should be specially noted.
          The work by N. A. Ivanova was devoted to the problems of the social composition, and
the job opportunities of the district school heads (staff caretakers) (IVANOVA, 2010). The
introduction of the post of the above-mentioned officials, as well as their legal status and their
interaction with higher authorities, were considered by Kalininа (2017).
          The analysis of the works of the above-mentioned authors showed that the issues related
to the study of this topic remain poorly studied.



Materials and Methods

          The sources of this study are the unpublished material deposited in the State Archives
of the Republic of Tatarstan. So, the most informative source was the office documentation,
among which a special group is made by the reports of the directors of public school, which, in
addition to decrees and orders, include information about university and school officials
(sometimes the data on their social origin, and position in the system of rank production).
          “Comparative statements about the state of educational institutions managed by the
department of the Ministry of Public Education” is of interest among published sources which
began to appear in the “Journal of Public Education Ministry” (1835). They provided detailed
information on the appointment and dismissal of university and school officials. The analysis


RPGE– Revista on line de Política e Gestão Educacional, Araraquara, v. 25, n. esp. 2, p. 797-805, May 2021.      e-ISSN: 1519-9029
DOI: https://doi.org/10.22633/rpge.v25iesp.2.15266                                                                             799

                                         Guzel' Vazykhovna IBNEУEVA and Aysylu Ilgizovna SHAKIROVA




of this type of sources was carried out using a comparative method, which made it possible to
identify the factors of staff caretaker position development and the principles of its appointment.
          The historical and systemic method made it possible to assess the functioning of the
staff caretakers as a special socio-professional group, which was a subsystem of educational
institutions and state-social relations in the first half of the XIX century.



Results and Discussion

          The position of a staff caretaker, accountable to a public-school director, was introduced
in 1796 to supervise the district and parish schools. The overseer was elected in each county
town from among the honorary citizens. Basically, these were wealthy merchants and burghers
who owned city real estate and served in the local administration. For example, the
superintendent of the Minor Public school in the Cheboksary district was the mayor, and the
district judge – in Yadrin (State Archives of the Republic of Tatarstan).
          In the Alexander era, a similar election process was initially maintained. The election to
the post of staff caretaker was considered honorable for the bourgeois and merchants. The
supervisor of the district schools was supposed to control the district schools that were opening
at this time, visit them weekly and observe the teachers. However, as time passed, it became
clear that such an elective position was not effective. Only a small number of caretakers
performed their duties conscientiously, monitored the organization of district schools and took
care of them (State Archives of the Republic of Tatarstan). As a rule, most of the caretakers
were inactive. First of all, this was due to the fact that their work was not paid, and the caretakers
considered it as a heavy social duty.
          This attitude towards their duties was characteristic of the staff caretakers throughout
the region. Thus, by the Kazan Order of Public Charity, the townspeople elected the petty
bourgeois V. Guryev as superintendent during one of the first elections for the post of staff
caretaker of the Cheboksary Minor public school. However, he was fired due to non-fulfillment
of his duties and insubordination to the requirements of public school director. Similar
situations were in other districts of the Kazan province. Due to this, at the suggestion of a
member of the Main Board of schools, it was decided that only persons with scientific
knowledge and subordinate to the directorate of public schools can be appointed to the post of
staff caretaker (WIRTSCHAFTER, 1994). Thus, the position of staff caretaker of district
schools became part of the system of the provincial school directorate.


RPGE– Revista on line de Política e Gestão Educacional, Araraquara, v. 25, n. esp. 2, p. 797-805, May 2021.   e-ISSN: 1519-9029
DOI: https://doi.org/10.22633/rpge.v25iesp.2.15266                                                                          800

                  District school officials of the Kazan Province in the school management system in the first half of the 19th century




          The appointment to the post of a caretaker did not take place at the same time. According
to the Charter of 1804, a vacancy for a caretaker appeared with the opening of a district and
parish school in the county towns. However, this was not the case everywhere. For example, a
staff caretaker appeared only in 1813 in the Yadrin district school, although the district school
began to function in 1791. Since the number of students in this school was small (10–15), and
parish schools were opened much later in the villages of the Yadrin district, so there was no
need to appoint a staff caretaker to the Yadrin district. Some of the caretakers combined their
main activity with the position of teachers of parish schools, receiving additional funds for their
work (State Archives of the Republic of Tatarstan).
          The caretaker of the district schools could be appointed to two counties at once. The
reason for this was the small number of educational institutions in the counties and the small
number of students. So, for example, Kozmodemyansk and Tsarevokokshaisk districts,
Cheboksary and Tsivilsk districts, Chistopol’ and Mamadysh districts have been merged in the
Kazan province (1807–1816). Those persons who performed their duties in two counties at once
were assigned salary increase up to 150 rubles from the funds of city councils (KOZYREV,
1948). This order of leadership remained unchanged throughout the first quarter of the XIX
century.
          Most of the caretakers lived near the district school, combining this position with
teaching. So, senior teachers of the Kazan gymnasium were appointed to the position of staff
caretakers in the Kazan province at the beginning of the XIX century. Living in the provincial
city, they were the teachers of the provincial gymnasium and at the same time were appointed
to the position of staff caretakers. As caretakers of schools, gymnasium teachers rarely traveled
to the province counties, and thus, irregularly attended educational institution due to the long
distance. This practice caused dissatisfaction within the Ministry of Public Education, since the
caretakers did not exercise proper control over the schools (GROMOVA, 2016). Therefore,
since 1826, by decision of the Minister of Public Education A. S. Shishkov, only those teachers
who worked in the district schools began to be appointed to the posts of district caretakers. Due
to this, the duties of the staff caretakers were performed by the teachers of the district schools
instead of the senior teachers of the gymnasium in the Kazan province (1826) (State Archives
of the Republic of Tatarstan).
          The issue of the material position of the staff caretakers was decisive in the organization
of the public school system. The payment for their labor had a significant impact on the
effectiveness of a district school organization, its relationship with the school administration
and the teaching staff of schools. The salary of a regular caretaker was 400 rubles. To save
RPGE– Revista on line de Política e Gestão Educacional, Araraquara, v. 25, n. esp. 2, p. 797-805, May 2021.      e-ISSN: 1519-9029
DOI: https://doi.org/10.22633/rpge.v25iesp.2.15266                                                                             801

                                         Guzel' Vazykhovna IBNEУEVA and Aysylu Ilgizovna SHAKIROVA




school fees, a single caretaker was often appointed, who could manage two district schools at
once. It should be noted that his trips from one school to another were not funded from the state
treasury (PINTNER, 1970). Fare money for the trip was paid out of city council funds.
          However, as a rule, there was not enough money for long trips. Insufficient funding was
a typical phenomenon for the Kazan province with huge distances between the district schools,
which the staff caretakers were supposed to visit. Therefore, some caretakers visited schools
only in the summer because winter trips were the most expensive. So, the caretaker of Chistopol
district D. Kherasov wrote the following in his report (February 1834):

                                  Due to the distance, irregularity of communication, especially in winter, I visit
                                  parish schools only in the summer, because the path is very difficult, long and
                                  painful in winter [....] The costs of my trip [...] are up to 155 rubles now. The
                                  sums necessary for such a distant road were borrowed by me for a while (State
                                  Archives of the Republic of Tatarstan).

          Most likely, Kherasov took additional funds for travel from the school budget and had
to return them. To use the state money for its intended purpose, a special decree "On traveling
money" was issued in November 1834, which indicated that the running money for inspections
of schools would be issued to staff supervisors in the form of an accountable increase to their
salary. At the same time, it was necessary to observe the caretakers so that the funds issued for
travel around the county were used for their intended purpose (RUSSIA, 1864).
          Thus, the financial competence of the county school superintendents was limited. Staff
caretakers were prohibited from spending and using funds for other purposes. If such cases
were register red, then they were punished severely. For example, according to the results of
the school audit for 1816, the caretaker of the Cheboksary district school M. O. Golosnitsky,
the director of public schools of Kazan province O. D. Volynsky issued an order on
inadmissible cost overrun in the amount of 70 rubles and 50 kopecks. This fact was reported to
the trustee of the Kazan educational district M. A. Saltykov, who demanded from the caretaker
an explanation of the reasons for the excess costs (State Archives of the Republic of Tatarstan).
          As evidenced by the surviving records of educational institutions of the first quarter of
the XIX century, caretakers supervised all educational work in the district schools, conducted
extensive office documentation and correspondence. Based on the information provided by the
teachers, several times a year the caretakers compiled a statement about the pupils of all schools,
detailed annual reports on the state of county schools, submitted information to the directorate
on the use of new teaching methods, on penalties for guilty teachers or, conversely, on their
encouragement, carried out the description school library funds, etc.

RPGE– Revista on line de Política e Gestão Educacional, Araraquara, v. 25, n. esp. 2, p. 797-805, May 2021.   e-ISSN: 1519-9029
DOI: https://doi.org/10.22633/rpge.v25iesp.2.15266                                                                          802

                  District school officials of the Kazan Province in the school management system in the first half of the 19th century




          In contrast to the previous situation, the new Charter, adopted in 1828, clarified and
gave administrative and organizational functions to a staff caretaker (RUSSIA, 1830).
According to the Article 92, the caretaker was endowed with a wide range of powers, becoming
a kind of a district school head. His main obligations were monitoring the activities of teachers
and the quality of education of students, visiting schools: the classes at the district and parish
schools twice a day, and the district schools – twice a year. When inspecting schools, a caretaker
had to conduct conversations with students, review class magazines and monthly reports from
teachers. At the end of each academic year, he was supposed to hold open tests with students,
after which he awarded those who distinguished themselves at a solemn meeting.
          The supervision of the punishment system played an important role in his activities.
Considering the behavior of the district school pupils, the staff caretaker determined the
measures of education and punishment for those who violated the disciplinary rules
(MCCLELLAND, 1979).



Summary

          The district caretakers, who were on the periphery of the administration, in cooperation
with teachers, local authorities and the population, helped to increase the number of district
schools and keep primary schools in a decent condition. Their own teaching experience,
knowledge of disciplines and methodological techniques allowed them to monitor and review
the educational activities of subordinate schools successfully.
          An important factor of a staff caretakers position development was the level of education
of these officials. Most often, the teachers from subordinate schools were appointed to this
position. There were few university graduates among them. As a rule, these were the teachers
who had graduated from the provincial gymnasiums. For them, the position of a caretaker could
become the highest point of career growth (FLYNN, 1988).
          The success of the staff caretaker work depended on his relationship with the teachers
of the district and parish schools. The caretaker had to build a communication system between
the teachers and himself. Staff caretakers behaved differently when dealing with complaints
and conflict situations. Some used similar situations for their own purposes, seeking to remove
the teachers they did not like from their posts (State Archives of the Republic of Tatarstan).
Other caretakers tried to adhere to corporate ethics and considered the emerging conflicts within
the team, not informing their superiors about them and not and not taking the dirt out of the
house.

RPGE– Revista on line de Política e Gestão Educacional, Araraquara, v. 25, n. esp. 2, p. 797-805, May 2021.      e-ISSN: 1519-9029
DOI: https://doi.org/10.22633/rpge.v25iesp.2.15266                                                                             803

                                         Guzel' Vazykhovna IBNEУEVA and Aysylu Ilgizovna SHAKIROVA




          Interdisciplinary approaches (sociocultural and multicultural) to the study of
management, along with axiological, holistic, systemic, activity and synergetic are the
methodological basis of the study. Methodological principles (synergetic, complementarity,
activity (action and creative), interaction between the subjects of the educational process,
convergence from the abstract to the concrete) have been applied (SOKOL et al., 2021)



Conclusions

          Thus, the staff caretaker of the schools was very important in the system of the district
school administration. Despite all the complexities of professional activity (abundance of
official obligations), the staff supervisors of the county schools had a high administrative status,
which, at the same time, did not imply their further career development. The duties of a staff
caretaker included control and supervision over the organization of educational work in the
district schools, the selection of teaching personnel for the schools, and the maintenance of
documentation. At the same time staff caretakers were inherent only in the formal performance
of their duties. Professional activities problems occurred repeatedly with the fulfillment of
official duties, requirements of the director of public school, which in turn testified to the
superficial attitude of these officials to their service.

ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS: The work is performed according to the Russian Government
Program of Competitive Growth of Kazan Federal University.



                                                        REFERENCES

FAHRUTDINOVA, A. V. Free education: fundamentals of humanistic pedagogics (on the
example of activity of the german public figures of the second half of XIX – the beginning of
the XX centuries of F. Gansberg, L. Gurlitt, G. Sharrelman). Education & Educational
Research, v. 8, n. 1, p. 201-207, 2019.

FLYNN, J. T. The University Reforms of Tsar Alexander I, 1802–1835. Washington, D.C.:
The Catholic University of America Press, 1988.

GROMOVA, N. F. From the history of primary educational institutions of the Crimea in the
first half of the XIXth century: students and teachers of parish and district schools.
Tavrichesky Scientific Observer, v. 10, p. 4-9, 2016.

HANS, N. The russian tradition in education. London: Routledge & Kegan Paul, 1963.

IVANOVA, N. A. The social status of staff superintendents from district schools in the
Smolensk province during the 1960-ies-1970-ies. Science and School, v. 3, p. 126-127, 2010.
RPGE– Revista on line de Política e Gestão Educacional, Araraquara, v. 25, n. esp. 2, p. 797-805, May 2021.   e-ISSN: 1519-9029
DOI: https://doi.org/10.22633/rpge.v25iesp.2.15266                                                                          804

                  District school officials of the Kazan Province in the school management system in the first half of the 19th century




KALININA, E. A. The system of public education in the European North of Russia during the
first half of the XIX-th century. Moscow: New Chronograph, 2017.

KOZYREV, A. V. Upbringing and Education in Russia during the First Half of the 19th
Century. Stavropol, 1948.

MCCLELLAND, J. C. Autocrats and academics: education, culture, and society in tsarist
russia. Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 1979.

PINTNER, W. M. The social characteristics of early nineteenth century russian bureaucracy.
Slavic Review, v. 29, n. 3, p. 429-443, 1970.

RUSSIA. Collection of decrees on the Ministry of Public Education. Moscow: SPb, 1864.
v. 1.

RUSSIA. Complete collection of laws of the Russian Empire. Moscow: SPb, 1830. v. 27.

SHAMSUTDINOVA, R. G. et al. The state and development trends of social science
education in Russia (the nineties of the 20th century and the beginning of the 21st century).
Opcion, v. 35. N. esp. 22, p. 1026-1038, 2019.

SOKOL, M. et al. Tolerance in the communicative culture of modern educational manager.
Propósitos y Representaciones, v. 9, n. esp. 3, e1171, 2021.

STATE Archives of the Republic of Tatarstan, f. 160, fa. 1, c. 261, sh. 183.

STATE Archives of the Republic of Tatarstan, f. 92, fi. 1, c. 11, sh. 82.

WIRTSCHAFTER, E. K. Structures of society: imperial russia’s people of various ranks.
Dekalb: Northern Illinois University Press, 1994.




How to reference this article

IBNEУEVA, G. V.; SHAKIROVA, A. I. District school officials of the Kazan Province in the
school management system in the first half of the 19th century. Revista on line de Política e
Gestão Educacional, Araraquara, v. 25, n. esp. 2, p. 797-805, May 2021. e-ISSN:1519-9029.
DOI: https://doi.org/10.22633/rpge.v25iesp.2.15266


Submitted: 20/01/2021
Required revisions: 18/03/2021
Approved: 25/04/2021
Published: 01/05/2021




RPGE– Revista on line de Política e Gestão Educacional, Araraquara, v. 25, n. esp. 2, p. 797-805, May 2021.      e-ISSN: 1519-9029
DOI: https://doi.org/10.22633/rpge.v25iesp.2.15266                                                                             805