Discover Sustainability

Research

Reflections on educational leadership for sustainability: a Brazilian
case study
Daniela Cassia Sudan1             · Vânia Gomes Zuin2,3,4

Received: 24 November 2021 / Accepted: 30 December 2021


© The Author(s) 2022  OPEN


Abstract
Large-scale socio-environmental education to foster a culture of sustainability and transform degrading situations is
considered a matter of worldwide urgency. Considering this, we present and discuss results from a thesis that investi-
gated the potentials and challenges of a participatory methodology, capillarity architecture, to educate sustainability
leaders used on a socio-environmental training programme for public servants from a Brazilian Higher Education Insti-
tution. Capillarity architecture, launched by the Brazilian Federal Government in 2005, is a methodological strategy that
encompasses participatory action research and collective networks of educators for training in an exponential format. The
participants in the process undergo training while developing educational practices for their university peers. The overall
study included 2500 individuals, who were assigned to one of 160 learning collectives in seven university campuses. The
research method includes a participatory-research approach, a focus group, participant observation and discursive textual
analysis of process documents. The results are discussed considering two points: (1) Impacts of capillarity architecture on
the university experience and; (2) Challenges and tensions between the commitment to leadership formation on a large
scale and the search for emancipation in EE. It can be concluded that even considering the permanent risk of impairing
quality in exponential Environmental Education training, capillarity (in its critical principles) allows for: gains in autonomy,
critical reflection, exchanging experiences and repertoires within the university, educating new leaders, in addition to the
concomitant engagement of a larger audience. The results of this project also provide us with evidence that leadership
formation in sustainability is influenced by the access or not of the participants and coordinators to material conditions
(budget, infrastructure, personnel). The relevance of promoting concrete investments in environmental education and
training towards sustainability is indicated, so that large-scale training can take place in territories that have significant
social inequalities. Capillarity architecture questions the traditional format of organisational training. It provides for the
exchange of experiences among its participants, elaboration and development of courses in the socio-environmental
area in a collective way, based on problems and social relations of the local territory. These are fundamental aspects
when we think about leadership formation on a large scale in broad policies, which involve different cultures and diverse
socioeconomic conditions worldwide.

Keywords Emancipation · Capillarity · Sustainability · Critical environmental education · Leadership formation




* Daniela Cassia Sudan, danisudan@usp.br, http://lattes.cnpq.br/3863004014765353; Vânia Gomes Zuin, vaniaz@ufscar.br;
vania.zuin@york.ac.uk; vania.zuin@leuphana.de, http://lattes.cnpq.br/5265150425993880 | 1Department of Education, Communication
and Information, University of São Paulo (USP), Ribeirão Preto, SP, Brazil. 2Chemistry Department, Federal University of São Carlos (UFSCar),
São Carlos, SP, Brazil. 3University of York, York, England. 4Leuphana University, Lüneburg, Germany.


        Discover Sustainability       (2022) 3:4         | https://doi.org/10.1007/s43621-022-00072-z


                                                                                                                                   13
                                                                                                                              Vol.:(0123456789)

Research                      Discover Sustainability         (2022) 3:4             | https://doi.org/10.1007/s43621-022-00072-z


1 Introduction

There is a general consensus, even considering so many social inequalities and plurality of views, to recognise the need
for socio-environmental education of as many people as possible to transform degrading situations in life and in the
world [23, 31, 34, 43].
    Nowadays, environmentalisation is required in all sectors of society, including universities. As public assets, they play a
central role in the development of critical thinking and in incorporating the issue of sustainability in all their educational
processes, in the initial training of students, undergraduate courses, research, extension and management [4, 5, 44].
    Numerous relevant experiences related to environmental education developed in Brazilian universities can be identi-
fied [40, 41], highlighting the collective experiences of educating local socio-environmental sustainability agents [32],
from the ACES Network, to promote university environmentalisation among 11 partner institutions, including some from
Iberoamerica [41] and the University Network of Environmental Education Programs/RUPEA [14].
    Various institutional initiatives in Environmental Education (EE) are recognized in Brazil [43], but warn of their specific
and sporadic characteristics, limiting their impact on the community and changing university management, research,
extension and teaching. Another study [9] also present an overview of environmentalisation in Brazilian universities,
agreeing that initiatives are, in general, specific, and do not have a regulated and policy-oriented institutional articulation.
    Thus, there is still no institutionalisation of the environmental issue in different organisations “considering the profound
political transformations demanded by environmentalism”. On the contrary, there is “fragility of the broader, cultural,
societal and structural discussion on the topic” ([14], p. 264) and prevalence of disseminating norms and campaigns that
hold individuals accountable and blame them and their choices concerning environmental degradation. This resistance
by universities to move forward with the environmental agenda within “their own home” is also related, in the author’s
view, to material and technological progress, to human domination and utilitarianism over nature. Moreover, the envi-
ronmental issue, which requires another relationship with nature and rethinking the production system, “goes against
the tide” [14].
    According to two other surveys [4, 5], few Brazilian Higher Education Institutions (HEIs) present environmental policies
and sectors responsible for the environmental area. The authors conclude that projects related to environmentalisation of
campus management are still more common than structural changes in courses; curriculum transformations or teachers´
pedagogical practices. They also identify a multiplicity of factors and reasons that prevent or hinder the development of
sustainability culture in HEIs. Among them are the following: individual and collective resistance to sustainable actions,
lack of interdisciplinarity between courses, non-integrated data systems that make it difficult to obtain information con-
cerning teaching, research and extension developed in university faculties. According to the authors, the very existence
of pluralism and diversity of understanding about sustainability between the different segments also interferes with
implementing sustainability in HEIs,
    In international studies [10], it is clear that after decades of EE in universities, actions are still restricted to volunteering,
without concretely including the theme in the institutions’ decision-making, challenging change in HEIs’ organisational
culture. Hence, showing the importance of training personnel. Another published recent research [30] addresses the
influence of governance on the ways in which sustainability is perceived and practiced in a higher education context.
Moreover, based on various studies they point out the lack of adequate personnel training to deal with issues related to
sustainability, which ensures appropriation of related concepts, to include them, in fact, as part of their daily work. It was
found that employees tend not to be very knowledgeable about basic sustainability concepts and are uncertain about
their practical implementations. Furthermore, they indicate that there are still many challenges in terms of integration
between sustainability and governance in these institutions. In addition, in another related study [31], the researches
note that there is a demand of university lecturers themselves to be educated in sustainability. They point out apply-
ing concepts to real world problems as being important in Sustainable Development Education (SDE), recognising the
value of using engaged and specific learning in each local context. In addition, they require SDE in undergraduate and
postgraduate courses as learning objectives.
    Amid a certain trend of more prescriptive programs or based only on specific and voluntary actions of environmental
education in universities, the object of study of this article is a project proposed to challenge the normative and depo-
liticised perspective of education and to assume an emancipatory trajectory with its participants. It is an ambitious and
innovative project seeking democratisation of EE with the engagement/commitment of all public servants of an HEI,
through a “capillarity architecture”.




13
Vol:.(1234567890)

Discover Sustainability            (2022) 3:4              | https://doi.org/10.1007/s43621-022-00072-z                                 Research

   The term “capillarity architecture” is defined as a methodology for educating environmental educators on a perma-
nent, continuous and network basis, aimed at the totality of inhabitants of a given territory [44], based on two view-
points—PAP1,2 and simultaneous performance of networked collective learning [12, 13]. This concept has roots and
influences in progressive references and in the popular Latin American organisation.3 This perspective “breaks with the
idea of profession and training of specialists, bringing EE to the field of citizen praxis to be exercised by all people on a
daily basis”, in the search “for another form of production and consumption, of organisation and relationship in human
societies, different from the hegemonic capitalist order in modernity” ([44], p. 30).
   According to these authors [44], in critical EE, capillarity architecture can fulfil two roles in HEIs.
    that of educating the institution itself, so that it incorporates environmental issues in its daily life—environmen-
    talisation of the Institution, found in its teaching, research, extension and management activities; and to contrib-
    ute to educating society environmentally—an environmental project of the country and the educational actions
    committed to it (p. 25).
    Thus, leadership formation does not make the leader the centre of attention but invites him/her to take part in the
protagonist exercise of motivating/cooperating and helping the collective of participants in transforming degrading
realities, while at the same time exercising humility and stripping themselves of vanity on a daily basis. Leaders also need
to learn how to develop, conduct and socialise strategic, participatory, incremental and articulated plans, which allow
shared construction of strategies, objectives and directions [44].
    It was by sharing the critical perspective of environmental education, under the influence of the aforementioned public
policy [36, 37] that the PAP project was developed at the university that participated in this study. Capillarity architecture
is assumed as a methodological strategy aiming to democratise EE within the institution, for all its employees.
    The project was developed considering the efforts from an environmental agency of the public institution involved
and various partners who contributed with important results together with the participants, becoming a reference for
several other universities that seek to expand environmental education in their community [5, 6, 35, 42]. It was a training
process designed to be developed during working hours, having institutional approval and support [46, 47].
    Based on data from a broader survey [45], this article addresses the contributions of the capillarity methodology to the
socio-environmental formation and strengthening of sustainability culture in an HEI. This rich experience, however, did
not take place without contradictions and resistance from the academic environment and there were challenges within
the coordination group itself, which made us reflect on the development, in a dialectical perspective and to investigate
the complexity of leadership formation regarding sustainability.
    The results are discussed from two viewpoints: (1) Capillarity architecture and its impacts on the university experience
and, (2) Challenges and tensions between the commitment to leadership formation on a large scale and the search for
emancipation in EE. Finally, it is shown how this experience enables one to offer reflective parameters for leadership
formation in different spaces, organisations and cultures. An assessment of the capillarity architecture in a concrete
experience like this can provide a valuable contribution to thinking about the preparation of leaders for sustainability
at a global level.


2 Research methods

This study contains data from qualitative research [45] using a participant research case study, in which the researcher
developed the project at university. Participant-research, despite presenting a wide range of social practices, theoretical
and methodological foundations, encompasses, in general, the objective of promoting “the production of knowledge


1
  The acronym in Portuguese is used in its original form in this article because of its resonance.
2
  The concept of PAP is characterised by Orlando Fals Borda as a methodology that involves participant-action-research, adult education,
scientific research and social or political action, based on a critical perspective of analysis, diagnosis of reality and everyday practice search-
ing for transformations [8, 17].
3
  In 2006, a public policy to educate environmental educators was introduced in Brazil, including some technical guidelines and national
articulation for the formation and performance of collective educators in capillarity, in a perspective of critical and popular training on a
large scale. The technical reference document addresses contents and principles that refer “to schools of thought such as Hermeneutics,
Critical Theory, Environmentalism and Popular Education” (p. 8). It also indicates the following as methodological strategies: psychosocial
intervention, PAP, communicative action, learning collectives, culture circles, and the learning community, among others [36]. Hence, the
spread of the term “capillarity architecture”, which is analysed in this study.


                                                                                                                                      13
                                                                                                                                 Vol.:(0123456789)

Research                        Discover Sustainability           (2022) 3:4              | https://doi.org/10.1007/s43621-022-00072-z


Table 1  Data collection          Technique                           Ways to register                                     Quantity
techniques for research
Source: elaborated by the         Meetings in the project’s coordi-   Memories of meetings                                 Eighteen memo-
authors with data from Sudan       nation group                                                                              ries
[45]                                                                                                                       Seven transcripts
                                                                                                                             of recordings
                                  Focus groups                        Recording transcription                              Two
                                  Participant observation             Notes from researcher from 2013 to 2015              Notes in word file
                                  Document analysis                   Data from articles/abstracts published by the        Romero et al. [42]
                                                                       coordinating group                                  Sudan et al. [46]
                                                                      Reports authorized for access by the researcher,     Meira et al. [35]
                                                                       with disclosure restrictions                        Bonzanini et al. [6]
                                                                                                                           Project ­reportsa
                                  a
                                   Internal Project report (2016); We do not mention it in detail in the references so as to preserve the ano-
                                  nymity of the institution participating in the research


of both the researched subjects and the researcher, searching for transformations of a given reality” ([7], p. 5) This type
of research requires delving into the intersubjectivity of the collective dialectic, by prioritizing the historicity of the phe-
nomena, praxes, contradictions and the subject’s action on their realities [8, 15, 17].
   The research data4 [45] were collected or produced in face-to-face meetings in the project’s coordination group, in
planning and evaluation meetings, in focus groups and their resulting documents (recording transcription or memories
of meetings), as well as notes from participant observation by the researcher from 2013 to 2015 (Table 1).
   A focus group is a collective interview technique [21] which was chosen with the purpose of enhancing dialogical
and reflective moments for the participants and for the researcher in understanding the meanings attributed by the
coordination group to the main issues of the PAP project, including capillarity architecture.
   Based on the discursive textual analysis [38], we carried out the interpretation of the data based on Critical Theory
concepts. Several excerpts from the documents of the corpus were presented, with manifest and other latent aspects
on the theme of capillarity regarding public servant training. The validation of the comprehensions reached was sought
in the relationship between theory and practice, in the “acceptance of a reality understood as dialectic, in a permanent
movement of overcoming” [38].
   Many authors [3, 8, 22, 24, 26, 48] assert that research is a political action in Critical Theory as research actions are
closely related to the researcher’s values, requiring a dialogical and transformative method, facilitating the transformation
of reality. This type of research must also carry out a permanent self-criticism, reviewing its foundations, assumptions,
praxis and concepts searching for emancipation in society [48]. Likewise, for Critical Theory “contradictions are constitu-
tive parts not only of the subject who thinks reality, but also of the objects that compose it” ([11], p. 135).


3 Research results and discussion

3.1 Capillarity architecture and its impact on the university experience

Capillarity architecture gains life and functionality in an institution considering the formation and performance of learn-
ing collectives in four consecutive phases, from PAP1 to PAP4. The PAP1 collective coordinates the process and in the
formation and direct supervision of seven PAP2 collectives, which comprise groups of experienced public servants in




4
   All data collection actions, as well as the general project for this research, were approved by the UFSCar Ethics Committee, associated with
its registration on Plataforma Brasil, of the National Research Ethics system/SISNEP.


13
Vol:.(1234567890)

Discover Sustainability      (2022) 3:4           | https://doi.org/10.1007/s43621-022-00072-z                     Research

seven social campuses. PAP2 collectives develop and coordinate 31 face-to-face courses in their work units for the PAP3
collectives, which in turn, are committed to developing educational actions involving other PAP4 employees [35, 42]
(Internal Project Report, 2016).
   The training took place as face-to-face and meetings and was aimed at the PAP 2, 3 and 4 collectives. Practices were
monitored on the campuses. The general training program for the PAP2 collective had three dimensions; the first was a
conceptual repertoire (with a set of contents on sustainability, education and environmental management, to be further
developed); a situational repertoire (including orientation for carrying out participatory socioenvironmental diagnoses
in the workplace, identifying specific problems and needs of each territory) and the promotion of a socioenvironmental
educative action with other public servants on the campus (Internal Project Report, 2016).
   The support materials were made available on a virtual academic platform, comprising scientific articles, books, forms
and guides used in face-to-face classes. As support to the planning of educative actions and continued reflection on
educational activities, tutorials were given to the PAP collectives. This took place from the PAP1 (or other invited teach-
ers) to the PAP2 collectives and from the PAP2 to PAP3 collectives, concomitant with the planning and carrying out of
educational activities. It is noteworthy that each PAP2 collective had the autonomy to develop a 20-h classroom course
for the PAP3 collective (plus 20 h of monitored practices) based on the issues raised in the socio-environmental diagnoses
made at their campus of origin. Likewise, the PAP3 collective was able to choose the themes that would be addressed
with the PAP4 collective [35, 42].
   The PAP Project had institutional funding and support in various different aspects, which were fundamental for the
costs incurred by intercampus meetings and external speakers; acquiring basic equipment (computers, cameras, tablets,
etc.) on some campuses; hiring professionals, granting scholarships and offering internships for the support team; the
articulation of partners and managers; institutional certification and promoting intervention projects during working
hours ([35]; Internal Project Report, 2016).
   Among the results of the project at the HEI, the coordination group highlighted the promotion of 31 face-to face
courses (40 h) on socioenvironment, promoted by the 92 PAP2. Moreover, 533 PAP3 participated in these courses. The
PAP3 collective’s Education and Environmental Management actions totalled 127 interventions, in which 1853 PAP4
participated in the seven campuses. The total number of participants was around 2500 people in the period from 2013
to October 2015 (Internal Project Report, 2016). A website was created and a book about the project was also published
by the PAP collectives. The following qualitative results that emerged from this study can be indicated: recognition by
the university community of the importance of continuing this training; strengthening the autonomy of the PAP2 col-
lective, both in planning and in the collective development of an educative action. It also notes that some public serv-
ants, in contact with other campuses and areas, have broadened their views on the university’s organisational structure
and its internal dynamics. Among the contents learned by PAP 2, 3 and 4 collectives are those related to environmental
management, Education, society, culture, Psychology and social action. Many civil servants´ engaged participation in
meetings and experiential experiences of the process can also be highlighted [42].
   Other publications [5, 6, 35] and the following excerpts from the focus groups confirm these results, showing signs
of strengthening groups and links between civil servants, developing a capacity for constant assessment of their train-
ing process itself, as well as a broadening of their perception of the complexity and diversity of organisation and power
relationships of the campuses involved.
  Fisális: As one of the PAP commented, “Since I have been here, for 30 years, I have never seen people meeting in
  the laboratory”, therefore, there is nothing more integrating than the simple fact of people from each area on the
  campuses [sic] sitting in a circle talking, and which is even one of the pillars of Environmental Education. Good
  meetings enhance the empowerment of subjects [...] (Focus group transcription, May 4, 2015).
   As the specific study [29] notes, the PAP 1, 2, 3, and 4 engaged actions in each local context, are very important in
Education for sustainability because they enable specific learning considering the challenges and problems of the place.
   The PAP1 collective assessed that capillarity: “makes it possible to reach people who might not be able to access much
information”; it expanded the “perception of the surroundings and thereby created new links between public servants,
departments, units and campuses; it was “a strategy that offered various contributions” (Memory of meeting, 13 August
2015).




                                                                                                                 13
                                                                                                            Vol.:(0123456789)

Research                     Discover Sustainability        (2022) 3:4            | https://doi.org/10.1007/s43621-022-00072-z


   In a publication by the PAP1 group [6] affirm that even the specialists in sustainability and environmental educa-
tion of the project’s coordinating group—the PAP1—were able to significantly grow in the project’s development pro-
cess, expanding their experiences, their self-assessment capabilities and their own way of dealing with diversity at the
university.
   Based on the documents and publications of the project, three collaborations of capillarity architecture stood out
in terms of reflecting on training sustainability leaders, namely: (i) they provided a large number of educational inter-
ventions for sustainability, concomitantly and sequential (from PAP1 to 4), during the short period of 2 years; (ii) they
provided actions rooted throughout the institution, in its seven campuses and different sectors, for employees from
different areas of expertise and knowledge; (iii) a conduct of leadership was required from all its participants, who had
to design, mediate and develop courses for their co-workers, considering leadership and responsibility.

3.2 Challenges and tensions in the capillarity praxis in the HEI

The main challenges for training environmental educators in capillarity architecture at the HEI were:

3.2.1 Networking within a hierarchical institution

Capillarity architecture presupposes a horizontal relationship between learning collectives, and that is why from the first
meeting of the project, its viability within a hierarchical organisation, such as a Brazilian university, has been questioned.
   I didn’t know PAP and I think it is ambitious. It is a very democratic project, for a not very democratic institution. We
   have to prepare and be aware of this so as not to underestimate resistance (Inhame, transcription of the meeting
   on 28 March, 2013).
   In view of this, the organisers sought an institutional articulation, considering the “importance of the proposing organ
of the joint project with the institution’s managers, support for training their employees and allowing them leave to
participate in the process” (Memory of meeting, 28 March, 2013).
   Some excerpts show PAP1 collective´s daily dealings with the hierarchy in the institution. They illustrate the time and
commitment of the group to carry out each task, passing through different sectors, waiting for authorization.
   Moringa: […] bureaucratically, hierarchically I don’t know if we can ask the director first to inform people and then
   send it to the boss, I think it has to be the other way around, his boss has to inform people and then the director.
   Pana: Isn’t the director in charge? [or] Isn´t it the boss who gives orders and defines things?
   Umbu: Yes, but ... did you send the first letter? [No]. So, the first letter goes to the director, it is the director of the
   proposing body who will talk to the boss […] (Transcription of the meeting, 30 September, 2013).
   The hierarchy associated with bureaucracy in the HEI management requires various articulation strategies and takes
up a large chunk of the group’s time that should be dedicated to teaching and related to the PAP collectives in the pro-
cess. For example, the waiting time to hire a professional to work on the project (for 3 months, without employment)
ranged from 3 to 9 months.
   Quinoa: ... Sometimes you even have the resources, but you can’t hire anyone, so this is a problem with rules,
   bureaucracy rules. (Transcription of the focus group, May 5, 2015).
   The issue of hierarchy and bureaucracy as the core of the institution’s functioning is complex and is related to its his-
tory and political-economic relations in Brazilian society. Brazilian universities underwent a university reform during the
military dictatorship (1964–1985), adopting vigorous science and technology policies and establishing immense bureau-
cracy “restricting the freedom of both teachers and students” [39, p.15], having influenced “scientific and technological
production” [39, p.16] and the functioning of institutions since then.
   It is worth noting that the search for democratizing EE by the capillarity “arrows” was, contradictorily, faced with the
hierarchy and bureaucracy existing in the HEI, not represented in its design.
   Dialectically, the capillarity architecture hierarchy was problematised by the PAP1 collective.
   Baru: But [...] that PAP4 with PAP4 thinking about the exchange not only base-periphery-centre, but periphery-
   periphery; if it is from the inside out, it is hierarchical.



13
Vol:.(1234567890)

Discover Sustainability         (2022) 3:4             | https://doi.org/10.1007/s43621-022-00072-z                            Research

    Pupunha: You can say. Why be afraid of the word hierarchy? [...] It is nice that they [have] representations that show,
    at the same time, the complexity coming and going, but also that they do not hide the fact that there is a hierarchy,
    yes. PAP1 PAP1 is not going to give certification, PAP1 PAP1 is going to give certification (PAP1 PAP1 and PAP2 PAP2),
    right? So, like, there is a hierarchy. We are not going to deny the existence of a hierarchy, but we are making a process
    that tries to really encourage self-management, autonomy, the deconstruction of hierarchy that has no meaning.
    But, we will not deny that there is a project that is being planned by people for other people to get involved, it’s
    not being planned at the end; it is not being demanded at the end, right? It is being planned, what is written here
    (transcription of the meeting of the coordination group, 22 August, 2013).
   Unlike a hierarchical relationship of power, here Pupunha emphasises the importance of a “hierarchical” relationship
of responsibility for the process, of competence and authority in the field of EE that the coordination group needs to
have, to promote adequate planning and ensure theory and practice in the subjects under study. Freire ­[16] discusses
the tension between freedom and authority in educational practice, highlighting the most difficult position to be based
on democratic ethical principles (equality and solidarity), founded on authority by professional competence and not by
authoritarianism.
   To sum up, PAP1 collective’s differentiated responsibility in capillarity architecture seems to us to be a fundamental
indication of quality assurance in training processes, in which the necessary competence in the area of EE is not exempt,
even in a non-formal context.
   The discussions raised by international studies [29–31] also emphasize the importance of ensuring quality in sustain-
ability training in higher education, so that such concepts are in fact implemented in practical actions in the work environ-
ment. Likewise, as their studies point out, this project also sees the need for greater integration between sustainability
and governance so as to streamline the implementation of sustainable actions in the institution, without having to face
so many hierarchical barriers and bureaucratic procedures.

3.2.2 Political‑institutional issues and material structure in EE

Regarding political and institutional issues, the group had to deal with the changes of the university’s administration
that took place during the second year of the project, in the middle of the PAP2 collective´s training. The times, deadlines
and changes in the institution had been a matter of concern for the group since the beginning, as Capim Limão points
out: “It is important to have a schedule, of the activities, a schedule of disbursement of funds, right? Because then you
are making it all difficult in the next administration” (Transcription of the coordination group meeting, 22 August, 2013).
   Capillarity training implied continuity over time, more in-depth and articulated training, which requires commitment
from the institution, regardless of the change of manager.5 In addition, a financial crisis was announced at the institution,
which would interfere greatly in the following months of the project and cause a major change in its schedule. All public
universities in the state of São Paulo were affected by the change/decrease in transfers from the collection in the State’s
ICMS tax6 in the period. This context led to further budget cuts in the PAP project. Approximately 30% of the forecast
was approved. Therefore, the budget for communication, production of teaching materials and other items had to be
relocated and the number of professionals hired was reduced7 (Internal Project Report, 2016).
   The project’s dependence on the possibility of temporary hiring presents and confirms the demand for more profes-
sionals in the area of EE. It also illustrates the precariousness in the work of the environmental educator, who lives (in
general) off temporary contracts in Brazil [27].
   Moreover, in the context of this crisis, the Voluntary Exit Incentive Program (PIDV in Portuguese) resulted in 2760
technical and administrative employees (more than 15% of the staff )8 self-selecting themselves for termination. This
occurred simultaneously with course registrations being made available for PAP3. There was general discouragement
among the civil servants as the work environment scenario was reconfigured and as colleagues were leaving, many of
their routines would change significantly in their sectors.
   In the day-to-day development of the project, the problems related to the socio-political and economic conditions of
Brazilian education appear, thus identifying various material issues, such as: the precariousness of temporary hiring; the

5
  It should be noted that, in this case, the new manager of the proposing environmental agency continued the project.
6
  Tax on the circulation of goods and provision of services.
7
  In total, six extension scholarships (10 h of performance per week), six interns (20 h of performance per week) and five educators were
hired (20 h of performance per week) for the project.
8
  Electronic message from the university administration on 25/08/2020.


                                                                                                                             13
                                                                                                                        Vol.:(0123456789)

Research                         Discover Sustainability         (2022) 3:4               | https://doi.org/10.1007/s43621-022-00072-z


Table 2  PAP training workload and activities
PAR workload              PAR1                  PAP2                 PAP3                                        PAP4

Face-to-face activities   120 h              64 h                    20 h                                        2–8 h
                          planning and       Integrated training     Participation in the course given by PAP2   Participation in educational
                            evaluation meet- meetings from all                                                     activities provided by
                            ings               campuses                                                            PAP3
Practices monitored at    Not estimated      66 h                    Educational action planning (12 h) and      –
  the workplace                              Planning and train-      application with PAP4 (8 h)
                                               ing meetings at
                                               the campus of
                                               origin
                                             Applying the edu-
                                               cational action
                                               to the PAP3 collec-
                                               tive
Total                     Around 180 h       130 h                   40 h                                        From 2 to 8 h

Source: Sudan 2017



civil servant strike in São Paulo State and the voluntary dismissal plan that occurred in the period. This scenario generated
a climate of insecurity for the coordination group regarding the conditions for continuity of the project so as to address
this issue constantly in the group’s planning meetings.
    The institution’s budget crisis is linked to state, national and global political issues and consequences of the capital-
ist system are revealed in the institutional daily life. Hence, the importance of unveiling the appearances of reality and
considering these elements as having an impact on any training process in order not to evaluate the “successes and
failures” only as the responsibility and (in)competence of those involved [1, 33].
    The specific context of this project and its material conditions modified during the development of its actions give us
clues about the relevance of considering the unequal conditions in which training projects for sustainability occur at a
global level and that differentiated investments, according to these needs, need to be provided to break basic obstacles
for leaders to access socioenvironmental training and to be able to act with ease in their territories [18–20].


3.2.3 Differentiated workload

According to Table 2, the distribution of the workload in this project decreased in the capillarity wheel—in the centre-
periphery direction of its design. It was higher among the PAP1 collective and lower in the PAP4 collective. The decrease
in workload also reflects the reduction of content worked in the activities. The PAP1 collective emphasises this aspect
when they assess that “capillarity brings the challenge of guaranteeing the training of people who go into the final stages”
(in this case, the PAP4 collective) (Memory of meeting, 13 August, 2015).
   According to the PAP1 collective, the educational actions of the PAP3 collective together with the PAP4 were “more
laborious and demanded more from the PAP1 and PAP2 collectives and the support teams involved”; PAP3 “had problems
executing and transmitting [knowledge] to PAP4 due to the limited amount of techniques and knowledge gained”; they
thought it was “difficult to find available time to prepare interventions”; struggling to “mobilise people to participate”.
“We can identify several very interesting, relevant, innovative interventions” … It is also possible to observe some poor,
innovative, precarious interventions … The majority of which can be classified between these two extremes “(Memory
of meeting, 13 August, 2015).
   Even with a reduced workload, however, we highlight two characteristics in the PAP4 collective’s training, provided
by the capillarity methodology. The first is that some people from the PAP4 collective were able to develop theoreti-
cal and practical analyses in their courses and workshops (technical visits to environmental management initiatives;
practical workshops for composting organic waste, reusing water from air conditioners; pesticide packaging recycling,
etc.), mainly in activities that included debates between invited experts (on “sustainable mobility”, including lectures by
architect engineers from the campus and researchers in the area and “scarcity of water and actions for the quality of life”,
and talks given by lecturers from the Nursing Faculty, among others). The second positive characteristic of capillarity is



13
Vol:.(1234567890)

Discover Sustainability           (2022) 3:4               | https://doi.org/10.1007/s43621-022-00072-z                                Research

Table 3  Comparison between        Goals                                                                    Initial planning Final results
the initial goals of training
HEI employees and the result       Number of university campuses (from the same institution) involved 7                        7 (100% concern-
achieved at the end of the                                                                                                       ing the initial
project                                                                                                                          goall)
                                   Project coordinator group size—PAP1 (lecturers, higher education         40                 15 (37.5%)
                                     technicians and support staff )
                                   Number of PAP2                                                           128                92 (~ 72%)
                                   Number o PAP3                                                            4,495              533 (~ 12%)
                                   Number of PAP4                                                           12,970             1853 (~ 14%)
                                   Total number of public servants involved in the project                  16,509             2500 (~ 15%)

                                   Data organised based on the Internal Project report (2016)


that it provides a progressive approach to new people in the area, including those who are learning about sustainability
for the first time [45].
   Faced with these issues then, the challenge still remains in this methodology of: expanding the training of those
who had a lower workload—PAP3 and PAP4. This aspect that can be overcome (in part) in the continuity of education
in forthcoming years, with the change of capillary level from some PAP4 to PAP3, in a procedural mobility of the PARs
in a centripetal sense.
   And more than the workload involved in each PAP group, it is up to the organisers to commit to the depth of the meet-
ings held. From the point of view of Critical Theory, capillarity training will be emancipatory as long as it incorporates a
permanent individual and collective self-critical movement of its participants. This reflective action involves “dialogical
fecundity, hermeneutics of horizontality; accept dissent and lead to its problematisation”, “with decisions increased and
supported by clarification” ([49], p. 162).

3.2.4 Large‑scale training

In order to reach 16,509 public servants, it would be necessary to engage 128 PAP2, 4495 PAP3 and 12,970 PAP4 collec-
tives, in addition to the PAP1 group formed by 40 people (teachers, higher education technicians and support staff ).
The coordination group did not give up on this goal (Table 3), although it always worked by adjusting the schedule and
tasks in view of the material conditions they had at the time.
   Among the results of the project at the HEI, the coordination group highlights the promotion of 31 face-to face
courses (40 h) on socioenvironment, promoted by the 92 PAP2. Moreover, 533 PAP3 participated in these courses. The
PAP3 collective´s Education and Environmental Management actions totalled 127 interventions, in which 1853 PAP4
participated in the seven campuses. The total number of participants was around 2500 people in the period from 2013
to October 2015 (Internal Project Report, 2016).9
   Some notes and memories of meetings reveal an issue about the size of the public, in addition to pointing out the
“need to reduce the workload of PAP2 and extend the duration of the project from 2 to 4 years” (Subgroup meeting
memory process design/theoretical analysis, May 2013).
    Aguapé: Guys, I just have one question: should we continue with this goal of 16 thousand? Because we feel a sense
    of failure ... because it was really cool, there were 600 people, 700 to register,10 that’s a lot, but at the same time we
    were a bit frustrated because we didn’t reach the three thousand [PAP3 ] expected, so, I don’t know, if we should
    decrease our goal, so that we can achieve it.
    Capillarity architecture raises several challenges and tensions if the coordination team is not proportionally large to
its demands for tutoring, institutional articulations, administration, secretariat and pedagogical actions.
    The comparison between the goals initially planned and the results achieved reveals a great mismatch in relation to
the number of PAP3 and 4, followed by PAP1 (coordinating group). The PAP2 group participating in the project was the
closest to what was planned. In order to understand these differences, it seems essential to consider the several limiting

9
   Internal Project report (2016); We do not mention it in detail in the references so as to preserve the anonymity of the institution participat-
ing in the research.
10
    From PAP 3.


                                                                                                                                     13
                                                                                                                                Vol.:(0123456789)

Research                     Discover Sustainability         (2022) 3:4            | https://doi.org/10.1007/s43621-022-00072-z


factors of the project, discussed in the previous categories, such as the lack of certain material conditions and insuf-
ficient size of the project’s coordinating team; institutional bureaucracy and political issues (which required more time
to proceed with each step of the project). In addition, the difference in components in the PAP1 group can be explained
by the fact that the work in this project is characterised as “university extension”, still little valued and without status in
the curriculum of Brazilian teachers (who also already have many other demands for teaching and research). As a result,
many who were invited to the coordinating team declined to join [45]. Concerning PAP2, it seems that the fact that the
greater dedication and time spent by PAP1 to the process occurred in the first phase of capillarity work (in institutional
articulation, dissemination, mobilisation and training of PAP2) has interfered in this result. It was necessary to obtain
enough subscribers and develop actions in the training process, with a greater workload. In general, PAP2 was given
greater independence in the dissemination and development of the following phases (to mobilise the participation of
PAP3 and after PAP4), whereby the PAP1 group was dedicated to tutoring the groups. The diversity in the preparation,
leadership and work autonomy of each PAP2, 3 and 4 group may have influenced the number of participants in the
whole project. In any case, this difference between the initial goal and the achieved one expresses an initial ambition
that is disproportionate to the possibilities of the participating groups (who were quite engaged), requiring future plans
to be revised.
    The results obtained in other survey [31] suggest that sustainability policies, certification, organisational structure,
budget, reports, the sustainability team, staff training, as well as resources to support their implementation are key
components in the consolidation of sustainability in HEIs. Having teams responsible for this topic at the university, with
qualified professionals in the area, is a key point for promoting sustainability. The lack of this support can become a
barrier, just as the lack of support from superiors also compromises the commitment of the rest of the administration.
    At the same time, capillarity architecture can move towards an understanding and mass use of methodology in sus-
tainability training, as Cambuci emphasises: it is “exponential training… you train ten, then each of these ten trains ten”
(transcript from the focus group, 8 April, 2015).
    The critical Theory [3] warns us about the risk of the emancipation proposal moving towards that of the numerical
conquest of the general public, in the eagerness to promote a far-reaching project. Thus, the current use of the term “a
multiplier system approach in teacher training” should be cautious, due to the possible qualitative loss of the process
and the impoverishment of experience when the focus of the work becomes “multiplication of leaders”. Hence the need
for this methodology to be carefully mediated with self-critical reflections, with procedural planning and assessments,
commitment to participatory socio-environmental diagnosis in the territories of action, articulation of practices with
theoretical analysis. Ensuring exercises of critical self-reflection [25, 28, 33], within the educating collectives is an antithesis
of instrumental training propagated throughout society.
    Reference researches in the diffusion of this methodology in Brazil ([13], p. 347) point out that, regardless of their
numerical perspective, capillarity must guarantee the “opening of networked collectives as an ethical condition, imply-
ing the opening to new content and new members, with its consequent sustainability in the territory and expansion
autonomy”. It must also commit to “the establishment of public communicative spaces that allow for the disalienation
and imaginary institution of sustainable societies”.
    The emancipatory potential of capillarity architecture is when planners and subjects (not objects) of planning are
articulated, in an ethical-democratic process that transforms “any member of the collective into a planner and, therefore,
into a co-governor who represents him/herself in the collectives” ([49], p. 162). Furthermore, social emancipation pre-
supposes an immanent self-reflective social criticism and the socialization of objective conditions favourable to human
development. Therefore, education for emancipation is, above all, a political education, an education for contradiction
and resistance [2]. This is our permanent challenge when we propose to train leaders, on a large scale, for sustainability.



4 Considerations for educational leadership for sustainable development

The present experience of training environmental educators within the scope of the Brazilian HEI in this study enables
us to point out some reflective parameters for the formation of leaders in different spaces, organisations and cultures.
   Capillarity architecture has the potential for a greater rooting of EE in the different HEI segments, as it mobilises many
dialogical circles in the respective PAP1, 2, 3 and 4 collectives. It provides different levels of participation and theoretical-
practical analyses, even with the workload decreasing from PAP1 to PAP4. It provides more university employees with
an initial contact with the theme of sustainability. In addition, such actions end up increasing environmentalisation of


13
Vol:.(1234567890)

Discover Sustainability              (2022) 3:4                | https://doi.org/10.1007/s43621-022-00072-z                                     Research

university management and enable implementation of exemplary sustainable procedures and practices both for its own
community (students and teachers) and for the whole of society.
    Encouraging meetings and dialogue also risks reflection and critical action at university. This seems to be a nodal,
dialectical point in this methodology. What, on the one hand, can move at all times in the multiplication/repetition of
superficial actions, leading to qualitative losses on the initial proposal for socioenvironmental training, also allows for
the development of autonomies and openness to new aspects within an organisation.
    Some limitations of the capillarity architecture methodology, experienced in this case study, give clues to implement-
ing new experiences in the training leaders for sustainability, such as: (i) the increasing reduction of the training load from
PAP1 to PAP4; (ii) a very demanding performance to a reduced coordinating group, with insufficient material conditions;
(iii) difficulty in reaching the entire public of a given territory/ institution in one part of the project. Such challenges can
be overcome with continued processes in which PAP4 can become PAP3 in subsequent editions; ensuring material con-
ditions and investments to support the actions; hiring professionals who work fully in the project, with the consequent
expansion of the team; having appropriate valuation of the participation of lecturers, students and technicians with an
impact on the professional curriculum; improvement of the institutional articulation to avoid mismatches of adminis-
trative procedures in the process and with adaptation of the desired goal to the concrete possibilities of its realization.
    The results of this project also provide us with evidence that leadership formation in sustainability implies dependence
on inequalities in material conditions (budget, infrastructure, personnel). Therefore, the relevance of directing concrete
investments in environmental education and training towards sustainability is indicated, so that large-scale training
takes place in territories that have significant social inequalities.
    Nevertheless, capillarity architecture questions the traditional format of organisational training. It provides the
exchange of experiences among its participants, elaboration and development of courses in the socio-environmental
area in a collective way, based on problems and social relations of the local territory. These are fundamental aspects
when we think about leadership formation on a large scale, in broad policies, which involve different cultures and diverse
socioeconomic conditions worldwide.
    As emancipation, in contrast to an idealised dream, is a dialectical process with concrete possibilities to be realised, it
encourages one to know that, despite numerous obstacles, it is risky to happen in these intricacies and causes concrete
transformations towards socio-environmental sustainability.

Acknowledgements Federal University of São Carlos-SP/Brazil, CNPq—National Council for Scientific and Technological Development—(CNPq)
(N. 311000/2014-2, 421096/2016-0 y 310149/2017-7) and CAPES (Coordination for the Improvement of Higher Education Personnel).

Authors’ contributions DCS and VGZ wrote the main manuscript text and reviewed the manuscript. Both authors read and approved the final
manuscript.

Data availability Data supporting the conclusions of this study are available in Federal University of São Carlos-SP/Brazil, but restrictions
apply to the availability of these data, which were used under license for the current study and therefore are not publicly available. Data are,
however, available from the authors upon reasonable request and with the permission of the participating research subjects.

Declarations

Competing interests The authors declare no competing interests.


Open Access This article is licensed under a Creative Commons Attribution 4.0 International License, which permits use, sharing, adapta-
tion, distribution and reproduction in any medium or format, as long as you give appropriate credit to the original author(s) and the source,
provide a link to the Creative Commons licence, and indicate if changes were made. The images or other third party material in this article
are included in the article’s Creative Commons licence, unless indicated otherwise in a credit line to the material. If material is not included in
the article’s Creative Commons licence and your intended use is not permitted by statutory regulation or exceeds the permitted use, you will
need to obtain permission directly from the copyright holder. To view a copy of this licence, visit http://c​ reati​ vecom
                                                                                                                         ​ mons.o
                                                                                                                                ​ rg/l​ icens​ es/b
                                                                                                                                                  ​ y/4.0
                                                                                                                                                        ​ /.




References
 1. Adorno TW, Horkheimer M. A indústria cultural: o esclarecimento como mistificação das massas. In: Adorno TW, Horkheimer M. Dialética
    do esclarecimento: fragmentos filosóficos. 2. ed. Almeida GA, translator. Rio de Janeiro: Jorge Zahar; 1985. pp. 113–156.
 2. Adorno TW. Educação e emancipação. 3. ed. Maar WL, translater. Rio de Janeiro: Paz e Terra; 1995.




                                                                                                                                               13
                                                                                                                                         Vol.:(0123456789)

Research                         Discover Sustainability             (2022) 3:4               | https://doi.org/10.1007/s43621-022-00072-z


 3. Adorno TW. Teoria da Semiformação. In: Pucci B, Zuin AS, Lastória LACB, editors. Teoria e inconformismo: novas perspectivas e pesquisa.
    Campinas: Autores Associados; 2010. p. 7–40.
 4. Bacci DC, Silva FRL. A cultura da sustentabilidade nas instituições de ensino superior. In: Grandisoli E, Souza DTP, Jacobi PR, Monteiro RAA,
    eds. Educar para a sustentabilidade: visões de presente e futuros [E-book on the internet]. São Paulo: Editora Na Raiz; 2020. A cultura da
    sustentabilidade nas instituições de ensino superior. [2021, jan., 07]. https://​doi.​org/​10.​11606/​97865​88109​021.
 5. Bacci DLC, Silva RLF, Sorrentino M. Educação ambiental e universidade: diagnóstico disciplinar para a construção de uma política ambi-
    ental. In: Encontro Pesquisa Em Educação Ambiental. 8. Ed. [cited 2021 jan. 12]. 2015; Rio de Janeiro: UFRJ, U.; UNIRIO; http://​epea.​tmp.​
    br/​epea2​015_​anais/​plena​ry/.
 6. Bonzanini TK, Moreira PG, Silva RLF. Evaluation of a participatory-action-research process in a socio-environmental education project
    of a public higher education institution (HEI) in the State of São Paulo, Brazil. In: 3rd World Symposium On Sustainable Development At
    Universities; 2016; Cambridge, USA.
 7. Brandão CR. A pesquisa participante e a participação da pesquisa: um olhar entre tempos e espaços a partir da América Latina. In:
    Brandão CR, Streck DR, editors. Pesquisa participante: a partilha do saber. Aparecida: Ideias & Letras; 2006. p. 21–54.
 8. Brandão CR. Participar-pesquisar. In: Brandão CR, editor. Repensando a pesquisa participante. 3rd ed. São Paulo: Brasiliense; 1987.
    p. 7–14.
 9. Brandli LL, Leal Filho W, Frandoloso MAL, Korf EP, Daris D. The environmental sustainability of Brazilian universities: barriers and pre-
    conditions. In: Leal Filho W, Azeiteiro UM, Caeiro S, Alves F, editors. Integrating sustainability thinking in science and engineering curricula.
    Switzerland: Springer International Publishing; 2015. p. 63–74.
10. Disterheft A, Azeiteiro UM, Leal Filho W, Caeiro S. Participatory processes in sustainable universities—what to assess? Int J Sustain High
    Educ. 2015;16(5):748–71.
11. Faria JH, Meneghetti FK. Dialética negativa e a tradição epistemológica nos estudos organizacionais. Organ Soc. 2011;18(56):119–37.
12. Ferraro Junior LA, Sorrentino M. Coletivos Educadores. ln: Ferraro Junior LA. Encontros e caminhos: Formação de educadoras (es) ambi-
    entais e coletivos educadores. Brasília: MMA/DEA; 2005. pp. 57–69.
13. Ferraro Junior LA, Sorrentino M. Political imaginary and coloniality: challenges to qualitative evaluation of public policies for environmental
    education. Ciência Educ. 2011;17(2):339–52.
14. Ferraro Junior LA. Incorporação da questão ambiental na universidade vista a partir de dentro da gestão ambiental do Estado. In: Sorren-
    tino M, Biasoli AS, editors. Ambientalização nas instituições de Educação Superior no Brasil: caminhos trilhados, desafios e possibilidades.
    São Carlos: EESC/USP; 2014. p. 262–79.
15. Franco MAS. Pedagogia da pesquisa-ação. Educ Pesqui. 2005;31(3):483–502.
16. Freire P. Pedagogia da autonomia: saberes necessários para a prática educativa. Rio de Janeiro: Paz e Terra; 1998.
17. Marcela G. Pesquisa participante: Propostas e projetos. In: Brandão CR, editor. Repensando a pesquisa participante. 3rd ed. São Paulo:
    Brasiliense; 1987. p. 15–50.
18. Goergen P. A Universidade e a dialética do esclarecimento. In: Pucci B, Zuin AS, Lastória LACB, editors. Teoria e inconformismo: novas
    perspectivas e pesquisa. Campinas: Autores Associados; 2010. p. 217–44.
19. Gonzales-Gaudiano EJ. Otra lectura a la historia de la educación ambiental en América Latina y el Caribe. Desenvolvimento e Meio
    Ambiente. 2011; p. 141–158.
20. Gonzales-Gaudiano EJ. Power, politics, and policy: “Tragic optimism” from Latin America. J Environ Educ. 2016;47(2):118–27.
21. Gondim SMG. Grupos focais como técnica de investigação qualitativa: desafios metodológicos. Paidéia. 2003;12(24):149–61.
22. Gramsci A. Scritti politici: Crônicas do L’Ordine Nouvo. Gomes JM, translator. Roma: Editori Riuniti; 1973.
23. Grun M. Ética e educação ambiental: a conexão necessária. 11th ed. Campinas: Papirus; 1996.
24. Gruschka A. Frieza burguesa e educação: a frieza como mal-estar moral da cultura burguesa na educação. Campinas: Autores Associados;
    2014. p. 27–71.
25. Horkheimer M, Adorno TW. Temas básicos da sociologia. São Paulo: Cultrix; 1973.
26. Horkheimer M. Teoria Tradicional e Teoria Crítica. In: Horkheimer M, Adorno TW, editors. Textos escolhidos. São Paulo: Abril Cultura; 1983.
    p. 31–68.
27. Layrargues PP. Muito além da natureza: Educação Ambiental e reprodução social. In: Loureiro CFB, Layrargues PP, Castro RC, editors.
    Pensamento complexo, dialética e educação ambiental. Cortez: São Paulo; 2006. p. 72–103.
28. Layrargues PP, Lima GFC. Mapeando as macrotendências políticos-pedagógicas da educação ambiental contemporânea no Brasil. In:
    Anais do ENCONTRO “PESQUISA EM EDUCAÇÃO AMBIENTAL”, 7 edn.; 2011 sept; Ribeirão Preto, São Paulo. Universidade de São Paulo.
29. Leal Filho W, Levesque V, Salvia AL, et al. University teaching staff and sustainable development: an assessment of competences. Sustain
    Sci. 2021. https://​doi.​org/​10.​1007/​s11625-​020-​00868-w.
30. Leal Filho W, Salvia AL, Frankenberger F, et al. Governance and sustainable development at higher education institutions. Environ Dev
    Sustain. 2020. https://​doi.​org/​10.​1007/​s10668-​020-​00859-y.
31. Leal Filho W, Wolf F, Lange Salvia A. et al. Heading towards an unsustainable world: some of the implications of not achieving the
    SDGs. Disco Sustain. 2020;1(1). https://​doi.​org/​10.​1007/​s43621-​020-​00002-x.
32. Leme PCS. Formação e atuação de educadores ambientais: Análise de um processo educativo na universidade [dissertation]. São Carlos:
    Centro de Educação e Ciências Humanas, Universidade Federal de São Carlos; 2008. p. 309.
33. Loureiro CFB, Trein E, Torzoni-Reis MFC, Novicki V. Contribuições da teoria marxista para a educação ambiental crítica. Cad CEDES.
    2009;29(77):81–97.
34. Luz WC, Tonso S. Construção de indicadores e parâmetros de educação ambiental crítica. In: Anais do ENCONTRO “PESQUISA EM EDU-
    CAÇÃO AMBIENTAL”, 8 edn. 2015; Rio de Janeiro; EPEA.
35. Meira AM. et al. Formação Socioambiental em capilaridade de servidores da USP. In: Anais da Conferência Internacional de Educação
    Ambiental e Sustentabilidade. 2014; Bertioga, São Paulo; SESC. p. 457–68.
36. Ministério do Meio Ambiente (BR), Ministério da Educação (BR). Programa Nacional de Formação de Educadoras (es) Ambientais (Profea)
    Por um Brasil educado e educando ambientalmente para a sustentabilidade. Série Documentos Técnicos. 8. edn. Brasília: Órgão Gestor



13
Vol:.(1234567890)

Discover Sustainability             (2022) 3:4                | https://doi.org/10.1007/s43621-022-00072-z                                 Research

      da Política Nacional de Educação Ambiental; 2006. [cited 2021 dec 20]. Available from: http://​www.​mma.​gov.​br/​estru​turas/​educa​mb/_​
      arqui​vos/​dt_​08.​pdf.
37.   Ministério do Meio Ambiente (BR), Ministério da Educação (BR). Documentos de referência para o fortalecimento da política e do Pro-
      grama Nacional de Educação Ambiental (Pronea). 4. Edn. Brasília: Ministério do Meio Ambiente Secretaria de Articulação Institucional e
      Cidadania Ambiental/Departamento de Educação Ambiental; 2014.
38.   Moraes R. Uma tempestade de luz: a compreensão possibilitada pela análise textual discursiva. Ciência Educ. 2003;9(2):191–211.
39.   Motoyama S, et al. História da Universidade de São Paulo: Apontamentos historiográficos. Rev Cult Ext USP. 2011;5(9):9–17.
40.   Oliveira HT, Farias CRO, Pavesi A, Cinquetti HCS. Mapeamento da Educação Ambiental em instituições brasileiras de Educação Superior:
      elementos para discussão sobre políticas públicas. Série Documentos Técnicos. 12 edn. Brasília: MEC/MMA/RUPEA; 2007.
41.   Oliveira HT, Freitas D. Ambientalização nos cursos de licenciatura por meio da inclusão curricular de uma disciplina: o caso da UFSCar
      (Brasil). In: Geli AM, Pavesi A, Farias CR, Oliveira HT, editors. Ambientalização da educação superior como aprendizagem institucional.
      São Carlos: Universidade Federal de São Carlos; 2006.
42.   Romero MA, Sudan DC, Meira AM, Brando FR, Sorrentino M. Contributions to Sustainability Construction at The University of São Paulo,
      Brazil. In: Leal Filho W, et al. editor. Handbook of Theory and Practice of Sustainable Development in Higher Education. Cham: Springer;
      2016. vol. 2. pp. 369–86.
43.   Sorrentino M, Biasoli S. A Educação Ambiental contribuindo para a construção de sociedades sustentáveis. In: Ruscheinsky A. et al.
      organizators. Ambientalização nas instituições de educação superior no Brasil: caminhos trilhados, desafios e possibilidades. São Carlos:
      EESC/USP; 2014. pp. 39–46.
44.   Sorrentino M, Nascimento EP. Universidade e Políticas Públicas de Educação Ambiental. Educ Foco. 2010;14(2):15–38.
45.   Sudan DC. Educação Ambiental e Teoria Crítica: a Dialética da Emancipação na Formação Socioambiental de servidores de uma univer-
      sidade pública do estado de São Paulo [doctorate thesis]. São Carlos: Universidade Federal de São Carlos; 2017. p. 265.
46.   Sudan DC, Meira AM, Sorrentino M, Fernandez FRB, Silva RLF, Martirani LA, et al. Environmental education for staff at the University of
      São Paulo, Brazil: capillarity and critical environmental education put into action. In: Leal Filho W, Azeiteiro UM, Caeiro S, Alves F, editors.,
      et al., World sustainability series. Switzerland: Springer International Publishing; 2015. p. 543–58.
47.   Sudan DC, Zuin VG. Action research from a critical perspective: analysis of an environmental education program for employees at a Bra-
      zilian public university. In: Brandli L, Kuznetsova O, Paço AMF, editors. Integrative approaches to sustainable development at university
      level. Manchester: Springer; 2015. p. 359–69.
48.   Tassara ET, Ardans HO. Educação ambiental crítica: pesquisa-ação, participação, silêncios e silenciamentos. Pesquisa em Educação Ambi-
      ental. 2006;1(1):59–71.
49.   Tassara ET, Tassara H, Ardans HO. Empoderamento (versus empoderar-se). In: Ferraro Junior LA, editor. Encontros e caminhos: Formação
      de educadores ambientais e coletivos educadores, vol. 3. Brasilia: MMA/DEA; 2013. p. 315–22.

Publisher’s Note Springer Nature remains neutral with regard to jurisdictional claims in published maps and institutional affiliations.




                                                                                                                                          13
                                                                                                                                    Vol.:(0123456789)