Available online at globets.org/journal                    IJETS
                       International Journal of Education, Technology and Science        International Journal of
                                                                                        Education Technology and
                                           2(4) (2022) 486–501                                   Science



       A REVIEW OF EDUCATIONAL LEADERSHIP CHALLENGES
                     IN THE 21ST CENTURY
                                                  Belay Girmaa *
                            a
                                International Leadership Institute, Addis Ababa, Ethiopia


Received: 22.08.2022       Revised version received: 04.10.2022           Accepted: 10.10.2022


Abstract
The purpose of the research was to examine the challenges in educational leadership. The
methods employed for the study has been an exploratory research design with deductive
approach and used a qualitative data as secondary sources. Sampling is carried out with a
systematic review of those published and unpublished data and it focused on a literature
review of 35 peer- reviewed journals, books, articles and research works as a longitudinal or
time series of mainly 5 years’ data (2018 to 2022). To meet the objectives of the study a
systematic review with that of a generalization of the existing approaches employed and the
research findings figured out the leadership styles in education is different from other sectors
as there are many stakeholders in the field which strive for quality leadership, however most
importantly the transformational styles of leadership plays a predominate role to others as it
encourages both the principal and the staff jointly to set the institution goals and endeavor to
meet the performance. At a concluding remark, in this 21st century organizations mostly
require a good leadership that characterized by situations, behaviors, transformational and
servant leadership styles as these encourage the participation of employees or followers which
also encourage ethics and work for mutually success. As a future direction, the author
recommended that more of in-depth and field work research which makes a survey of
institutional staff, students, parents of students, education bureau and quality or standard
control office have to be taken.
Key words: Educational leadership, challenges, 21st century, types of leadership



1. Introduction

1.1 Background



*Corresponding author: Belay Girma ORCID ID.: https://orcid.org/0000-0002-8349-1428

 E-mail: bgetachew04@gmail.com




                                                                                                             486

      Belay Girma / International Journal of Education, Technology and Science 2(4) (2022) 486–501   487



  Education plays an enormous role in personal career, community development and nations
growth as it enables a country to get rid of poverty and improves the people way of life.
Likewise, for a better education system the quality of leadership has a paramount importance
as the theories, styles and real practice of leadership would have a great contribution in
constructing a good education system. Though the notion of leadership widely exercised in the
community, society, government organizations and institution, the real challenges and
problems that arouse on the practical implementation and exercising of leadership is still a
daunting tasks for scholars. This is greatly advocated by a well-known academician Burns as
“Leadership is one of the most observed and least understood phenomena on earth” (Burns,
1978). Even if leadership has been studied extensively over the years and has taken on greater
importance than ever before, still it is one of the most complex and multidimensional
phenomena. Nevertheless, due to the complexity of the subject and the real challenges faced in
the ground, leadership still continues to generate captivating and confusing debate (Benmira &
Agboola, 2021).

  This perspective is stretched further and remains the domain of the study when leadership is
ineffective, absent, or toxic and the result is that people, organizations, communities, and even
entire societies are impacted, sometimes in the most devastating ways. (Gandolfi & Stone
2016, cited in Gandolfi & Stone, 2018). In a similar fashion, the impact of leadership is more
exacerbated in education sector as the entire system of the learning environment would be
affected by the leadership styles the institution espoused. Despite numerous researches being
carried out with respect to leadership the fact that the challenges remains a multifaceted issues
demand a more in-depth and field work research in the field. Researchers also pointed out that
too many leadership theories are not productive, instead it obstructs the progressive practice
and hence deduced that there is no need for leadership theory in consolidation. (Mango,
(2018). Hence, due to the complex system of education, presently there is a widespread
disagreement in the field and the dominance is normally attributed to the goal of improving
educational practices, in which numerous scholars argue now that the field’s central questions
concern the role of schools leaders in guiding the educational system towards the goal of
achieving social justice. (Heck & Hallinger, 2005). From the above introductory phrases, the
author of this article induced that on the implementation of educational leadership there is a
daunting challenges and it requires a rigorous research to fill the gaps which eventually this
paper strived to address.


1.2 Research objectives

 The objectives of the study are:
1. To examine the educational leadership challenges in the 21st century.
2. To point out the role of leadership in promoting education.


1.3 Related works

488     Belay Girma/ International Journal of Education, Technology and Science 2(4) 2022) 486–501




  Since theories are the foundation and milestones to carry out any researches, to achieve the
objective of this study it would be imperative to review some related works.

1.4 Theoretical review

1.4.1. The concept of leadership


  Despite numerous studies and empirical review have been conducted with regard to
leadership, on the real situation exercising leadership wouldn’t been a facile task as there is no
perfect or ineffectual leadership theories and styles of leadership. Research also revealed that
leadership is an infinite and tremendously complex journey along with paradoxes that cannot
be captured comprehensively. (Luedi, 2022). However, leadership has become increasingly as
a fast-growing topic of interest for both scholars and practitioners from all over the world.
(Toma et ‘al, 2021).

  Based on this introductory remark, definitions of leadership had been appeared in the first
three decades of the 20th century (1900 – 1929) which emphasized control and centralization
of power with a common theme of domination. (Peter, 2013). In the concept of leadership
there are mainly two major themes such as a leader and follower in which whenever there are
leaders, followers have to exist that intermingle creates a leadership process in an organization
or environments. Based on this introductory remark it will be indispensible to make a review
of the leadership theories which portrayed as follows.

  Leadership is a technique by means of which someone influences others to perform an
objective and directs the organization in a manner that makes it more cohesive and clearer”.
Thus it is a process and techniques of influencing people or a group in an organization and
also involves the protection of identification or culture of an organization to implement the
strategies and achieve the goals successfully. (Sifat, 2019). Besides as Binney et al (2006)
states leadership is not about knowing the answer; it is the capacity to release the collective
intelligence and insights of groups and organizations. Hence, the purpose of leadership
involves getting a job done in a certain way and not only doing a job on similar fashion. (Sifat,
2019). According to Kouzes and Posner (2007), leadership is a dynamic process in which
leaders mobilize others to get extraordinary things done. To do so, leaders have to engage in
five practices; such as model the way, inspire a shared vision, challenge the process, enable
others to act, and encourage the heart.
From a systematic review of the above notion the researcher perceived that on the process of
leadership influencing, inspiring or stimulating others whether they are a good followers or not
play a big roles on getting the right track and to this end leaders have to understand, learn, and
adapt certain requirements which in turn enable them to properly accomplish their duties.


1.4.2   Theories of leadership

      Belay Girma / International Journal of Education, Technology and Science 2(4) (2022) 486–501   489




  Though the leadership concept of a leader and follower emanated quite a long time till recent
period a remarkable theoretical contribution has been forwarded by leadership authors. Based
on this conception some of noteworthy theories that adduced by scholar’s are chronicled as
follows.
i/ Great man theory (1840s)
  From its name this theory perceives that leaders are born to become a quality leader and no
one ever justify with scientific backup or human behavior characteristics instead it assumes the
personalities of leadership are intrinsic, and in some extent this belief still remains as a
controversial issue.
ii/ Trait theory (1930’s – 1940’s)
  The Great man theories evolved into the trait theories and this theory assumes leaders are
both born or made with different abilities or skills to exercise better leadership roles. Its
common characteristics are creativity, intelligence, sense of responsibility and value places on
a person and it is assumed that the traits of successful leaders can be either inherited or
acquired through training and practice. However, the author of this paper infers the theory has
a short coming from psychology point of personalities approach and in practical situation the
theory is still debating.
iii/ Behavioral era or theories (1940’s – 1950’s)
  This theory characterizes by delivering a brand-new stand point that specializes in the
behaviors of the leaders as opposed to their intellectual, bodily or social traits. It assumes
leaders are largely made, not born and it divided leaders into two categories; like, those
concerned with the tasks and the people. It assumed that the particular behaviors can be learnt
to ensure effective leadership. This article researcher found out that in recent time, this theory
is more impressive in leadership development as the skills and behavior characteristics are
more important to acquire good leadership.
iv/ Situational era: contingent and situational theories (1960’s)
  This theory strongly argues that to become a leader there is no single approach instead every
leadership style could be created on certain situations and there are certain person who excel
on a leadership quality. Hence, scholar’s assumed that it is an extension of trait theory.
v/ Style and behavior theory
  This theory revealed that certain necessary leadership skill uses to serve as enabler for a
leader who performs an act while drawing its parallel with previous capacity of the leader and
each individual has a distinct style of leadership with which he/she feels most contented. This
theory is also related to two general kinds of behavior which are task and relationships

490      Belay Girma/ International Journal of Education, Technology and Science 2(4) 2022) 486–501



behavior thus at the end of the day the purpose of these two behaviors are to influence the
subordinates to meet organizational goals.


vi/ Process leadership theory
  In this theory servant leadership, learning organizations, principal centered leadership and
charismatic leadership was noted by the year 1990s and servant leaders focused to the
anxieties of the followers and the leader in turn sympathize to take-care of and nurture them.
vii/ New leadership era: transactional and transformational theories (1990s)
            and others (2000s)

     Transactional theory


  On this theory it assumed that leaders not only influence followers but leaders are under
their influence as well. It shows a discrepancy with regard to the level of leader’s action and
the nature of the relations with the followers. It is also a serious of agreement between
followers and leaders.

     Transformational theory

  This theory distinguishes from the other by involvement of the followers in the process or
activities related to personal factor towards the organization and considered that it engages in
interactions with followers based on common values, belief and goals for the benefit of the
group.

     Others theory

  In this theory as the leadership development stretched a shared, collective and collaborative
leadership thinking emanated from, and accordingly success in an organization becomes more
dependent on leadership practices distributed throughout the organization and coordinated
rather than the actions of only a few individuals at the top level which derived to the origin of
servant leadership that still is popular as it emphasized the importance and credibility of the
followers. Hence, Servant leadership seems to be the most promising and most investigated
over the last few years, especially due to the holistic approach and broad focus adopted
compared to the other philosophies, as well as to its important role in affecting individual and
team level outcomes, such as organizational commitment, organizational citizenship behavior,
job performance and job satisfaction. (Benmira & Agboola, 2021, Canavesi & Minelli, 2021,
Khan et’ al., 2016, Peter, 2013 and Sifat, 2019).
  With respect to leadership theories implication to an education, though each theory has a
great contribution in teaching-learning environment; the major scholar’s finding in relation to

      Belay Girma / International Journal of Education, Technology and Science 2(4) (2022) 486–501   491



education indicated that a Great-man theory is important as it teaches for a greatness of people
in which would able to learn the potential, capacity, skills and knowledge’s of some born and
talented people. Likewise, in educational institutions/schools the management is using Trait-
theory in recruitment process for school director, principal, supervisor, head teachers and other
personnel. In situational leadership theories, the role of school leadership, the institution
system and specifically the leadership role of the teacher are different on yielding many
followers and managing a student that used to bring out the best and smart students. In
transactional leadership, there is a contractual relationship between leaders and followers on
setting reward system which uses for both improvements in education performance and
students records. With regard to transformational leadership, almost all institutions are now a
days able to set their vision, mission and objectives in order to inspire all the staff and
employee. This leadership theory is productive in education sector as it makes interpersonal
relationship, stimulates creativeness in teachers, academic staff and students.
  From the above notion the researcher discerned that each theoretical development has had a
great impact still on exercising leadership and especially the new leadership era; such as
transactional and transformational theories are prominent however since organizations leaders
couldn’t get success on their individual contribution solely, they exhorted to look from the
perspective of customers and followers in which emanated the essence of servant leadership
and at present time this theory is more popular and takes as a domain in the field of study. This
view is also stretched by Canavesi and Minelli (2021) as the interpretation of servant
leadership prevailing in literature is positive, due to the promising attitudinal, behavioral and
performance outcomes that it can produce on followers.
1.4. 3 Theoretical review of leadership styles
  To get more knowledge about the contemporary challenges in leadership, it is also important
to look the leadership styles that are exercised in day to day activities as in the real world it is
common to hear about the leadership styles that leaders are pursuing and thereby everyone
argue and make a debate still about it. Though the notable scholar Taylor classified leadership
in an organization into autocratic, transitional and participative emergent forms, recent
theories are more stretched by numerous researchers which elaborated as follows:
i/ Authoritarian (Autocratic) leadership
  It is highly concentrated on commands by the leader and manages of the followers. There is
a clear division between the leader and the members and characterized by clear expectations to
be done, how it should be done and the leaders make decisions independently with little or no
inputs from the rest of the group.
ii/ Participative (Democratic) leadership
  Though it is mostly uncommon on this leadership styles employers invite employees to take
part and participate on giving inputs and thereby leaders make their decisions.

492     Belay Girma/ International Journal of Education, Technology and Science 2(4) 2022) 486–501



iii/ Delegative (Laissez faire) leadership
  From its name indicates that this leadership styles are attributed to passive action of leaders
and allow for groups to make their own decision. It also stimulates employees to be productive
as it normally focuses on subordinate achievements.
iv/ Transformational leadership
  “This type of leadership style is typically recognized as the single best style.” It is also
characterized by encouraging the talent of followers, positive changes in teams, energetic
behavior, emotionally intelligent, energetic, enthusiastic and helping teams to achieve their
organizational goals. (Sifat, 2019). According to Agarwal and Gupta (2021) on creating an
attraction for friendly image, trustworthy and humane leader and also a positive psychological
atmosphere in the organization, transformational leadership styles are more preferable in
decision making.
  At current time despite organization is pursuing each or a blend of these leadership styles,
the systematic review and practical exposures of this article author posed that, the
transformational leadership style is a more preferred approach in educational institutions as it
strengthen the relationship between staff, encourages the contribution of individuals and
stimulate the followers to actively participate on the success an institution performance.
  Hence, it is acknowledged that the leadership styles in the 21st century are a continuation of
leading theories and based on this perception despite the practical application of such
leadership styles have been imperiled in an organization it would be vital to look for a new
form of leadership styles. In this regard, despite the recent research that carried out to a new
way of leadership styles are not exhaustive, as stated in the other theories section above and
most scholars also recognized that in sustaining the relationship and interaction between a
leader and a follower the servant leadership style is more suitable in the sphere of the study. It
is also remarked that servant leadership works from a purely moral perspective which uses for
a success of an organization. (Gandolfi and Stone, 2018).
  From leadership theories and leadership styles stated above coupled with plenty of research
carried out in the field, even if none of them able to sort out the right choice, the researcher
extrapolates there are no perfect theories that best suited to leadership in an organization but
the best schema is that customizing the theories to the real situations of an organization and
synthesizing it to a success of an organization is more vital.


  The nature of rapidly changing circumstances in the world nowadays urge a different
leadership approaches, as Lazarus et ‘al., (2019) states the distinctive situation in the 21st
century requires any organization if wants to move ahead shall do proper planning and
working on staff empowerment that the skills and knowledge acquired enable them fit into the
knowledge-driven new global economy. Besides, in this increasingly complex world in which
society is also changing rapidly the leadership style requires collaboration, participation,
delegation and distribution of leadership. (Knights et ‘al, 2021). Besides, the current

        Belay Girma / International Journal of Education, Technology and Science 2(4) (2022) 486–501   493



leadership styles demand more of flexible style approaches that equipped with turbulent
environments. In this context, as Mucharraz (2016) pointed out the fundamental change in the
recent years is a transition from transactional theories to transformational approaches that
incorporated positive psychological approaches, servant leadership, and values based
leadership models.

  In addition as Peter (2013) stated presently the style and behavior theory is easily applied
and ongoing at all level of organizations as managers are continually engaged in task and
behavior relationships which underpinned by training and development programs to influence
the followers that in turn used to meet objectives. The writer of this article also perceived that
the style and behavior theory is more acceptable that intertwined with transformational
leadership styles as both stimulates the participation of the followers or teams to achievement
of organizational objectives. In line with this, the leadership styles in present time also demand
a good leadership competencies, as Knights et ‘al., (2021) pointed out there are 8 Integral
Competencies of Leadership (8ICOL); such as, personal preferences, self-awareness, self-
management, social awareness, relationship management, personal conscience, self-
determination and lastly intellect and logic.

  From the above conception the author of this research deduced that as the 8 Integral
Competencies of Leadership are more related to situational theory, the leadership styles in the
present time would be affected by both controllable and uncontrollable factors, organizational
and personal behaviors which in turn intertwisting with the dynamic situation and would be an
indispensible move in the leadership process.


2.1.4    Educational leadership challenges in the 21st century

  Since education affects all the physical, mental and psycho-social life areas of human
beings, it can be considered as a driving force in the journey of human to achieve the better
future. (Kiral, 2020). In this 21st century leadership, educational leaders confront with plenty
of social, economic and political pressures to cope with day-to-day real situations in education.
These also relates to competition in the global market, change the nature of work and
technology. Hence, educational leaders in the 21st century must change their personalities and
have to align their individual leadership style that shall reflect the needs and expectations of
the organization.
  Although the basic dogma of leadership is to influence an individual, groups or organization
employees to achieve common goals, in real situation it is not uncommon to confront
challenges in leadership process. For instance, the failure in leading a country politics,
inability to lead a certain groups, community or class and most importantly the incapability of
leading an organization are all attributed to present challenge in leadership. Taking this as an
introductory remark some of the notable research findings with regard to challenges in
leadership are stated as follows. Contemporary leadership challenges in an education portraits

494     Belay Girma/ International Journal of Education, Technology and Science 2(4) 2022) 486–501



school leaders have to possess more of managerial roles than actually engage in pedagogical
issues. (Dorcza and Freund, 2017).
  Besides, according to Kalu (2018) the major findings pointed out that for the leadership
challenges is that though delegated there is an inability of subordinates to report for the leader,
high expectations by subordinates from the leader and unclear attitude of subordinates towards
the leader. The other Google scholar’s (n.d.) identifies there are 6 top leadership challenges in
the world; such as, honing effectiveness, inspiring others, developing employees, leading a
team, guiding change and managing stakeholders.
  The world is facing a dismaying challenges ahead that includes demand for good leaders,
manpower quality, low employability due to poor skills, deep-rooted mindset, managing
aspirations, engagement level of employees and its heights of engagement, factors influencing
satisfaction and contribution of employees in career development opportunities & training,
(Sharma, 2015). Scholars explicated that at time of crisis and challenges in an organization the
transformational leadership styles have more righteousness as by encouraging and motivating
employees, transformational leaders always strive to work for common goal and success of an
organization which in turn enable them to overcome the limitations or challenges.
(Antonopoulou et’ al., 2020).
  However, still now there is a controversy regarding to leadership traits, in this respect as
Hunt et ‘al (2019) reveals it appears that dialogues regarding leaders turn up in virtually every
facet of society. Arguments ensue as to whether someone is a leader and what traits make the
individual a leader. Some suggest a leader is born to lead. Others suggest a leader becomes
one through experience. Still others suggest that there is no such thing as a leader, and a leader
is the perpetuation of a fiction. Hence, the author of this article bring about the point that the
argument to educational leadership is still get up as pursuing which leadership styles or traits
of leadership is a controversial issue. This point is well noted by Gandolfi et’ al., (2017) that
the widely disparate views on leadership contribute and attributed to a lack of clarity on
leadership styles.
  Though the above scholars argued about what traits a leader has to possess, the writer of this
article has a standpoint that a leader shall not be out of the usual leadership traits as either
born, made or develop through experience in which the situational theories are more dominant
in present challenges of leadership. Empirical research also revealed that beside corrupt
practices ethical failures in leadership is one of the challenges nowadays which ascribed by the
individual antecedents of ethical leadership failures that encompass lack of ethical awareness,
irresponsibility, egocentricity, ignorance, uncontrolled access to organizational resources and
poor leadership skills. (Benlahcenea and Ramdan, 2019).
  To overcome the challenges organizations have to set individual and common goals,
delegating or cascading to others, maximizing the unique value, getting role clearly, strengthen
team alignment and collaboration requires. This demands a quality of good leadership and
according to Plecas et ‘al (2018) a good leadership requires certain attributes; like, behaviors,
aspirations, skills, information commitments, communication commitments and sustainability

      Belay Girma / International Journal of Education, Technology and Science 2(4) (2022) 486–501   495



commitments in which these components have to blend with inner core factors of leadership
such as character, integrity, ethics and value. When this quality of leadership blended with
transformational leadership styles, educational institutions would able to overcome the present
challenges as transformational leadership styles are more opted for the situation which also
comprises four dimensions; such as, intellectual stimulation, individualized consideration,
charisma or idealized influence and lastly inspirational motivation in which all pay a great
attention with interaction of a follower. (Bass cited, in Mwesigwa et ‘al., 2020).

  The importance of school leadership more pleading in this century, as Townsend (2011)
pointed out student outcomes are measured by the role of leadership in the institution as the
role of the principal is changing rapidly and seems to be becoming increasingly complex in
which the change in a society towards a more knowledge-based way of looking at the world
has been accompanied by changing paradigms of leadership which ranges from organizational
leadership towards a strong focus on instructional leadership that measured by competence,
skills and characteristics that also lead to future capability. Cambridge assessment on
international education (n.d.) implies the diversity of views about leadership results some
prominent perspectives; like, instructional leadership which focuses on the school’s business –
teaching, learning, pupils’ progress and achievements; transformational leadership relates to
the commitment of colleagues, leading change and improving performance; moral leadership
which emphasize the importance of values, vision and ethical leadership; participative
leadership stresses the importance of including colleagues, shared decision making and social
capita; managerial leadership focuses on the importance of defining functions, tasks and
behaviors, and contingencies leadership which highlights how leaders respond to the particular
organizational circumstances and challenges they face and encounter over time.

  Though each perspectives demand an intensive study by itself and also scholar’s pointed out
that instructional leadership has more result in education system, the writer of this paper
perceived that it still arguably whether an institutions to use instructional leadership or
transformational leadership as this part remain the domain of the study.

  In addition, at this dynamic world the traditional way of leadership styles have no more a
point of discussion in an organization instead it requires a new approach to leadership such as
visionary, architect, coach and catalyst. ((Lurie and Tegelberg, 2019). Thus, at this point the
importance of transformational leadership is more advocated by scholars, and correspondingly
according to Ibrahim and Al-Mashhadany (2012) “Educational leaders are expected to adopt
transformational leadership to predict organizational learning and change”. This leadership
styles therefore characterized by setting direction, shared vision, compelled goals, designating,
trusting, caring work, learning culture, developing the institutional conditions (structures,
processes, culture) that enable to hold a high performance and also developing collaborative
decision-making structures that engages parents and the community in school improvement.

  Hence, from a systematic review of scholars contribution, the author of this research
adjudged that at these uncertain, turbulent and complex environments, institutions and people
are not looking for a traditional way of leadership traits and style of leadership, instead the

496     Belay Girma/ International Journal of Education, Technology and Science 2(4) 2022) 486–501



situation urges to look educational leadership that encourage the involvement of employees
and staff without a discretion, the leaders more act as a servant of the mass, the leaders must
take part as a role model from start of designing the vision or plan to a better implementation
process in which these steps are in reality still lacking attention and shall be addressed in the
future.

      Belay Girma / International Journal of Education, Technology and Science 2(4) (2022) 486–501   497



2. Method

  The research adopted for this research was a systematic review of theoretical and empirical
data’s of specifically 38 peer- reviewed journals, books, articles and research works since a
qualitative research approach with that of an exploratory research design more appropriate for
this type of study. Specifically, in this systematic study, it pursued a clear step of identifying
the problem and to address the research objectives the author used to search and appraise the
existing literatures, analyzed and synthesized the data, reported the result and eventually able
to put forward a recommendation. Accordingly, in this theoretical and empirical review of the
study the research is executed with longitudinal or time series of mainly 5 years data (2018 to
2022) which used for the researcher to systematically examine the educational leadership and
able to synthesize with relevant best theories.

3. Results

  Research finding annotated that a good leadership plays a great role at time of crisis, or
insistence of requiring strategic foresight or when competition is stiff in this dynamic
environments. This has underpinned by McKimm et ‘al., (2022) as leadership was a key factor
for organizational success, as effective leaders promote a positive culture and climate—a
necessity in uncertain and difficult times. Regarding to leadership traits and styles
organizations pursuing, the study found out that though there was much dialogue in line with
leadership traits, the real practices proved that each theory has been customized with the
context of real situations. Hence, recent finding in educational leadership indicates the
instructional, transactional and transformational theories are more prominent as it results in a
good productivity in students, stimulates the effort of teachers, and encourages the interactions
between a leader and follower on emphasizing the common values, belief and goals. Besides,
the result of the study also pinpointed that the servant leadership styles are more popular
nowadays as it works in recognizing the efforts of employees, creates a good moral which is
ethical and strives also to better serve the customers need.

  In addition to that, scholar’s also reveal in this digital area more of skilled and
knowledgeable leadership styles require that stimulates employees as a knowledge driven
work force and digital leaders make a significant change in organizational culture and strategy
making process and that is why digital leadership can be considered a strategic factor that
influences the wellbeing of internal human resources.

4. Discussion

  Despite plenty of readers are at least familiar with the basic foundation of leadership
theories, the factual situation in educational leadership urge for the academicians to undergo
an extensive research in the field as still some ancient theories; like, the Great-man, Trait

498     Belay Girma/ International Journal of Education, Technology and Science 2(4) 2022) 486–501



theory, Behavioral, Situational, Style and behavior theories have an impact and being used as a
role model in present generation. Hence, the success of an institution is mainly dependent on
the leadership style that the leader uses to influence the employees or staff and bring about
employee satisfaction and performance. Because the leader not only focuses on noting labor
productivity but also emphasizing the human factor as employees are encouraged to have
positive emotions, improve job satisfaction, and increase loyalty. (Kelly and MacDonald,
2019).

  Though as a rule of thumb the real practice of leadership in an institution differs in context,
customizing the leadership traits and styles would be an indispensable task for the success of
an organization, in this regard despite being no right or wrong decision on selecting the
leadership traits or style of leadership, most research finding related to education deduced that
the instructional, transformational, moral, ethical or participatory leadership are well enough
for the success of an institution as it reinforces the interaction between leaders and staff.
However, since quite numerous numbers of researches have undertaken for the past decays,
most of the finding gave an emphasis to participatory, transformational or servant leadership,
likewise scholar’s proposed that in most organizations study the transformational leadership
outstripped from the other styles of leadership. This reasoning is also propped up by Hai et’al.,
(2022) as transformational leadership style is considered the preferred style to increase the
level of leadership implemented by increasing employee commitment. The writer of this
article also came across that this point of discussion is more related to a notable management
philosophy of Management by Objectives (MBO) in which when the employee, institution
staff, teachers and/or students take part in goal or objective setting process, they would own a
sense of ownership and endeavor for a mutual success.

5. Conclusion and Suggestions

  Cognizant of the fact that the study that has been undertaken regarding leadership theories,
styles and the challenges in this contemporary time remain unequalled espousal as the people
living and working styles are highly determined by the pursuant of leadership. This is also
underpinned by researchers that while there is much dispute with regard to what leadership
actually is, the one commonality that can be found across virtually all of the existing
leadership literature is that leadership is important. (Gandolfi and Stone, 2018).

  Thus, the domain of this theoretical review of the educational leadership challenges revealed
that there is still a debating issue in customizing the leadership traits or styles of leadership to
the real situation of an organization despite research being carried out states the style and
behavior, instructional leadership, transformational or servant leadership is often persisting
presently. This is considered a paramount topic currently as the leadership challenges are more
unexcelled issues that demand an intensive research. Based on this notion to address the
research objectives of the educational leadership challenges in the 21st century mostly ascribed

      Belay Girma / International Journal of Education, Technology and Science 2(4) (2022) 486–501   499



by the inability of an institution to identify and customize the best theories to its real
implication as some researches recommend the instructional, transformational, ethical, moral
or participative leadership more important in productivity of an institution.

  Besides, the research finding sorted out that the role of leadership in promoting education
has to be purely attributed to a good leadership of the principals, dean’s, presidents,
superintendent or management staff that characterized by situations and behaviors, aspirations,
skills, information commitments, communication commitments, sustainability commitments,
good character, integrity, ethics and value. More so, when these qualities of leadership shall
able to meld with instructional, transformational or whichever leadership styles that more
opted to an institution and has to be intertwined with the role and contribution of the followers
or employees which eventually use for the leaders and institution to overcome the present
challenges in leadership.

  As a future direction the author of this article proposed that an intensive and more of field
work research; specifically, a case study of educational institutions require since research
carried out so far has a limitation on pointing out which leadership traits, styles or perspectives
of leadership are more preferable in education systems.


Declaration of Conflicting Interests and Ethics


The author declares no conflict of interest.

500    Belay Girma/ International Journal of Education, Technology and Science 2(4) 2022) 486–501




References
Agarwal, R., & Gupta, B. (2021). Innovation and leadership: A study of organizations based in
  the field of United Arab Emirates. Foundation of Management. 13(1), 73-84.
  https://doi.org/10.2478/fman-2021-0006
Antonopoulou, H., Halkiopoulos, C., Barlou, O., & Beligiannis, G. N. (2020). Leadership
  types and digital leadership in higher education: Behavioural data analysis from University
  of Patras in Greece. International Journal of Learning, Teaching and
  Educational Research, 19(4), 110–129. https://doi.org/10.26803/ijlter.19.4.8.
Benlahcenea A. & Ramdan, A. (2019). Ethical Failures in Leadership: A Qualitative Study in
  the Algerian Public Organizations. ResearchGate. International Journal of Innovation,
  Creativity and Change, 10 (9). 411- 429.
Benmira S. & Agboola M. (2021). Evolution of leadership theory. BMJ Leader. 5(3–5).
  https://doi.org/10.1136/leader-2020-000296
  Bennis WG. (2009). On becoming a leader: Basic Books. New York, NY.
Binney G., Wilke G., & Williams C. (2006). Living leadership: A practical guide for ordinary
  heroes. (2nd. ed.). Pearson Education Limited.
Burns, J. M. (1978) “Leadership”, NY: Harper & Row.
Cambridge International Organization (n.d.). Cambridge assessment on international
   education. Educational Leadership. www.cambridgeinternational.org/events
   Canavesi A. & Minelli E. (2021). Servant Leadership: a Systematic Literature Review
   and Network        Analysis.    Employee     Responsibilities   and     Rights    Journal,
   https://doi.org/10.1007/s10672-021-09381-3
Dorcza R. & Freund B. (2017). Contemporaray Educational Leadership. 4(1). Jagiellonian
   University.
Gandolfi F. & Stone S. (2018). Leadership, leadership styles, and servant leadership. Journal
   of Management Research, 18(4). 261 – 269.
Gandolfi, F., Stone, S., & Deno, F. (2017) Servant leadership: An ancient style with 21st
   Century relevance. Review of International Comparative Management, 18 (4). 350–361.
Hai T.H., Van Q.N. & Thị Tuyet M.N. (2022). An Empirical Study of Principals' Leadership
   Styles with Faculty Commitment. Emerging Science Journal. 6(3). 603-618.
Heck R.H. & Hallinger P. (2005). The Study of Educational Leadership and
   Management: Where Does the Field Stand Today? Educational Management
   Administration       &       Leadership,   SAGE       Publication,     33(2).    229-244.
   https://doi.org/10.1177/1741143205051055.
Hunt T., JD, Fedynich L.C. & Ed. D (2019). Leadership: Past, Present, and Future: An
   Evolution of an Idea. Journal of Arts & Humanities. 08(02). 20-26.

       Belay Girma / International Journal of Education, Technology and Science 2(4) (2022) 486–501   501



Ibrahim A.M.M. & Al-Mashhadany A.A. (2012). Roles of Educational Leaders in Inducing
    Change in Public Schools: Al Ain as a case study. International Journal of Arts &
    Sciences. 5(5). 455-476.

 Kalu D.C., Okpokwasili N.P. & Ndor M.B. (2018). Challenges Faced by Leaders in
     Improving the Job Performance of Subordinates. Journal of Information Knowledge and
     Management. 9(3). 151 – 160. https://dx.doi.org/10.4314/iijikm.v9i3.12.
 Kelly, S., & MacDonald, P. (2019). A Look at Leadership Styles and Workplace Solidarity
     Communication. International Journal of Business Communication, 56(3). 432–448.
     https://doi.org/10.1177/2329488416664176
 Kiral E. (2020). Excellent Leadership Theory in Education. Journal of Educational
     Leadership and Policy Studies, 4(1).
     Knights J. Grant D. & Young G. (2021). Developing 21st century leaders, a complete new
     process We call them Transpersonal Leaders. Journal of Work-Applied. 12(1). 6-21.
 Kouzes, J. & Posner, B. (2007), “The Leadership Challenge”, 4th edition, Jossy-Bass: San-
     Francisco.
 Kumar       M.      (2020).    Leadership      theories    and    concepts.    ResearchGates.
     https://www.researchgate.net
Lazarus G.N., Adesojiet A.A. & Jinadu I. (2019). Leadership and management practices in the
     21st century academic libraries. Journal of Library Services and Technologies, 1(2).51 –
     61.
 Lorez M. (n.d,). Discovering the 21st century Leadership. Master dissertation excerpt. Michael
     Smurfit Graduate School of Business in Dublin, Ireland.
 Luedi M.M. (2022). Leadership in 2022: A perspective. Best Practice & Research Clinical
     Anaesthesiology. Elsevier. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.bpa.2022.04.002.
 Lurie M. & Tegelberg L. (2019). The new roles of leaders in 21st century organizations.
 https://www.mckinsey.com/capabilities/people-and-organizational-performance/our-
     insights/the-organization-blog/the-new-roles-of-leaders-in-21st-century-organizations.
 Mwesigwa R. Tusiime I. &Ssekiziyivu B. (2020). Leadership styles, job satisfaction and
     organizational commitment among academic staff in public universities. Journal of
     Management Development. 39( 2). 253-268. https://www.emerald.com/insight/0262-
     1711.htm
 Mango E. (2018). Rethinking Leadership Theories. Open Journal of Leadership. Open Journal
     of Leadership. 7 (57-88). https://doi.org/10.4236/ojl.2018.71005.
 McKimm J. et ‘al (2022). Adaptive leadership during challenging times: Effective strategies
     for health professions educators: AMEE Guide No. 148. Medical Teacher Journal Online.
     Taylor & Francis. https://doi.org/10.1080/0142159X.2022.2057288

502      Belay Girma/ International Journal of Education, Technology and Science 2(4) 2022) 486–501



Mucharraz Y. (2016). Leadership in the 21st Century. ResearchGATE.
    https://www.researchgate.net/publication/304743006
No author (n.d). The top 6 leadership challenges around the world.
    https://www.ccl.org/articles/leading-effectively-articles/top-6-leadership-challenges/
Peter G.N. (2013). Leadership theory and practice. (6th. Ed.). SAGE Publications, Inc.
    California.
Plecas D., Squires C. & Garis L. (2018). The Essential of Leadership in Government:
    Understanding the Basics. 2nd ed.
Sharma V.K. (2015). Leadership Challenges in 21st century. Conference paper. ReserachGate.
    https://www.researchgate.net/publication/283793903.
Sifat R.I. (2019). Role of Leadership for Achieving Sustainable Development Goals. GIS
    Business. 14(3). https://ssm.com/abstract =3693538 on 08 August 2022.
Toma S.G., Catană D.S. & Grădinaru C. (2021). Leadership: an overview. Challenges of
    entrepreneurship in the 21st century.
https://www.researchgate.net/profile/Stefan-Catana-3?enrichId=rgreq-
    1f8e3d047e9d7f23ab3bbca523f656ba-
    XXX&enrichSource=Y292ZXJQYWdlOzM0OTM4MDYyOTtBUzo5OTIzMjE0OTU2N
    DIxMTNAMTYxMzU5OTI4OTg4OQ%3D%3D&el=1_x_10&_esc=publicationCoverPdf
Townsend T. (2011). School leadership in the twenty-first century: different approaches to
    common problems? School Leadership and Management. 31(2). 93-103. Taylor & Francis
    Group. http://dx.doi.org/10.1080/13632434.2011.572419.




Copyrights
Copyright for this article is retained by the author(s), with first publication rights granted to the Journal.
This is an open-access article distributed under the terms and conditions of the Creative Commons Attribution
license (CC BY-NC-ND) (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0/).