The Paucity of Female Educational Leadership
                                   in Politically Volatile Context of Zimbabwe:
                                   Women Leading Education
                                   Zvisinei Moyo *
      Journal of                   University of Johannesburg, South Africa
      Education,
 Management and
   Development                     RESEARC H ARTICLE
        Studies
          jemds.cspc.edu.ph
           ISSN: 2782-9413
        E-ISSN: 2799-0583          Abstract
      Published 1 June 2024        Zimbabwe is one country that experienced deep political turmoil soon after attaining
                                   independence in 1980. This study explored the intertwining of violent politics, the politics
                                   of ﬁeldwork, and the paucity of female educational leadership research by examining the volatile
                                   contexts within which knowledge construction occurs. The researcher reviewed related literature
                                   to gain insights into the impact of volatile contexts on research. The study provides a literature
                                   review on issues and concepts related to the studies put forward by other scholars within which
                                   the study was discussed and analyzed. The review of related literature was conducted mainly
                                   to analyze three interweaving factors: the visibility of studies on educational leadership and
                                   management publications in 2008, migration, and political violence in Zimbabwe. The study
                                   established that the terror operation (Gukurahundi) waged in Midlands, Matebeleland South,
                                   and Matebeleland North provinces from 1982 to 1987, the formation of the political opposition
                                   party - Movement for Democratic (MDC) and commercial farm invasions in 1999, operation
                                   Murambatsvina in 2005 and elections in 2008 are enough evidence that the Mugabe regime
                                   developed a tradition of using violence and intolerance as a tool of consolidating political power.
                                   These events formed a complex, multi-layered volatility that silenced academic research and other
                                   forms of documentation.



                                   Keywords: Zimbabwe, female educational leadership, volatile context, educational research;
                                   political power
    OPEN ACCESS
                                   DOI: http://doi.org/10.52631/jemds.v4i2.228
      CC BY-NC-SA 4.0
      *Corresponding author
    zvisinei.moyo@gmail.com
     Submitted 20 September
                       2023        1   INTRODUCTION
       Revised 26 April 2024
                                   Post-independence Zimbabwe has been signiﬁcantly marked by a repressive dictatorial
      Accepted 18 June 2024        government using state agencies to unleash gruesome violence on unarmed civilians to maintain
                       Citation    its hold on power. The rise of dictatorship and authoritarianism (Hwami, 2014) by the ruling
 Moyo, Z. (2024). The Paucity      Zimbabwe National Union-Patriotic Front (ZANU PF) was characterized by internal colonization,
         of Female Educational     and this had an impact on research and documentation. That ZANU PF subjected the citizens
       Leadership in Politically
Volatile Context of Zimbabwe:      of Zimbabwe to ruthless and consistent attacks, silencing opposing voices and instilling fear
   Women Leading Education.        is well documented (Hwami, 2014; Mangwiro, 2016; Matereke, 2012; Mvundura, 2014;
          Journal of Education,    Ndlovu-Gatsheni, 2009; Raftopoulos & Phimister, 2004; Zhira, 2004) This paper explores
              Management and
                                   signiﬁcant aspects of political violence aﬀecting Africa, particularly Zimbabwe, which deserves an
   Development Studies. 4(2).
                    56-68. doi:    investigation. The researcher explores the intertwining of violent politics, the politics of ﬁeldwork,
   10.52631/jemds.v4i2.228         and the paucity of female educational leadership research by examining the volatile contexts

within which knowledge construction occurs. Also, the researcher seeks to illuminate the power
of context in academic research, particularly the voiceless and marginalized (women).
This article argues that context has been considered a challenge. However, it has not been explored
how the volatile contexts have contributed to the paucity of female educational leadership
research in Zimbabwe until 2008. More than this, the aim of conducting this study was framed
by the belief that contextual factors manifest themselves in the organization and management of
education and school systems (Hallinger, 2018a). From a series of papers evolving from a research
review on women’s educational leadership in Zimbabwe, the study established that publications
emerged in 2008, the geographical distribution of studies by provinces was uneven, and no study
examined nor mentioned the political context. This prompted the researcher to review related
literature to interrogate how political violence has impacted academic research. The researcher
relies on scholarship that has narrated the Zimbabwean political violence from the liberation
struggle from 1966 to 1979 and the post-independence era from 1980 to 2018.
Literature has featured internal colonization by the ZANU PF empire in alliance with a partisan
state to mobilize a compliant citizenry (Matereke, 2012). The volatility of the Zimbabwean
politics violated human rights, leading to intimidation of citizens, hence the need to uncover
the implications of political developments on academic research, particularly female educational
leadership. The coincidence of the visibility of female educational leadership in 2008 and the
internal and external displacement of citizens is worrying. The rationale for conducting this
study lies in conceptualizing unjust structural, socio-economic, and political practices aﬀecting
women in educational leadership in a post-colonial state. The essence of this argument, which the
researcher illustrates by examining the existing body of knowledge, is that volatile contexts restrict
free movement and access to knowledge construction in academic research. This discussion
is important as the researcher seeks to unearth the deepest root causes of the scarcity of
female educational leadership research. The direct experience of the author as a black immigrant
woman having grown up in a politically volatile post-colonial context positions her well to raise
consciousness about African women’s oppression. The signiﬁcant contribution of this analysis lies
in the quest to seek the advancement of knowledge in female educational leadership. In addition,
it guides the growing body of researchers and policymakers regarding future research regarding
volatile contexts. The void in this knowledge bank, particularly regarding the Zimbabwean context,
has given rise to this study.
African feminist perspectives frame this literature review and undergird the discussion of
implications and conclusions. From these perspectives, Zimbabwean women in education
leadership’s lives are positioned prominently while oppressive, intimidating, marginalizing, and
repressive ideologies and practices of political violence are thoroughly exposed and critiqued. First,
the researcher provides background on policies promoting women’s advancement in education.
The researcher then captures literature on the volatility of Zimbabwean politics and ends with a
discussion of implications.


2   BACKGROUND
Zimbabwe’s cultural values and political, social, and economic features have roots in patriarchy,
hence the need for this brief historical background to understand issues of female leadership in
Zimbabwe. To begin with, the Zimbabwean constitution has elaborated provisions on gender
equity and empowerment. Hence, the government has put in place several pieces of legislation
and policies to implement the provisions. The Public Service Circular No. 4 of 1991 prioritized
the promotion of women, hence the increase in the number of women venturing into school
leadership positions (Muzvidziwa, 2013). This happened after the implementation of universal
primary education and heavily subsidized secondary education. Zimbabwean education expanded
at all levels, and problems began to be visible, particularly a lack of ﬁnancial resources (funding of
physical facilities) and human resources (shortage of teachers and lecturers) (Chabaya & Gudhlanga,
2013). Despite the challenges, the expansion of education was unstoppable; everyone desired to
access the doors previously made impossible by the colonial regime. The government was guided


                                                                                                   57

by a socialist ideology, declaring education as a basic human right and the means of achieving
equity (Chabaya & Gudhlanga, 2013).
It was during this period that women were appointed to educational leadership positions. The
government continued to engender laws and policies aligned with the Constitution to empower
women. For instance, it was realized that despite all the eﬀorts to increase the enrolment of
women in tertiary institutions, their number remained very low (Chabaya & Gudhlanga, 2013).
This was a result of the Zimbabwean society’s patriarchal nature that gloriﬁed male dominance.
To rectify the imbalances and reinforce Circular No. 4 of 1991, the government introduced the
Aﬃrmative Action Policy in 1992 to increase the number of females in tertiary institutions. This
further increased the demand for tertiary education, culminating in the growth in quantity of
universities. As a follow-up to its gender equity commitment, the government later introduced
the National Gender Policy in 2004. Although women seized opportunities and beneﬁts that
facilitated advancement in the labor force, they continue to face challenges that impede their
full access to such opportunities (Zimbabwe National Statistics Agency (ZIMSTAT), 2016). It has
been thirty-two years since Circular No. 4 of 1991 was instituted to redress gender imbalances in
educational leadership. Nevertheless, research has unearthed several political, economic, cultural,
social, and structural challenges perpetuating gender inequalities, making it diﬃcult for women
to realize their full potential (Grogan, 2015; Makura, 2009; Mapolisa, Tichaona, & Madziyire,
2012; Mapolisa, Tichaona, Mhlanga, Madziyire, & Chimbwadzwa, 2013; Moorosi, 2012; Steyn &
Parsaloi, 2014; Zikhali & Perumal, 2012). The structural and decision-making processes remain
male-dominated, relegating women to subordinate positions.
To expedite the advancement of women, the Public Service commissioned Circular No. 11 of 1997,
which encouraged women who had the potential to lead schools to be recommended regardless
of seniority or experience (Hlatywayo, Hlatywayo, & Muranda, 2014). Female teachers were
encouraged to apply for promotional posts. This forms the backdrop against which the impact
of volatility on academic research in Zimbabwe can be understood. The researcher argues that
volatility exacerbated social constructs engrained in traditional patriarchal beliefs that suppressed
documentation of women’s experiences in education leadership, leading to a dearth of literature
on contextual features peculiar to female leadership. The researcher reiterates the centrality and
signiﬁcance of female educational leadership in the global knowledge economy, which cannot
be contested. Especially when the African feminist movement is out in full force to achieve
indigenization in knowledge production. Further, the implication of education’s importance in
women’s emancipation is necessary for the feminist movement (Goredema, 2010; Mikell, 1997;
Nnaemeka, 2004).

3   THEORETICAL FRAMEWORK
The researcher chose to locate this argument in the African feminist perspectives to understand
the realities of African women working and living in Africa. They support Western and Anglo-
American feminism because of its hegemonic position of claiming to know about African women,
over-focusing on ﬁghting battles with men and excluding them from the movement (Atanga, Ellece,
Litosseliti, & Sunderland, 2013). Nonetheless, the researcher knows that African feminism(s)
came from Western feminism. On the contrary, African feminists recognize the role of women
responsible for holding families together when there is little state support (Sachikonye, 2010).
African feminist discourses raise critical questions about the construction of knowledge as a
process and seek to unmask the faceless body of knowledge and put a human face on it instead
(Nnaemeka, 2004). It is important to note the inclusivity of African feminism(s) in facing the
challenges of societal transformation; both men and women are included in the struggle (Kolawole,
2011). Feminist scholarship foregrounds the notion of African women by scrutinizing the exclusion
of women in scholarship, and their persistent marginalization (Nkealah, 2006). African feminists
have rejected the earlier collections of knowledge that have marginalized and silenced African
women’s voices. While African feminists advocate for diverse voices in the knowledge economy,
the researcher, as a feminist activist, is worried about the internal silencing of women’s voices,
particularly in Zimbabwe. For instance, Nnaemeka (2004) deﬁantly proclaims, in the same way that
Africa produced the raw materials that the metropole transformed into manufactured products,


                                                                                                  58

African women are instrumentalized as researchers/ scholars. They are the instruments for
collecting the raw data with which foreign scholars manufacture knowledge as they research.
They are the instruments through which scholarship is produced and careers built.

African feminism(s) counteracts the shortcomings of developing knowledge engineered from
outside Africa for Africans, hence their ﬁrm stance on indigenous knowledge production
(2016). Building on the Indigenous advances ownership that opens avenues for democratic
and participative processes that validate diverse world views and values (Ebunoluwa, 2009). The
researcher’s concern is that knowledge construction cannot take place when so-called democratic
governments who have the mandate to uphold human rights turn oﬀ the voices of their people.
African feminists challenge the patriarchal structures and psychological and political systems that
use traditional force, customs, education, labor, law, language, rituals, and others to keep women
governed by men (Mekgwe, 2008). They seek to overturn the complex stratiﬁcation that places
women at the bottom of the gender hierarchy. In both public and private life, African women have
been silenced by the traditional practices that have produced social contributions that deﬁne what
is male and what is female. Such ways have disadvantaged the females; everything has been made
to look normal in many ways. In contrast, such practices are dehumanizing, for example, polygamy,
excision, forced marriages, and powerlessness in society (Mikell, 1997). African feminists seek
to subvert patriarchal dominance, beliefs, practices, norms, and values that subjugate women –
rather, encourage an egalitarian society through the creation of social institutions (Azuike, 2009).

African feminists continue to voice their views about war, political violence, military coups,
undemocratic governments, migration, economic recessions, and other crises that have subjected
Africans to dehumanizing circumstances (Mama, 2007). Since the United Nations Fourth World
Conference on Women in Beijing, China, in 1995, European and Anglo-American nongovernmental
and civic society organizations have supported women’s activism. Colonial rule in Africa and the
market economy have marginalized women from the means of production and denied them the
right to own land (Gatwiri & McLaren, 2016). Likewise, the African women in post-colonial Africa
have continued to live under the matrix of colonial rule because of the brutality of governments
that have turned on them. Women continue to be side-lined in leadership structures and important
decision-making positions. In countries like Zimbabwe, where state-sponsored political violence
was born at independence in 1980, women bear the brunt. Women activists are stepping up their
liberation struggles against exploitation; however, because of masculine leadership structures
and lack of representation, they are failing to put enough pressure on political parties to listen to
them. More speciﬁcally, they are intimidated and silenced.

Since African feminism(s) as a paradigm and movement is shaped by African contexts and
experiences, its goals depend on the stability of the states (Sachikonye, 2010). African feminists
are committed to giving voice to African women (Ntseane, 2011) whose historical experiences
have been blurred by European and Anglo-American feminist theories. African feminism(s) is a
collective movement in a struggle to eradicate patriarchal systems, structures, and ideologies
that privilege men (McFadden, 2011). Therefore, African feminists do not embrace the notion
that gender inequality is natural; rather, they believe that it is a man-made phenomenon that can
be questioned. They query the denigrating inferiority complex associated with women always.
They seek to restructure the economic and gendered relationships across society. The women of
Zimbabwe are not independent, contrary to the declaration made in 1980. The post-colonial era
has continued to support patriarchy and the oppression of women.

Zimbabwean women have been traditionally excluded and relegated to subordinate roles within
masculine formal structures, systems, and practices. Women collectively seek to challenge
the institutional structures to promote systemic change (Christensen & Kelly, 2016). Women
are faced with a multitude of discriminations in a post-colonial society. Their needs, reality,
oppression, and empowerment are best addressed through an inclusive approach (Kolawole,
2011) that accommodates their historical trajectory and speciﬁc experiences (Nkealah, 2006). In
addition, the pluralist nature of African feminism(s) allows it to create a new liberal, productive,
and self-reliant African woman within the diversities of African cultures. African women share
a common struggle, which is male privilege. African feminism(s) addresses cultural issues that


                                                                                                  59

subordinate women across the African continent. Therefore, (Nkealah, 2016) sums, ‘African
feminism(s) is a resistance to patriarchal domination, ethnic discrimination, linguistic segregation,
poverty and literacy and other forms of oppression which condemn to make sexitude.’

4   REVIEW METHOD
This paper emanated from a systematic research review of Zimbabwean female educational
leadership literature. The research review established that publications of female educational
leadership emerged in 2008, followed by an uneven geographical distribution across the ten
provinces in Zimbabwe. In addition, it is noteworthy that of all the twenty-ﬁve publications
reviewed, no study attempted to investigate nor mention the political context. This was a catalyst
of this literature review to examine the extent to which political violence has shaped academic
research in female educational leadership. Therefore, this literature review paper relied on a body
of literature focused on Zimbabwean political violence dating back from the liberation struggle
from 1966 to 1979 and the period after independence from 1980 to 2018.
In order to examine the intersection of the visibility of studies on educational leadership and
management publications in 2008, migration, and political violence in Zimbabwe, the researcher
analyzes literature according to the following events: the liberation struggle 1966-1979, the
Gukurahundi massacre 1982-1987, the formation of the Movement for Democratic Change and
farm invasions 1999 and Operation Murambatsvina 2005.

5   CONTEXTUALIZING THE POLITICAL SITUATION IN ZIMBABWE
Former president of Zimbabwe Robert Mugabe’s deeds of holding on to power has haunted the
Zimbabwean internal political landscape and academic scholarship activities (Ndlovu-Gatsheni,
2012). Scholars who have documented the mass migration of Zimbabweans at the turn of the
third millennium (Crush & Tevera, 2010; Manik, 2013; McDuﬀ, 2015; Pasura, 2013; Ranga, 2015)
and other scholars who have been keen to understand what went wrong in Zimbabwe have
held Robert Mugabe responsible for destroying the economy and authorizing state violence on
citizens (Ndlovu-Gatsheni, 2012). In order to understand the volatility of Zimbabwean politics,
the researcher traced the deeper roots of the patriotic history that presided over and articulated
a violent form of nationalism (Matereke, 2012), which has kept Zimbabweans narrow-minded
and short-sighted. The researcher opposes the widely conﬁrmed reports that the Zimbabwean
political violence started at the turn of the third millennium; rather, the researcher argues that it
only escalated in 2000. The researcher started with the liberation struggle, which dislodged the
colonial regime.

6   THE LIBERATION STRUGGLES 1966-1979
The 1966 to 1979 liberation war exposed the entire population to a (Sadomba, Chigwanda, &
Manyati, 2015). Two forces - the Zimbabwe African National Union-Patriotic Front (ZANU PF)
led by Robert Mugabe and the Zimbabwe African People’s Union (ZAPU) under the leadership
of Joshua Nkomo fought alongside to conquer the colonial government’s Rhodesian Front led
by Ian Smith. The ceaseﬁre agreement between the colonial government and ZANU PF and
ZAPU at the Lancaster House Conference in 1979 saw a new dawn of independence in 1980,
ending the bloody war (Coltart, 2008). A coalition government formed by ZANU PF and ZAPU at
independence broke down in 1982 because of power struggles worsened by the Lancaster House
Constitution that allowed Robert Mugabe to consolidate and later monopolize power (Zhira,
2004). Contrary to South Africa’s post-apartheid agreement, the Lancaster House agreement
did not provide for reconciliation - aggrieved war veterans, mainly ZAPU, mobilized masses to
revolt against the new government (Sadomba et al., 2015). Perpetrators for the bloodshed in the
liberation struggle remained in the army and continued to commit crimes against humanity in the
new government (Zhira, 2004). Cracks within the new government leadership caused political
disunity, and eventually, clashes broke out. It was oﬃcially justiﬁed that the government was
attacking the ex-combatants who did not want to be integrated into the national army, and they


                                                                                                  60

were described as dissidents (Coltart, 2008). This was followed by the Gukurahundi massacre,
as in the next section. Meanwhile, Robert Mugabe pursued his one-party state, and he made
progress (Coltart, 2008).


7   THE GUKURAHUNDI MASSACRE 1982-1987
In 1982, the government used the attacks of the dissidents as an excuse to eliminate the ZAPU
leadership and its supporters, including civilians, because they were a threat to national unity,
seen as toppling the government and destabilizing the country. As a result, Joshua Nkomo
was removed from parliament and charged with treason – sparking further desertions from the
army (Zhira, 2004). The conﬂict escalated, and the government decided to unleash its North
Korean-trained troops, known as the Fifth Brigade and other state agents, to massacre civilians
and ZAPU members in Matabeleland North, Matabeleland South, and Midlands provinces. The
massacres have been shrouded with controversy, so other scholars have argued that Robert
Mugabe persecuted opponents as an excuse to create a one-party state (Zhira, 2004).

The genocide waged from 1982 to 1987 left 20000 people dead. The most dreaded Central
Intelligence Organisation (CIO) worked alongside the ﬁfth brigade in the terror campaign, targeting
Ndebele-speaking people (Mlambo & Raftopoulos, 2010). Today, the CIO remains the most feared
of Robert Mugabe’s ‘machinery of dictatorship’ (Zhira, 2004) and has been used to silence voices
opposing the government. The terror of which hunting continued, leading to abductions, murder,
torture, intimidation, silencing, restrictions, and oppression of civilians. Burning of victims alive
was meant to leave bitter memories so that survivors were never to forget – even after death (Zhira,
2004). Meanwhile, all these atrocities were hidden from the public eye and the state-controlled
media; hence, Zhira (2004) study relied on interviewing survivors and the Catholic Commission
for Justice and Peace (CCJP). The genocide has not been documented; it is not in the history
books.

Interestingly, what happened to the three provinces later spread to the rest of the country, leading
to endless intimidation and violence (Mlambo & Raftopoulos, 2010). In sum, Ndlovu-Gatsheni
(2008) emphasizes, ‘The ruling party ZANU PF government attempted to use hegemonic and
monolithic solution underpinned by the sword of its violent agencies inherited from the past
such as the party Youth League, Women’s League, ex-combatants, CIO and the army.’ In the
run-up to elections in 1985, youth brigades were deployed to intimidate the electorate not to
support ZAPU but the ruling ZANU PF (Zhira, 2004). The massacre stopped in 1987 when Joshua
Nkomo’s ZAPU was absorbed into a government ZANU PF.


8 THE FORMATION OF THE MOVEMENT FOR DEMOCRATIC CHANGE AND
  FARM INVASIONS 1999
The formation of the Movement for Democratic Change (MDC) in September 1999 created a sense
of panic in the unchallenged ZANU PF (Mlambo & Raftopoulos, 2010), leading to the escalation
of violence in subsequent election periods (Mvundura, 2014). Robert and his ruling ZANU PF
notched up violence against the opposition, especially after losing the 2000 referendum to change
the constitution. Mugabe surrounded himself with the few political elites and was determined to
hang on to power through whatever means – accusing the commercial white farmers of sponsoring
the opposition MDC, leading to violent commercial farm grabs (Mlambo & Raftopoulos, 2010).
The land grabs were followed by massive wholesale looting of private properties (Coltart, 2008),
culminating in the economic meltdown. Violence intensiﬁed in the subsequent years after 2000,
characterized by a common pattern of the rule of violence and coercion leading to economic
collapse, unemployment, political stalemate, and increased international isolation (Cawthra, 2010).
Mugabe increased purges on civilians using ex-combatants and the youth who had always pledged
loyalty to the ruling party (Ndlovu-Gatsheni, 2012). Leadership structures and personnel in all
sectors were politicized along narrow ruling party lines (Raftopoulos & Phimister, 2004).


                                                                                                  61

9    OPERATION MURAMBATSVINA 2005
In the 2005 elections, ZANU PF lost all urban seats to the opposition MDC except one, while
the MDC lost ground in the rural areas (Coltart, 2008). In retaliation, the government launched
the controversial operation Murambatsvina against urban people. The event was marked by the
destruction of urban shelters that left 700,000 homeless and jobless. The researcher added a
voice to the controversial callous act that was meant to drive as many people as possible to the
rural areas where geographical restrictions made it impossible for them to escape the terror. This
had a major impact on the already failing economy. Teachers who were readily considered to be
MDC supporters were consistently targeted – they were tortured and displaced, and some were
removed from their posts (Raftopoulos & Phimister, 2004). This pushed Zimbabwe as a state to
an authoritarian political framework.


10    ELECTIONS 2008
The volatility of the Zimbabwean political violence reached its peak in 2008. The terror, which
was mainly concentrated in rural areas, took the form of violent assaults, destruction of property,
torture, murder, death threats, abductions, and disappearances. The youth militia led by military
personnel kept the civilians under constant surveillance (Mvundura, 2014). Restricted mobility
left people with limited access to information and ﬁnancial resources. In order to contain dissent,
legislation, and suppressive notions, for example, the Public Order and Security Act (POSA) and the
Access to Information and Protection of Privacy Act (AIPPA) were instituted (Coltart, 2008), turning
the public broadcasting authority into an unceremonious Propaganda tool. Non-governmental
organizations and civic society organizations operations were targeted and restricted. The ruling
party viciously mobilized its members (the highly politicized CIO, police, defense forces, youth,
and military combatants) to attack state structures, mechanisms, and legal procedures (Mlambo &
Raftopoulos, 2010).
The economy virtually collapsed at the hands of political instability and lawlessness, giving birth
to what has been referred to as the ‘Zimbabwean crisis’ (Crush & Tevera, 2010; Mlambo &
Raftopoulos, 2010) ‘Human catastrophe’ (Coltart, 2008) leading to the historic mass migration
as a survival strategy (Ndlovu-Gatsheni, 2012). The people of Zimbabwe had no choice but
to abandon their country in large numbers because of the tragedy threatening their livelihood.
They had to face the well-documented turmoil and tenacity of life in a foreign land, for instance,
Xenophobia in South Africa and taking up the most despised care work in the UK.


11    DISCUSSION
As the researcher discusses the implications in this section, the researcher highlights how events
in the above section formed a complex multi-layered volatility that silenced academic research
and other forms of documentation. The unstable Zimbabwean politics violated human rights
and intimidated citizens, further marginalizing women who already occupied the bottom of
power structures. Undoubtedly, academic research did not document how women in educational
leadership dealt with patriarchal systemic societal structures until 2008. To be more speciﬁc,
the number of scholarships created for women managing and directing the education sector in
Zimbabwe has been hidden. The volatile context worsened the widespread patriarchal system,
which always carries over into the organization and leadership of educational institutions. Women
are the hardest hit as their advancement has been hampered by colonial legacies as well as
patriarchal Indigenous cultures. Organizational culture is deeply rooted in social practices. In
summary, all masculine cultures negatively aﬀect the operation of women in their workplace (Moyo
& Perumal, 2020). Unequal power distribution between sexes remains a barrier to advancement
opportunities for women. It is important to note that the violent political context inﬂamed the
challenges of women’s advancement. It emerged from the studies that culture sustains gender
stereotyping, social practices, family and work relationships, and how women are viewed in
society.


                                                                                                 62

Further, this study established the demographic changes in the mass migration of Zimbabwean
citizens that was male-dominated in the late 1990s and later dominated by women and
unaccompanied minors at the turn of the millennium to date (Crush & Tevera, 2010; Manik,
2013; McDuﬀ, 2015; Mlambo & Raftopoulos, 2010). Equally notable was the shift in traditional
roles – women taking over the breadwinner role. The crisis impacted women in various ways. The
crisis dawned a deﬁnitive moment when women realized the need to advance their careers to
compete in the global market. In our empirical study ‘Narratives of Zimbabwean female teachers’
experience in South Africa,’ The researcher established that two participants were postdoctoral
research fellows, two PhD holders, ﬁve about to complete their master’s degrees, and one studying
towards a B.Ed. Honours degree. Meanwhile, the peak of Zimbabwean mass migration in 2008
coincides with the visibility of female educational leadership publications. The researcher deduce
that scholars transcended the challenges of living in a foreign land and consolidated the gains
of globalization. Having escaped human rights abuse, lawlessness, and systematic militarisation
of the state, they decided to write about the violence. Of much interest to us was that all the
authors of the studies The researcherexamined were aﬃliated with non-Zimbabwean institutions.
This is an accurate portrayal of the intensity of the volatility of the Zimbabwean context. Another
factor contributing to the visibility of publications by Zimbabwean scholars could be access to
funding.
The silence of the grave about female leadership in a post-colonial state in the twenty-ﬁrst
century is outstandingly disturbing. The crucial function of academia cannot be disputed in the
quest for gender equality. Researchers must provide unobstructed criticism of society, systems,
practices, and institutions and generate theories and policies that enhance development. This has
been missing in Zimbabwe for a long time. While African feminist discourses would like to see
women taking the lead in eradicating gender disparities, the Zimbabwean education system has
been used to propagate the ruling party’s propaganda, further marginalizing women who already
occupy the bottom of the gender hierarchy. It also emerged that Zimbabweans constantly lived
in fear, which has its long-term origins in the liberation struggle, which exhibited anti-democratic
tendencies and intolerance of dissent (Mlambo & Raftopoulos, 2010). The post-independent
government inherited the same structural political-economic legacies intertwined with African
nationalist politics and traditional culture, further worsening the position of women. Women who
have traditionally been silenced were further intimidated by the thirty-seven-year-long chains of
violent events.
The events have been kept alive by the fact that victims have always remained near the
perpetrators in Zimbabwe. The researcher questions how women continue to be silenced,
intimidated, and exposed to various manifestations of oppression in a post-colonial state. States
must prioritize societal peace as it is a prerequisite for knowledge construction. The researcher
advocates for what Nnaemeka (2004) describes, ‘space which allows for the coexistence,
interconnection, and interaction of thought, dialogue, planning, and action,’ which nurtures
the unfolding of African feminism(s). Violence has had devastating eﬀects on the development
of consciousness in African states. As a result, African societies have not been researched and
documented to match the global knowledge production, leading to unexamined reports about
Africans. As the world has become connected, it is time for women’s movements to intensify
collaboration to achieve far-reaching impact.
Further, the lack of access related to the constant surveillance of citizens suggests that researchers
could not access the research sites and participants. Take, for instance, the experiences of
researchers who documented their diﬃculties in accessing research participants in their studies;
Mangwiro (2016) undertook a study in six provinces where a non-governmental – Heal Zimbabwe
Trust is operating. The six provinces have been classiﬁed as highly volatile violence hot spots:
Midlands, Manicaland, Mashonaland Central, Mashonaland East, Masvingo, and Matebeleland
North. The researcher reported that some places were impenetrable, especially since the
leadership structures that approve research activities are highly aligned with the ruling party –
ZANU PF. He explained that some participants withdrew from the research after victimization.
Mvundura (2014) expressed how he considered it ethically safer not to seek oﬃcial approval
of access from local leadership structures or to meet participants outside their homes. The


                                                                                                   63

researchers often had to be accompanied by people known at the research sites. Coltart (2008)
warned that he could access census statistical information because of his position as a member of
parliament. Zhira (2004) reported the diﬃculties he faced interviewing Gukurahundi survivors and
church leaders, especially the Catholic Commission for Justice and Peace (CCJP) – the genocide
was not documented, nor has it appeared anywhere in the history books.

The geographically uneven distribution of publications mentioned earlier is linked to the volatility
of Zimbabwean society. The descriptions above conﬁrm the importance of free movement and
freedom of speech in society. Culture: The Zimbabwean government’s meddling in everyday
aspects of its citizens’ lives makes it impossible for researchers to access participants. The
researcher also reiterates the importance of proximity in feminist methodologies. This has further
concealed African women’s studies, and Africa as a context remains misrepresented, increasing
chances of being homogenized by European and Anglo-American scholarship. Contemporary
scholarship is dominated by non-Africans who have taken strategic positions to speak on behalf
of African women – advancing the portrayal of Africa as a dark continent (Pailey, 2016). The
extent to which African studies can be hidden or revealed depends on the commitment of the
producers of knowledge and enabling contexts. The African feminist movement disregards the
falsiﬁcation of African women – rather, it insists on individual autonomy, access to resources, and
democratic government for its goals to be feasible. African women’s lived experiences and world
views in history, social sciences, anthropology, and sociology must be considered to undo the
misrepresentation.

The concept of academic research has great potential to enhance the transformation of the
African political landscape. The volatility of the Zimbabwean context needs interrogation because
it impinges on the knowledge construction process. The researcher seeks to contribute to building
peaceful societies where women’s voices can be heard. African feminists encourage self-reliant
women; hence, peace and tranquillity are prerequisites for sustainable development. Despite
attaining independence in 1980, the culture persisted in nurturing dominance sustained by
authoritarian nationalism (Ndlovu-Gatsheni, 2009). Culture as a negative force remains a central
issue (Nnaemeka, 2004) in the emancipation of women. However, African feminists argue that
culture should not be dismissed as a negative factor; rather, its notions of oppression should be
interrogated and transformed in a way that makes it serve development (Mama, 2007). Culture
and structure are twisted together, and they have historically constructed women’s sexuality
and femininity. Women must ﬁght a multi-layer of complexities – the traditional culture of male
dominance, the inferiority complex created by the colonial regime, and the violence inﬁltrated
by post-liberation internal colonization. Internal colonization is evident in other post-colonial
African states, such as the Democratic Republic of the Congo, South Sudan, Nigeria, the Central
African Republic, and Kenya. Women and children suﬀer the most as they are likely to be treated
unfairly. The researcher talks about women who have been marginalized, exploited, and oppressed
culturally, politically, and economically, with or without the colonial regime. Most women in
Zimbabwe live in rural areas (Mvundura, 2014), where they are reeling in poverty, heading families
with little or no basic services such as education, which has long been side-lined (Coltart, 2008).
Female school leaders are expected to perform in ill-resourced schools.

Another implication emanates from the government’s denial of all the atrocities and the economy’s
failure. Non-governmental organizations, human rights, and civic society organizations have been
denied access to support Zimbabwean citizens in dire need of necessities when food became
a luxury. The researcher, therefore, suggests that since non-governmental organizations have
dominated women’s activism, the government did not commit itself to implementing the gender
legislative framework, policies, and programs. Almost four decades after independence, women
remain underrepresented in educational leadership (Hlatywayo et al., 2014; Mapolisa et al., 2013;
Mudau & Ncube, 2017; Muzvidziwa, 2013) and school leaders face perennial challenges related
to physical and ﬁnancial resources (Makura, 2009; Mapolisa et al., 2013; Shava & Ndebele, 2014;
Zikhali & Perumal, 2016).

As if the diﬃculties above were not enough, Zimbabwean residents also had to deal with a
worsening crisis in governance and human rights, in which they were routinely threatened with


                                                                                                 64

violence and intimidation by members of the government and the ruling party for siding with the
opposition (Coltart, 2008; Crush & Tevera, 2010; Mlambo & Raftopoulos, 2010; Ndlovu-Gatsheni,
2012). A dishonest political establishment is at the heart of Zimbabwe’s issues. About 35
years of economic gains have been reversed in the past ten years. Tragically, the Gukurahundi
incident continues to plague the entire country and is essential to silence dissent (Coltart, 2008).
Noteworthy is that this violence became mainly synonymous with the emergence of some strict
surveillance of citizens. The silences linked to this violence include silence as cultural censure, an
adaptation to dominant discourse, and a marker of liminality (Mvundura, 2014). All this negatively
impacted the economy and, most importantly, the lack of political will to prioritize academic
activities. Therefore, a lack of ﬁnancing has signiﬁcantly harmed academic research eﬀorts. This
cannot be contested given that most recent scholarly reviews have reported minimal contribution
of Zimbabwean universities to international academic research, for example, Hallinger (2018a).
The literature constantly mentions how the government withdrew from crucial sectors such as
education to concentrate on militarizing the state to consolidate power. The researcher notes
how it was easy for the government to abandon the once highest-ranked education system on
the African continent (Sadomba et al., 2015). The untold political upheaval and its economic
eﬀects on the education system created more bottlenecks, causing a mass exodus of lecturers
and teachers, a lack of infrastructure, and a lack of funding, which could have rendered female
leaders incompetent. The political and economic collapse of Zimbabwe has given the crisis’
causes and eﬀects more attention, obscuring the regrettable marginalization of groups with low
socioeconomic standing, such as women and girls. This could be why the Zimbabwean female
educational leadership literature is dominated by challenges/ barriers and under representation.
There is limited research on context.
Therefore, the researcher suggests further research on how context impacts female leadership.
Also, the invisibility of literature needs to be further investigated. For instance, the aim to
increase women in leadership may have been deﬂected because female enrolment levels of
education may have halted and overturned the access of girl children to secondary and tertiary
education, making it unaﬀordable. Education should prioritize gender equity. This opens new
avenues for departing from bureaucracy and centralization to decentralized systems. While
eﬀective educational leadership depends on the commitment of leaders, structural context,
political context, and economic and social contexts are indispensable.

12    LIMITATION
Several limitations apply to this literature review. First, this study did not aim to review related
literature from a corpus of studies; rather, the purpose was to focus on Zimbabwe to understand
the volatility’s magnitude. More importantly, while these ﬁndings cannot be generalized, some
lessons can be learned and transferred to similar contexts, especially post-liberation African
states, for example, regarding the invisibility of scholarship on women. Secondly, this study is
written from the point of view of a black woman, adding her voice to the struggle for women’s
emancipation.

13    CONCLUSION
We have seen how the complex multi-layered Zimbabwean volatility has aﬀected academic
research activities, fuelling the uneven geographic distribution of studies across provinces. The
use of state violence to eradicate political opposition and secure citizenry has been central to
ZANU PF’s dominance over Zimbabwe. There is no doubt that this has played a vital role in the
invisibility of publications on female educational leadership, only to emerge in 2008, in coincidence
with the mass migration. The consequences have been far-reaching - on women in educational
leadership who are already oppressed by traditional and colonial regimes.
This could stimulate further research and reviews comparing studies of various contexts in
developing regions. Since volatility has persisted over the years, The researcher suggests further
research to contextualize female leadership to increase its contribution to the existing wealth of


                                                                                                   65

knowledge. This also speaks to policymakers and funders, who should consider conducting needs
analyses in educational institutions and determine how academic work can be supported. As a
movement, African feminism(s) needs to intensify the scientiﬁc insights to map the terrain about
guiding the future and further research to uncover the extent of gender imbalances, violence,
intimidation, and silencing of women. The researchercall for moral leadership with a mandate
to fulﬁll societal and institutional educational goals rather than political appointees loyal to the
ruling party.

14    DISCLOSURE STATEMENT
According to the authors, there are no competing interests to declare.

REFERENCES
Atanga, L. L., Ellece, S. E., Litosseliti, L., & Sunderland, J. (Eds.). (2013). Gender and
Language in Sub-Saharan Africa: Tradition, struggle and change (Vol. 33). Amsterdam: John
Benjamins Publishing Company. Retrieved 2024-06-25, from http://www.jbe-platform
.com/content/books/9789027272300 doi: doi: 10.1075/impact.33
Azuike, M. (2009). Women’s Struggles and Independence in Adichie’s Purple Hibiscus and
Half of a Yellow Sun. African Research Review, 3(4). Retrieved 2024-06-25, from http://
www.ajol.info/index.php/afrrev/article/view/47548 doi: doi: 10.4314/afrrev
.v3i4.47548
Cawthra, G. (2010). The role of SADC in managing political crisis and conﬂict: the cases of Madagascar
and Zimbabwe. Maputo: Friedrich-Ebert-Stiftung Mozambique. Retrieved from https://
library.fes.de/pdf-files/bueros/mosambik/07874.pdf
Chabaya, O., & Gudhlanga, E. S. (2013). Striving to Achieve Gender Equity in Education:
A Zimbabwean Experience – Successes and Challenges. Zimbabwe Journal of Educational
Research, 25(1). Retrieved 2024-06-25, from https://www.ajol.info/index.php/zjer/
article/view/87242
Christensen, L. M., & Kelly, H. (2016). Unearthing and bequeathing Black feminist legacies of
Brown to a new generation of women and girls. Journal of Negro Education, 85(3), 199–211.
Coltart, D.    (2008).     A decade of suﬀering in Zimbabwe.   Development Policy
Analysis, CATO Institute, Washington, DC. Retrieved from https://www.cato.org/
development-policy-analysis/decade-suffering-zimbabwe-economic
-collapse-political-repression-under
Crush, J. S., & Tevera, D. S. (2010). Zimbabwe’s exodus: crisis, migration, survival. Canada: Southern
African Migration Pogramme.
Ebunoluwa, S. M. (2009). Feminism: The Quest for an African Variant. Journal of Pan African
Studies, 3(1).
Gatwiri, G. J., & McLaren, H. J. (2016). Discovering my own African feminism: Embarking on a
journey to explore Kenyan women’s oppression. Journal of International Women’s Studies, 17(4),
263–273.
Goredema, R. (2010). African feminism: the African woman’s struggle for identity. African
Yearbook of Rhetoric, 1(1), 33–41.
Grogan, M. (2015). Special issue from the women leading education-Ghana Conference. Planning
and Changing, 46(3/4), 259.
Hallinger, P. (2018a). Bringing context out of the shadows of leadership. Educational Management
Administration & Leadership, 46(1), 5–24. Retrieved 2024-06-25, from http://journals
.sagepub.com/doi/10.1177/1741143216670652 doi: doi: 10.1177/1741143216670652
Hallinger, P. (2018b). Surfacing a hidden literature: A systematic review of research on educational
leadership and management in Africa. Educational Management Administration & Leadership, 46(3),


                                                                                                   66

362–384. Retrieved 2024-06-25, from http://journals.sagepub.com/doi/10.1177/
1741143217694895 doi: doi: 10.1177/1741143217694895
Hlatywayo, L., Hlatywayo, S., & Muranda, A. (2014). The Extent to which Females Occupy
Leadership Positions in Zimbabwean Teachers Colleges. IOSR Journal of Humanities and Social
Science, 19, 28–36. doi: doi: 10.9790/0837-19972836
Hwami, M. (2014). Social injustice leadership in University education in Zimbabwe. In I. Bogotch
& C. M. Shields (Eds.), International handbook of educational leadership and social (In)justice (pp.
846–868). New York: Springer. Retrieved from https://www.amazon.com/International
-Educational-Leadership-Handbooks-Education/dp/9400765541
Kolawole, M. (2011). Transcending incongruities: rethinking feminism and the dynamics of
identity in Africa. Agenda: Empowering women for gender equity, 17, 92–98. doi: doi: 10.1080/
10130950.2002.9676183
Makura, A. (2009). The Challenges Faced by Female Primary School Heads: The Zimbabwean
Experience.
Mama, A. (2007). Is it ethical to study Africa? Preliminary thoughts on scholarship and freedom.
African Studies Review, 50(1), 1–26.
Mangwiro, I. (2016). The role of civil society in conﬂict transformation in Zimbabwe: The case of
Heal Zimbabwe Trust.
Manik, S. (2013). Zimbabwean immigrant teachers in KwaZulu-Natal count the cost of going
under the hammer. Alternation: Special Edition, 20(7), 67–87.
Mapolisa, Tichaona, & Madziyire, N. C. (2012). Female Leadership Dilemmas in Primary Schools:
A Case Study of 18 Primary Schools in Kambuzuma, Warren Park and Kuwadzana Areas of Harare
Province in Zimbabwe. International Journal of Social Sciences & Education, 2(3).
Mapolisa, Tichaona, Mhlanga, E., Madziyire, N. C., & Chimbwadzwa, Z. (2013). Female leadership
dilemmas in primary schools: A case study of primary schools in Harare province in Zimbabwe.
Zimbabwe Journal of Educational Research, 25(2).
Matereke, K. P. (2012). ‘Whipping into Line’: The dual crisis of education and citizenship in
postcolonial Zimbabwe. Educational philosophy and theory, 44, 84–99.
McDuﬀ, E. (2015). Women’s voices from the Zimbabwean diaspora: Migration and change.
Ìrìnkèrindò: A Journal of African Migration, 8, 10–52.
McFadden, P. (2011). Re-crafting citizenship in the postcolonial moment: A focus on Southern
Africa. Works And Days, 29, 57–58.
Mekgwe, P. (2008). Theorizing African Feminism(s) the ’colonial’ question. Quest: An African
Journal of Philosophy Revue/ Africaine de Philosophie, XX(1-2), 11–22.
Mikell, G. (1997). African feminism: The politics of survival in sub-Saharan Africa. University of
Pennsylvania Press.
Mlambo, A., & Raftopoulos, B. (2010). The regional dimensions of Zimbabwe’s multi-layered
crisis: An analysis. In Election processes, Liberation movements and Democratic change in Africa
Conference. Maputo: CMI and IESE.
Moorosi, P. (2012). Gender, educational leadership and change: Unsettling the norms to achieve
gender equity. Education Leadership, Management and Governance in South Africa, ProQuest Ebook
Centra, Nova Science Publishers, 107–123.
Moyo, Z., & Perumal, J. (2020). A systematic review of research on women leading and managing
education in Zimbabwe. Gender and Behaviour, 18(2), 15688–15697.
Mudau, T., & Ncube, D. (2017). Leadership qualities of women in educational management
positions: stakeholders perceptions of selected schools in Matabeleland South region in Zimbabwe.
Gender and Behaviour, 15(4), 10595–10608.



                                                                                                 67

Muzvidziwa, I. (2013). Zimbabwean women primary school heads. In International handbook of
educational leadership and social (in) justice (pp. 799–817). Springer.
Mvundura, W. (2014). Memory and violence: Displaced Zimbabwean rural communities reliving the
memories of the March 2008 political violence. (PhD Thesis).
Ndlovu-Gatsheni, S. J. (2008). Black republican tradition, nativism and populist politics in South
Africa. Transformation: critical perspectives on Southern Africa, 68(1), 53–86.
Ndlovu-Gatsheni, S. J. (2009). Africa for Africans or Africa for “natives” only?“New nationalism”
and nativism in Zimbabwe and South Africa. Africa Spectrum, 44(1), 61–78.
Ndlovu-Gatsheni, S. J. (2012). Review article beyond Mugabe-centric narratives of the Zimbabwean
crisis. Oxford University Press.
Nkealah, N. (2006). Conceptualizing feminism (s) in Africa: The challenges facing African women
writers and critics. The English Academy Review, 23(1), 133–141.
Nkealah, N. (2016). Internal and external crises Africa’s feminism: learning from oral narratives.
Gender and Behaviour, 14(2), 7364–7372.
Nnaemeka, O. (2004). Nego-feminism: Theorizing, practicing, and pruning Africa’s way. Signs:
Journal of women in culture and society, 29(2), 357–385.
Ntseane, P. G. (2011). Culturally sensitive transformational learning: Incorporating the Afrocentric
paradigm and African feminism. Adult education quarterly, 61(4), 307–323.
Pailey, R. N. (2016). Where is the ‘African’in African studies? African Arguments, 7.
Pasura, D. (2013). Modes of incorporation and transnational Zimbabwean migration to Britain.
Ethnic and Racial Studies, 36(1), 199–218.
Raftopoulos, B., & Phimister, I. (2004). Zimbabwe Now: The Political Economy of Crisis and
Coercion. Historical Materialism, 12(4), 355–382. Retrieved 2024-06-28, from https://
brill.com/view/journals/hima/12/4/article-p355_13.xml                  doi: doi: 10.1163/
1569206043505301
Ranga, D. (2015). Gender diﬀerences in the migration of Zimbabwean teachers to South Africa.
Eastern Africa Social Science Research Review, 31(1), 43–62.
Sachikonye, T. (2010). African feminism driven by African women. Consultancy African Intelligence.
Sadomba, Z. W., Chigwanda, B., & Manyati, T. (2015). Education in the crucible of a postcolonial
revolution: community reaction to the challenges of Zimbabwe’s crisis. Social Dynamics, 41(2),
235–252.
Shava, G. N., & Ndebele, C. (2014). Challenges and opportunities for women in distance education
management positions: Experiences from the Zimbabwe Open University (ZOU). Journal of Social
Sciences, 40(3), 359–372.
Steyn, G., & Parsaloi, M. (2014). Moving towards gender equality: the case of female head
teachers in Kenya. Gender and Behaviour, 12(1), 5980–5993.
Zhira, M. (2004). Uncovering the reality of state violence in western Zimbabwe, 1982-1987. Past
Imperfect, 10.
Zikhali, J., & Perumal, J. (2012). The 56th yearbook on teacher education. International Council of
Education for Teaching. 56th World Assembly, 10–12.
Zikhali, J., & Perumal, J. (2016). Leading in disadvantaged Zimbabwean school contexts:
Female school heads’ experiences of emotional labour. Educational Management Administration &
Leadership, 44(3), 347–362.
Zimbabwe National Statistics Agency (ZIMSTAT).    (2016).   Understanding Equity in
Zimbabwe: Women and men Report (Tech. Rep.). Harare, Zimbabwe: ZIMSTAT. Retrieved
from https://www.zimstat.co.zw/wp-content/uploads/publications/Social/
Gender/Women-and-Men-Report-2016.pdf


                                                                                                 68