Vol. V, No. I (Winter 2020)                                                  Global Social Sciences Review (GSSR)
    p- ISSN: 2520-0348                                                 URL: http://dx.doi.org/10.31703/gssr.2020(V-I).37
    e-ISSN: 2616-793X                                                                   DOI: 10.31703/gssr.2020(V-I).37
    ISSN-L: 2520-0348                                                                                   Page: 362 ‒ 369


                       Jahangir Afzal*                                        Muhammad Tanveer Afzal†

    Need Analysis of School Management Information System for Public Schools in
                                Punjab (Pakistan)

                        The research was designed to identify and analyze the need for School MIS at secondary and
      Abstract         higher secondary school levels in Punjab. Three separate questionnaires were developed for school
      principals, teachers and parents. The population of the study was the principals, teachers and parent members of
      the school councils of public schools. Punjab has 36 districts and the study was delimited to 12 districts selected
      randomly. A 10% sample from each of twelve districts was taken. Findings of the study indicated that there is no
      type of school-based MIS available in public schools and there is a dire need of school-based MIS to easily record
      and retrieve information. It was concluded that school efficiency cannot be improved significantly without
      introducing school-based MIS in public schools of Punjab.



    Key Words: School MIS, management, information system, SMIS, SIMS


Introduction
The ‘information’ today is a precious commodity, necessary for the success and development of
individuals as well as countries. The importance of information in the management process is
recognized globally. This situation led the world to convert their information systems from manual to
computer-based, connected with the internet.
     In this age of information technology, organizational managers have to collect volumes of data,
convert it into information and use in the decision making to achieve their targets. Information is a
resource like capital and manpower in the modern world (Reddy, Srinivasu, Rikkula, & Rao, 2011).
     In Pakistan, no computerized educational data were available up to the 1980s. The educational
activities were very slow and tiresome. Obsolete and unauthentic data often caused many defects in
planning. Therefore, the need for an improved data collection and processing mechanism was felt and
an EMIS pilot project was initiated in the 1980s in Peshawar (KP). Later, activities were expanded and
a National EMIS project was launched during 1991-1993 (Amin, 1994).
     Now a national level EMIS is working under the umbrella of the Academy of Educational Planning
and Management Islamabad. AEPAM is responsible to research educational issues. However, it is facing
many problems like inadequate funds, issues of data collection and analysis, insufficient staff, and a
nominal role in policy matters (Human Development Fund, 2002).
     In Pakistan, a national and provincial level EMIS although exist but it gives the overall picture of
education of the country and does not fulfill the needs of schools.
     The study is beneficial for government to develop a school based MIS for public high and higher
secondary schools. School MIS has been successfully functioning in many developed countries for the
last more than two decades. School based Management Information System is expected to fulfill the
information needs of education managers, teachers, students, parents and society. It may be helpful for
school heads by providing the operational data for planning, scheduling, controlling and in decision
making for smooth functioning of the institutions. It may be helpful to store student information which
enhances the decision making related to the students’ development and progress in the class, planning

*
  PhD Scholar, Department of Educational Planning, Policy Studies and Leadership (EPPSL), Allama Iqbal Open
University Islamabad, Pakistan.
†
  Assistant Professor, Department of Science Education, Allama Iqbal Open University, Islamabad, Pakistan.
Email: tanveer.afzal@aiou.edu.pk

    Citation: Afzal, J., & Afzal, M., T. (2020). Need Analysis of School Management Information System for Public
    Schools in Punjab (Pakistan). Global Social Sciences Review, V(I), 362-369. doi:10.31703/gssr.2020(V-I).37

Need Analysis of School Management Information System for Public Schools in Punjab (Pakistan)


their placement activity better and also managing alumni in the long run. It may help teachers to plan
their teaching strategy in a better way with the help of up to date student record.
     The main purpose of the research was to study the availability of School MIS in the public schools
of Punjab. The research was intended to identify the need and importance of school based MIS for
school improvement.

Literature Review
In the last 25 years, school information management systems are being used in the developed countries.
A research conducted in Portugal reveals that structural changes in the school system have challenged
the old setup. The study suggested a new MIS for Portuguese schools to resolve the identified problems
and meet the needs of a modern school. (Nelson, 2013).
      According to a British government agency BECTA report 2005, School MIS are ‘crucial to
institutional effectiveness’. These tools enable school managers to improve efficiency, effectiveness and
the performance of their schools. This can be achieved through SMIS by reducing the staff workload,
effective time management through systematic timetabling, emphasizing individualized learning,
providing analytical tools of assessment to the teachers and providing online access for parents to
improve parent-school links (BECTA, 2005).
      Many researchers have mentioned a lot of advantages of School MIS in planning, administration
and management of schools. Telem (1996) noted in his study that School MIS brought improvements
in decision making, teachers’ interaction and instructional areas. SMIS brought school affairs business-
friendly. Visscher (1996) mentioned that SMIS provides in time information to the teachers and
administrators which facilitates planning, policy-making, and evaluation. In this way, it helps in
improving the school performance. Nwagwu (1995) indicated in his study that record keeping is the
lifeline of school planning process. It is an impossible task to plan and manage an institute effectively
where record is not maintained properly. Nwagwu (1995) believes that accurate and adequate data
about school infrastructure, students and staff is necessary for effective school planning and
management.
      The researches indicated that School MIS has modified the role of school administration and
management. It has also changed the working environment of the schools (Pegler, 1992). The School
MIS can change the leadership style, decision-making process, responsibility, working environment,
HRM, communication and planning areas of school administration and management (Gur, 2000).
      In Short, a School MIS is a tool of management that helps to promote teaching-learning process
and improve the school’s performance. It should be helpful to ‘increase success and decrease failure’
(Jenkins, 2003). Another researcher (Demir, 2006) explored the perceptions of schools heads in Turkey
about the use of SMIS. Results indicated that it contributed positively to school administration and
management. Ahmad et al (2010) suggested the design of a novel system for students of Ayub Medical
College Pakistan to resolve various problems. The researchers designed a computerized database of
student information system. They studied old manual system of Ayub Medical College, Abbottabad
Pakistan and suggested a computerized system to resolve complications faced in manual system. As a
result of the study, a comprehensive database for the students (AMCSIS) was introduced. It was the
claim that system can store vast data and generate reports quickly. The system was helpful to manage
the information and use it easily and have effective data control. The system enabled the users to
flexibly access data through a graphical user interface.
      In Pakistan, some private educational institutions like ‘The Smart Schools’ have launched their own
school MIS which is web-based system having an LMS Module, Academic and Result Management
Module, Parental updating via SMS Module and Lesson Planning Module. Roots School System also
has its own school MIS and a website www.rootsschool.edu.pk. The website contains general
information about schools and their activities. Beacon House School System is another well-known
private school chain in Pakistan. They have branches in Asia, Europe and the Middle East. They have
a well-established school MIS. Their website www.beaconhouse.edu.pk has menus about school


Vol. V, No. I (Winter 2020)                                                                          363

                                                                 Jahangir Afzal and Muhammad Tanveer Afzal


registration, contact us, FAQ, curriculum, alumni, parent/student information, career and franchising.
Each menu has further links to different school activities. They have a comprehensive student
registration web portal. Student and their parents can submit admission applications online.
     The review of the literature indicates that school-based management information system is the
basic need of any school to meet the challenging demands of a rapidly growing global society. Pakistan
has although developed a central EMIS but there is no school-based management information system
available to the school heads and teachers so that they can plan their educational activities efficiently.

Research Methodology
This was applied research and descriptive in nature. Quantitative techniques applied in compilation and
generation of results. The study was based on the survey of schools to collect data from stakeholders
i.e. principals, teachers and parents.

Population
The study was conducted in government high and higher secondary schools of Punjab (Pakistan). Punjab
is divided into thirty-six districts. The population was delimited to one-third of the whole Punjab i.e.
twelve districts selected randomly for this study. All school principals, class teachers and parent
members of school councils of these twelve districts were the population of the study.

Sampling Technique
The stratified random selection technique was used for sampling of districts. Ten percent (10%) schools
from each district were selected by using the convenient sampling technique. A headteacher, two class
teachers and one parent member of the school council of the same school were sampled.

Research Instruments
Three Questionnaires for school managers, teachers and parents were developed to collect the data. It
was assumed that the School MIS will consist of more or less these modules including Administrative
module, Ministry/Local Authorities Module, school Processes Module, Student Information Module,
Enrolment Module, Examination Module, Reporting Module, Parent Notification Module, Timetabling
Module (Durnali, 2014).
    After the review of related literature and input received from the focus group, three questionnaires
were developed.
  Questionnaire A - for Principals
  Questionnaire B - for Teachers
  Questionnaire C - for Parents

Validity and Reliability
The content validity of the questionnaires was ensured through the expert opinion by applying Lawshe’s
Content Validity Ratio as mentioned (Ayre & Scally, 2013). Total of 13 experts were consulted. Six
were PhD level faculty members of Allama Iqbal Open University Islamabad while remaining seven
were field experts i.e. school heads. Questionnaires were refined according to the opinions of the
experts.
    The reliability of the questionnaire was ensured through pilot testing. The questionnaires were
administered in 30 schools of district Rawalpindi. Only tehsil Gujar Khan and tehsil Kallar Syedan
schools of district Rawalpindi were included in the pilot testing. Data collected through pilot testing
were analyzed by using SPSS Software.

Data Collection
After validation and reliability, the questionnaires were administered in the sample schools. Twelve
districts were selected and one person in each district was our coordinator. The help of Senior Staff


Global Social Science Review (GSSR)                                                                   364

Need Analysis of School Management Information System for Public Schools in Punjab (Pakistan)


Association Punjab (Staff association of grade 17 and above employees of Punjab Schools) was sought
for the selection of district coordinators. Questionnaires were sent to these coordinators through courier
and conventional mailing system. These coordinators distributed questionnaires in the schools of their
respective districts.

Data Analysis
Data collected through three types of survey questionnaires were analyzed by using SPSS software.
Each questionnaire was treated separately. The first questionnaire was for school principals, second for
teachers and third for parents. Total of 253 principals, 507 teachers and 255 parents responded to the
questionnaires. The frequency of responses and their percentage was drawn.

Questionnaire for Principals

Table 1. General Information about School MIS
 S. No      Statement                                                           Yes         No            N/A
            Do you have any electronic MIS in your                    f          05         245            03
 1
            school?                                                   %         1.96       96.07          1.17
            Do you need any computerized MIS to easily                f         213         32             10
 2
            record and retrieve information in the school?            %         83.5       12.5           3.9
            Do you think that electronic MIS will fulfill             f         227         22              6
 3          the purpose of improvement in school
                                                                      %         89.0        8.6           2.4
            efficiency?
Table 1 reveals that only 1.96% of principals agreed that they have electronic MIS in the school, 96.07%
responded that they don’t have any electronic MIS in their School, while only 1.17% were uncertain.
83.5% of principals agreed that they feel the need for any computerized MIS in their school to easily
record and retrieve information while 12.5% disagreed with the statement and 3.9% respondents were
uncertain. 89% of principals agreed that electronic MIS will fulfill the purpose of improvement in school
efficiency, 8.6% of respondents disagreed with the statement and 2.4% did not reply about the
statement.

Questionnaire for Teachers

Table 2. General Information about School MIS
  S. No                 Statement                                                       Yes        No      N/A
                                                                                 f       19        482       6
  1                     Do you have any electronic MIS in your school?
                                                                                 %       3.7       95.1     1.2
                        Do you need any computerized MIS to easily               f      435         54      18
  2
                        record and retrieve information in the school?           %      85.7       10.7     3.6
                        Do you think that electronic MIS will fulfill the        f      490         11       6
  3
                        purpose of improvement in school efficiency?             %      96.6        2.2     1.2
Table 2 reveals that 3.7% of teachers agreed that they have electronic MIS in their school, 95.1%
respondents responded that they don’t have any electronic MIS in their School, while only 1.2% were
uncertain. 85.7% of teachers agreed that they feel the need of any computerized MIS in their school to
easily record and retrieve information while 10.7% disagreed with the statement. 3.6% did not respond
towards the statement. The highest majority of 96.6% of teachers agreed that electronic MIS will fulfill
the purpose of improvement in school efficiency, 2.2% of respondents disagreed with the statement.
1.2% did not reply about the statement.



Vol. V, No. I (Winter 2020)                                                                                       365

                                                                 Jahangir Afzal and Muhammad Tanveer Afzal


Questionnaire for Parents

Table 3. General Information about School MIS
 S. No     Statement                                                          Yes        No       N/A
           Do you have any electronic MIS in your child’s              f       69       117        69
    1
           school?                                                     %      27.1      45.9      27.1
           Do you feel the need for any computerized MIS in            f      234        14         7
    2
           your child’s school to easily retrieve information?         %      91.5       5.5       2.7
           Do you think that electronic MIS will fulfill the           f      237        11         7
    3
           purpose of improvement in school efficiency?                %      92.9       4.3       2.7
Table 3 shows that 27.1% of parents agreed that their child school has electronic MIS, 45.9% of
respondents disagreed with the statement, while only 27.1% were uncertain. 91.5% of parents agreed
that they feel the need of any computerized MIS in their child’s school to easily retrieve information
while 5.5% disagreed with the statement. 2.7% did not respond to the statement. 92.9% of parents
agreed that electronic MIS will fulfill the purpose of improvement in school efficiency, 4.3% of
respondents disagreed with the statement. 2.7% did not answer the statement.

Discussion
The research project was initiated for the need analysis of the school management information system
for public high and higher secondary schools in Punjab. To achieve this objective, the complete public
school system in Punjab was studied with special reference to prevailing situation; school management
system, its requirements, accuracy, reliability and implementation. Then the relevant literature was
reviewed to get in-depth insight into the project. After these two basic tasks, a focus group of all
stakeholders (Principals, teachers and parents) was formulated and a meeting was conducted in a
government high school of district Rawalpindi. The complete concept of school MIS was discussed
with the focus group and the input was sought to make the survey questionnaires more comprehensive.
Then three comprehensive questionnaires were prepared for school Principals, teachers and parents.
     After preparation, these questionnaires were validated through expert opinion by applying
Lawshe’s Content Validity Ratio as mentioned (Ayre & Scally, 2013). Total of 13 experts were
consulted. Six were PhD level faculty members of Allama Iqbal Open University Islamabad while
remaining seven were field experts i.e. school heads. Questionnaires were refined according to the
opinions of the experts.
     The reliability of the questionnaire was ensured through pilot testing. The questionnaires were
administered in 30 schools of district Rawalpindi. Only tehsil Gujar Khan and tehsil Kallar Syedan
schools of district Rawalpindi were included in the pilot testing. Data collected through pilot testing
were analyzed by using SPSS Software.
     The school principals, teachers and parent members of the school councils of government high
and higher secondary schools of Punjab (Pakistan) were the population of the study. Punjab has 36
districts and the study was delimited to 12 districts. A 10% sample from each of twelve districts was
taken. As districts have a different number of high and higher secondary schools so the sample from
each district varied in number. The sampling was done carefully from all three regions (north, south
and central) in equal proportion. Two districts from the north, four from the south and six districts from
the central regions were taken as samples randomly. A total number of high and higher secondary
schools in each district was taken from the official portal of the school education department Punjab.
One Principal, two teachers and one parent member of the school council from each school were
included in the research.
     A coordinator from each district was nominated who distributed and received back the
questionnaires through special messengers. Local courier service and conventional mailing system were




Global Social Science Review (GSSR)                                                                   366

Need Analysis of School Management Information System for Public Schools in Punjab (Pakistan)


used to send and receive back questionnaires from district coordinators. Data were analyzed through
SPSS. Simple frequency and percentage methods were used.

Results
The responses of the questionnaires A, B & C indicated that 96% of principals, 95.1% of teachers and
50% of parents confirmed that there is no any type of School MIS available in the schools. Survey
results indicated that 83.5% of principals, 85.7% of teachers and 91.5% of parents feel that there is a
need for computerized MIS in their schools to easily record and retrieve information. It was revealed
from the survey results that 89% of principals, 96.6% of teachers and 92.9% of parents agreed that
electronic MIS will fulfill the purpose of improvement in school efficiency.

Conclusion
The results of the study confirmed that there is no type of school-based management information
system available in the government schools of Punjab. The work of principals and teachers is
overburdened due to working manually. It identified the need to develop and launch a school-based
management information system in public schools. Survey results indicated the need for computerized
MIS to easily record and retrieve information. Respondents agreed that electronic MIS will fulfill the
purpose of improvement in school efficiency. It was concluded that school efficiency cannot be
improved significantly without introducing a school management information system in public schools.

Recommendations
It is recommended that a centralized school management information system should be launched.
School Education Department Punjab may take initiative and launch it according to the needs of schools
as mentioned in this study. Each school principal should have full access and administrative control on
their relevant portal/data.




Vol. V, No. I (Winter 2020)                                                                        367

                                                                 Jahangir Afzal and Muhammad Tanveer Afzal


References
ACARA. (2014). Frequently Asked Questions about the My School Website. Retrieved from
         http://www.acara.edu.au/
Ahmad N. et al, (2010). A Novel Database Design for Student Information System, Journal of Computer
         Science,       Pahang:        Malaysia,      6(1),      pp.      43-46.      Retrieved      from
         http://thescipub.com/pdf/10.3844/jcssp.2010.43.46
Amin, M. (1994). FedEMIS : Project Description and Finanacing. Islamabad: AEPAM.
Ayre, C, & Scally, A. J. (2013). Critical Values for LawShe's Content Validity Ratio: Revisitingthe
         Original Methods of Calculation. Retrieved from mecd.sagepub.com
Bee, R. & Bee, F. (1999). Managing Information and Statistics. London: CIPD Publishing.
BECTA. (2005). School Management, Information Systems, and Value for Money. Coventry: BECTA
         (Online). Retrieved from http://webarchive.nationalarchives.gov.uk
Courage, C, & Baxter, K. (2005). Understanding your users; a practical guide to user requirements
         methods, tools, and techniques. (1st ed.). San Francisco: Morgan Kaufmann Publishers.
Demir, K. (2006). School Management Information Systems in primary schools. The Turkish Online
         Journal of Educaional Technology , 5(2), 32-45.
Durnali, M. (2014). The Contribution of E-School, A Student Information Management             System, To
         the Data Processes, Environment, Education and Economy of Turkey. Retrieved                 from
         http://www.academia.edu/5112277/
Gurr, D. (2000). How Information and Communication Technology is changing the Work of Principals.
         Paper presented at the International Congress of School Effectiveness and Improvement, Hong
         Kong. Retrieved from http://www.ied.edu.hk/cric/ic2000/s9list.htm
Human Development Fund. (2002). Five ways to improve the structure of Pakistan's education system.
         Retrieved from www.yespakistan.com/education/5ways_imr_edu.asp
Husein, A. H. (2014). What Matters Most for Education Management Information Systems : A
         framework Paper. SABER- World Bank Group.
Jenkins, L. (2003). Improving student learning: Applying Deming's quality principles in classrooms. (3rd
         Ed.). Milwaukee: ASQ Quality Press.
Laudon, K. C. & Laudon, J. P. (2012). Management Information Systems: Managing the Digital
         Firm (12th Edition). New Jersey: Prentice Hall.
Nampila, J. (2012). Development of a Computer-Assisted School Information System for Namibian
         Schools, thesis presented in partial fulfillment of the requirements for the degree of Master of
         Information Technology at the Polytechnic of Namibia. Retrieved from
         https://www.scribd.com/document/271234511
Nelson, B.V. (2013). A Management Information System for Portuguese Schools. Master's Thesis,
         Faculty of Science & Technology,University of Algarve (UAlg) Portugal. Retrieved            from
         https://sapientia.ualg.pt/bitstream/10400.1/6786/1/a44399%20BNelson%20Thesis.pdf
Nwagwu, NA (1995). The development and management of records in Nigerian Education system.
         Ehiametalor E.T. (Ed.) Data Management of Schools and Other Issues. Benin City: NERA
         publishers
Pegler, G. (1992). Perspectives for school information systems. Australian Journal of Educational
         Technology. 8(2). 161-171.
Reddy, Srinivasu, Rikkula & Rao (2011). Management Information System to help managers for
         providing decision making in an organization. International Journal of Reviews in Computing.
         Vol.5, Retrieved from http://www.ijric.org/volumes/Vol5/1Vol5.pdf
Sekaran, U. (2003). Researched Methods for Business, A Skill building Approach. 4th            Edition.
         John            Wiley            &          Sons,           Inc.        Retrieved           from
         https://iaear.weebly.com/uploads/2/6/2/5/26257106/research_methods_entiree_book_umasek
         aram-pdf-130527124352-phpapp02.pdf




Global Social Science Review (GSSR)                                                                   368

Need Analysis of School Management Information System for Public Schools in Punjab (Pakistan)


School Education Department Punjab (2015). School Education Department. Retrieved from
         http://schoolportal.punjab.gov.pk/schcriteria.asp?crit=High
Survey of Pakistan (2012). Atlas of Pakistan. Rawalpindi: Director Map Publications.
Telem, M. (1996). MIS Implementation in Schools: A Systems Socio-Technical Framework. Computers
         & Education, 27(2), 85-93. Retrieved fromhttps://www.learntechlib.org/p/81606/.67
Visscher, A.J. (1996). The implications of how school staffs handle information for the use of school
         information systems. International Journal of Educational Research. 25(4), 323-334.




Vol. V, No. I (Winter 2020)                                                                      369