Kharisma: Jurnal Administrasi Pendidikan Islam
Vol. 3, Issue 1 (2024), pp. 1-15
ISSN: 2964-3996, DOI: https://doi.org/10.59373/kharisma.v3i1.43




Principal Strategies in School Management at the State Vocational High
School

Bulan Rohmadiyah1, Afif Zamroni2 Ismawati3
 1    Universitas Pesantren Kh. Abdul Chalim Mojokerto Indonesia ; rohmadiyah.bulan@gmail.com
 2    Universitas Pesantren Kh. Abdul Chalim Mojokerto Indonesia: afifzam.ikhac@gmail.com
 3    Institut Agama Islam Daruttaqwa Gresik, Indonesia: ismawati@insida@ac.id


     ARTICLE INFO                        ABSTRACT
                                         This article aims to describe the principal's management in
     Keywords:
                                         implementing education management in vocational high
     Education        Management,        schools. This article uses case study research with data
     Management Standards,
                                         collection from observation interviews and documentation.
     Principal Leadership.
                                         The informants consist of the principal, vice principal,
                                         teachers, staff, and some school members. The findings of this
                                         study are Program implementation at SMK Negeri 1 Dlanggu
     Article history:                    has a prominent position compared to other elements of the
     Received 2023-10-11                 education management standard. Each program is
     Revised 2024-02-13                  implemented by each school community with a high level of
     Accepted 2024-03-12                 awareness and with a predetermined division of tasks.
                                         Monitoring and evaluation are carried out based on the
                                         education management standards that have been set. School
                                         leadership at SMK Negeri 1 Dlanggu follows the education
                                         management standard. This can be seen from the hierarchical
                                         structure consisting of the Principal, Vice Principal, and
                                         Affairs Coordinator. Each member of the leadership team is
                                         aware of their respective roles and responsibilities, and they
                                         work collaboratively to improve overall school management,
                                         with the ultimate goal of achieving educational excellence.
                                         The development of the management information system
                                         shows relatively good results, although there is still room for
                                         further improvement in the utilization of resources to facilitate
                                         school administration and management.
                                                        This is an open-access article under the CC BY-SA license.




     Corresponding Author:
     Bulan Rohmadiyah
     Universitas Pesantren Kh. Abdul Chalim Mojokerto ; rohmadiyah.bulan@gmail.com




                                                                                http://kharisma.pdtii.org/

Kharisma: Vol,3 Issue 1 (2024):                                                                                       2 of 15




     1.   INTRODUCTION

             In the current era of globalization, it is increasingly understood how important the
      development of education is, this is due to the many emerging technologies or the rapid pace of
      civilization that will demand the readiness of more mature human resources in all respects (B,
      Kardini, Elshifa, Adiawaty, & Wijayanti, 2023; Musyaffa, B, Ichsan, Setianto, & Hasanah, 2023).
      Education can be said to be successful if the education process goes well. The process of education
      is the process of giving the ability to individuals to be able to give meaning to themselves and their
      environment (Abdussyukur, Mursyidi, Nicolas, Syarfuni, & Muflihah, 2023).
             Ruswandi (Azizi, Atlasi, Ziapour, Abbas, & Naemi, 2021) highlighted that educational
      institutions possess assets that can be employed to fulfill educational objectives. These assets can
      be categorized into (a) non-human resources, encompassing school programs and curriculum, (b)
      human resources (HR), including principals, teachers, staff, and other education personnel, as well
      as students, parents, and communities with vested interests in the school, (c) physical resources
      (SDF), which involve buildings, rooms, equipment, educational teaching aids, learning time, and
      the physical environment of the school, and (d) financial resources (SDK), covering the overall
      school management funds obtained from both the government and the community. Effective
      management practices are crucial for each of these resources to successfully attain the goals
      established by each educational unit (Tafsir et al., 2004).
             The management of education units, in this case, is the application of school-based
      management in addition to requiring guidelines, education management must be based on the
      principle of a development plan, the plan is then implemented in the form of an annual work plan
      which is a more detailed description of the medium-term plan of the education unit covering a
      period of 4 (four) years (Basari, Sebgag, Noval, Mudrikah, & Mulyanto, 2023; Hasibuan, 2022;
      Mohzana, Masita, Adnan, Murcahyanto, & Kulsum, 2023). (1) The annual work plan includes an
      educational or academic calendar, (2) a schedule for the preparation of the curriculum at the
      education unit level for the following year, (3) subjects taught, (4) teaching tasks for educators, (5)
      textbooks used, (6) schedules for the use and maintenance of infrastructure, (7) procurement of
      use and supply of consumables, (8) quality improvement programs for educators and education
      personnel,      (9) teacher council meeting schedule, (10) school committee, (11) schedule for
      preparing RAPBS and similar reports. The elements contained in the plan must be approved by
      the teacher council meeting taking into account the consideration of the school committee meeting.
             Efforts to improve this standardization are supported by the management of school
      principals because the success of an educational institution is not only supported by complete
      facilities and infrastructure, qualified teachers or good student input, but the role of the principal
      with his managerial ability is one of the educational components that play the most role in
      improving the quality of educational institutions (Aisyah, Ilmi, Rosyid, Wulandari, & Akhmad,
      2022; Estiani & Hasanah, 2022; Yamin, Basri, & Suhartini, 2023). Many say that successful schools
      are those led by qualified principals. SMK Negeri 1 Dlanggu is a vocational high school located in
      Mojokerto Regency Based on the researcher's observation the principal has optimized the
      management carried out following the standard education management program well. Therefore,
      researchers researched "Principal Management in School Management at SMK Negeri 1 Dlanggu".




Bulan Rohmadiyah, Afif Zamroni, Ismawati/ Principal Strategies in School Management at the State Vocational High School

Kharisma: Vol,3 Issue 1 (2024):                                                                                       3 of 15




     2.   METHODS
             This study employs a qualitative research methodology, characterized by an absence of
      statistical rules and quantification. The chosen approach for this research is the case study method,
      conducted specifically at SMK Negeri 1 Dlanggu, located at Jalan Jendral Ahmad Yani No.17,
      Kedunglengkong, Dlanggu, Jabaran, Pohkecik, Dlanggu District, Mojokerto Regency. The data
      collection techniques utilized in this study involve Observation, Documentation, and Interview
      (triangulation). The data analysis follows the four stages outlined by (Miles, Huberman, &
      Saldana, 2018): 1) Data collection, 2) Data reduction, 3) Data presentation (Data Display), and 4)
      Verification and Conclusion Attraction. Triangulation, a method for ensuring data validity by
      incorporating different sources, is applied according to Moleong (2012). This involves comparing
      and cross-checking findings from primary informants with those obtained from other sources.


     3.   FINDINGS AND DISCUSSION
          Planning
                 The process of program planning involves the preparation of various elements related
          to the achievement of educational management goals and objectives. As defined by
          Permendiknas Number 19 of 2007 concerning Primary and Secondary Education Management
          Standards, program planning is characterized as an activity that encompasses the formulation
          of the vision, mission, school goals, and the development of multiple management guidelines.
          These guidelines cover planning for student affairs, curriculum and learning, the management
          and utilization of educators and education personnel, educational facilities and infrastructure,
          finance and financing, school culture and environment, public relations and partnerships, as
          well as other aspects that contribute to quality assurance and development. Additionally,
          program planning includes the monitoring and evaluation of programs.
                 Related to this, the author conducted an interview with the principal of SMK Negeri 1
          Dlanggu, Mrs. Irni Istiqomah, saying:
                 "Program planning at SMK Negeri 1 Dlanggu certainly refers to the guidelines set by
                 Permendiknas Number 19 of 2007, including all components required in it, namely the
                 vision, mission, school goals, school work plan, and aspects of school planning and
                 guidelines. We can see this situation by the compatibility between the guidelines and
                 implementation in the field. The school has a vision and mission formulation that is
                 placed at the front of the school. The Head of SMK Negeri 1 Dlanggu stated that the
                 school's vision involves all stakeholders in the school, the school committee. Based on
                 the SWOT analysis, the school's vision is then compiled, so that the formulation is in
                 accordance with what is agreed by all stakeholders and the vision of education in
                 general" The affirmation of this is based on observations made by researchers showing
                 that the school's vision is expressed in short, clear, and easy-to-understand sentences. An
                 aspect other than the easy to understand phrasing is that the placement of the school's
                 vision chart is quite strategic, which is at the front after the school entrance. The school's
                 vision is the realization of graduates with character.”




Bulan Rohmadiyah, Afif Zamroni, Ismawati/ Principal Strategies in School Management at the State Vocational High School

Kharisma: Vol,3 Issue 1 (2024):                                                                                       4 of 15




                 In addition, the author also conducted an interview with the waka curriculum, Mr. Agus,
         saying:
                 "The school's vision is disseminated to all school residents and all interested parties by
                 the principal. Socialization of vision is by conveying the results of joint decisions through
                 oral and coaching as well as in the form of documents. Presentation in classes and
                 strategic places, the vision is drawn up at the beginning of the first period.

                 Based on the results of observations made by researchers, the formulation of the school's
         mission can be understood. This is because the elaboration of the school's mission is done with
         numbering that makes it easier for readers to understand each item in the school's mission,
         besides that the use of language is also done straightforwardly, clearly, making it easier to
         understand.
                 Regarding the vision, mission and goals because SMK Negeri 1 Dlanggu has majors that
         are ready to be directly in the world of work, hereby Waka curriculum Mr. Agus, said: "SMK
         Negeri 1 Dlanggu has many majors that are in great demand in the world of work today. Our majors are
         in the fields of tourism, art and technology expertise".
                 Based on the results of research, SMK Negeri 1 Dlanggu has seven majors that are
         currently in demand by students, including: Multi Media, Software Engineering, Computer
         and Network Engineering, Boga, Hospitality, Animation, and SIJA (Information Systems,
         Networks and Applications)
          Implementation
                     In the implementation of the school work plan, school implementation includes the
          preparation of school guidelines, making school organizational structures and implementing
          school activities. School guidelines include the curriculum at the education unit level (KTSP),
          academic calendar, school organizational structure, distribution of teacher teaching tasks,
          distribution of educational personnel duties, academic regulations, school rules, school code of
          ethics, and school operational costs. The implementation of school activities is divided into
          eight areas, namely:
          Organizational Structure
                     SMK Negeri 1 Dlanggu has an organizational structure based on the results of the
          principal's interview with Mrs. Irni Istiqomah, saying:
          "The organizational structure is administrative, the person in charge of the principal, below
          there is the vice principal, below there are teachers. As for the administrative staff, there is a
          coordinating relationship with the school committee."
          In addition, the author also conducted an interview with Waka curriculum, namely Mr. Agus,
          stating:
                     "The attitude is that the organizational structure is one form of picture that is expected
          to be understood by school stakeholders, to be able to know their respective positions. Its
          function as what, for example as a teacher, is ready to receive direct instructions. As a
          homeroom teacher, he also knows what his position is, what his duties and authorities are and
          as a component that is ready to receive direct instructions. So by looking at the structure, each
          component can know its position as how, what its duties, its obligations how, its expectations
          by looking at it all can know. As an employee when looking at his position, he must introspect
          himself. Form the structure of the structure, the principal has four vice principals. There is a



Bulan Rohmadiyah, Afif Zamroni, Ismawati/ Principal Strategies in School Management at the State Vocational High School

Kharisma: Vol,3 Issue 1 (2024):                                                                                       5 of 15




          division of affairs, which includes curriculum, infrastructure, student affairs, and public
          relations."
                    Relations related to the organizational structure of the school The author also
          conducted an interview with the Head of Administration, Mr. Antonius Yudha, he said:
          "The staff of education personnel with other staff is coordinating, while the command is
          directly from the principal. There is a separate division of duties in office management, namely
          as head of affairs, BOS treasurer, goods treasurer, salary treasurer and others. School committee
          positions are equal or equal in nature that are independent. Between the school and the school
          committee, each stands alone and cannot influence each other."
                    And for the implementation of counseling, extracurricular and alumni tracking service
          activities, an interview with Waka Kesiswaan Mr. Samsul will continue.
          "Counseling in the field has various services. The problems in question include learning
          barriers, personal problems. For personnel, there is already a division of own tasks that deal
          with learning obstacles, learning motivation, and problems between students. For
          extracurricular services there must be scouts. For extracurricular activities, it is not mandatory
          to have PMR, Paskibra, traditional and modern dance, English Debate, Islamic spiritual arts,
          journalism, choir, nature lovers, voly ball, PIK-R and Band. And the extracurricular majors
          there are network engineering, IoT & Robotics, WaPro, coding academy, illustration and
          lattering, fruit caruing, and broadcasting and television.
          Areas of Curriculum and Learning
                    Implementation of curriculum and learning areas consisting of the preparation of
          curriculum documents, educational calendars, implementation of learning programs oriented
          towards improving the quality of education, management of assessment of student learning
          outcomes. In this study, Waka curriculum, Mr. Agus, said:
          "The curriculum calendar is an integral part of the KTSP document, the determination of the
          Education academic calendar is the authority of the Education Office. While the school
          compiles an academic calendar by adding activities of SMK Negeri 1 Dlanggu, including
          effective study time, early entry time for the school year, midterm tests, exams, distribution of
          report cards and others. And the activities on the Education calendar are arranged by semester,
          monthly, and weekly time."
                    And the implementation on the management of the assessment of learning outcomes
          Mr. Agus as Waka curriculum in the interview, said:
                  "The assessment of learning outcomes is carried out with various activities including,
                  general test programs, class increase tests, midterm tests and material in the form of
                  material. Documentation of learning outcomes assessment is carried out through the
                  results of each assessment posted on the notice board, returning the results of each
                  assessment to students, and through report card activities.
          Facilities and Infrastructure
                    Implementation of facilities and infrastructure consisting of the preparation of
          infrastructure programs and library management as one of the learning resources. Principal
          Mrs. Irni Istiqomah, said: "The preparation of the infrastructure management program at SMK Negeri
          1 Dlanggu, according to the principal, Mr. Tarmadi, includes planning the needs of goods, procurement
          of goods, to reporting goods."




Bulan Rohmadiyah, Afif Zamroni, Ismawati/ Principal Strategies in School Management at the State Vocational High School

Kharisma: Vol,3 Issue 1 (2024):                                                                                       6 of 15




                    Based on observations, the infrastructure management program is still around
          recording through inventory cards. Another aspect is that during the research process,
          researchers have found the layout of school plans, rooms, and lay outs of each room.
                    Based on the results of document scrutiny, the management of infrastructure facilities
          at SMK Negeri 1 Dlanggu includes the addition of library materials, the procurement of
          learning support facilities and infrastructure, the management of sanitation facilities, and the
          use of information technology. Principal Mrs. Irni Istiqomah said:
                 "SMK Negeri 1 Dlanggu that related to facilities and infrastructure includes planning the
                 needs of goods, procurement of goods, rehabilitation and maintenance of buildings, to
                 reporting goods and arranging library room management. The implementation of the
                 facilities and infrastructure program is in accordance with the indicators that have been
                 set"

                    Library management, Waka Curriculum SMK Negeri 1 Dlanggu, said: "The library
          certainly has work programs, starting from planning, procurement, and processing. Book procurement
          can be sourced from BOS or from the government."
                    Based on observations, the existence of library space is good, the placement of
          buildings or rooms is in the front of the school. The physical condition is already very good.
          For services monitored in good condition.
                    Finance and Financing: Related to this, the author conducted an interview with the
          principal of SMK Negeri 1 Dlanggu, Mrs. Irni Istiqomah in her interview, saying: School
          financial management comes from the APBN/APBD, School Operational Assistance Fund
          (BOS) committees, donors, school business results and non-binding income."
                    Cultural and Environmental Fields: The school's efforts in creating an atmosphere and
          a conducive educational environment, with the preparation of a code of ethics and school rules.
          Related to this, the principal, Mrs. Irni Istiqomah, said: "We develop rules and codes of ethics
          in this school in order to create a safe and ethical environment"
                    Public Relations and Partnerships: Related to this, the author conducted an interview
          with Waka Public Relations of SMK Negeri 1 Dlanggu, namely Mr. Huddy Iswanto, said:
          "The school added the role of the school committee in addition to liaison, but also as a partner
          of the school, the community, and existing partnerships. The partnerships established include
          focused on cooperation in the context of education quality assurance through cooperation with
          tutoring, aspects of facilities and infrastructure management through cooperation with
          partners and agencies that provide services and services, and cooperation with DUDI including
          with PT. INSAN MEDIKA PERSADA, PT. MUSTIKA RATU, and SHERATON Surabaya
          HOTEL &; TOWERS."
                    Based on the researcher's data, the implementation of the field of public relations and
          partnerships consists of activities involving school committees, communities and existing
          partnerships.




Bulan Rohmadiyah, Afif Zamroni, Ismawati/ Principal Strategies in School Management at the State Vocational High School

Kharisma: Vol,3 Issue 1 (2024):                                                                                       7 of 15




          Supervision and Evaluation
                    Related to this, the author conducted an interview with the principal of SMK Negeri 1
          Dlanggu, Mrs. Irni Istiqomah, saying:
                 "Every semester conducts an evaluation with stakeholders, the results are published and
                 followed up. Our supervision program is carried out. As for teaching and learning
                 activities (KBM) we have internal supervision instruments, for procurement of goods
                 there are also evaluation instruments that we carry out every semester".

                    Related to this, the author conducted an interview with Waka curriculum of SMK
          Negeri 1 Dlanggu, namely Mr. Agus, said:
                 "The curriculum affairs coordinator added that the supervision program has been
                 prepared by the principal, in relation to learning and other aspects. The supervision
                 schedule is prepared and adjusted to the course of KBM. Evaluation of results and
                 follow-up are carried out during coordination activities."

                    Then the Head of Administration Mr. Antonius Yudha Setyawan, said: "That the
          supervision program is within the authority of the principal, all elements are interconnected and
          inseparable from each other."
                    Based on the results of the operation, there are several principals' work programs
          placed in the principal's office. i.e. the principal as supervisor, educator, manager,
          administrator and other functions. Management evaluation is realized on the information
          board in the principal's office.
         Educator and Education Programs
                    Regarding the evaluation program for the utilization of educators and education staff,
          the author conducted an interview with the principal of SMK Negeri 1 Dlanggu, Mrs. Irni
          Istiqomah, said: "Evaluation on performance implementation, for example with DP3, is a school secret.
          The aspects evaluated are of course all those related to the implementation of tasks and social interaction
          in school activities."
                    Waka curriculum Mr. Agus added that:
                 "The performance of educators and education staff is always monitored by the principal
                 in various forms of supervision and evaluation. Often directly the principal monitors the
                 teacher during classroom teaching. In addition to these two things, evaluation is carried
                 out to see performance through direct observation, attendance, fulfillment of working
                 hours. At least at 07.00 WIB have arrived at school, and go home at 03.00 WIB."

                    Based on observations, the KBM process runs well as far as research activities are
          carried out, teachers who provide subject matter are also in accordance with their
          competencies.
          School Accreditation
                    The implementation of preparing accreditation documents has not been clearly
          mentioned in school planning, this is because SMK Negeri 1 Dlanggu in 2022 has carried out
          accreditation activities, but in the accreditation preparation process all elements of the school
          are involved. In addition to the process of involving stakeholders, the activities carried out by
          the school are also in order to achieve eight SNPs.




Bulan Rohmadiyah, Afif Zamroni, Ismawati/ Principal Strategies in School Management at the State Vocational High School

Kharisma: Vol,3 Issue 1 (2024):                                                                                       8 of 15




                    Based on the excerpt from the Decree of the Provincial Accreditation Board for
          Schools/Madrasah (BAP S / M) Number 1857 / BAN-SM / SK / 2022 concerning the
          Determination of School / Madrasah Accreditation Results, SMK Negeri 1 Dlanggu was
          declared accredited with a grade of 92 and a rank of A. The decision was determined in Jakarta
          on November 30, 2022


      Discussion
      Planning
             Planning is an ongoing cognitive procedure involving analysis, formulation, and careful
      consideration, with decisions made requiring internal coherence that systematically connects to
      other decisions, both within the respective domains and across various developmental areas.
      There is no fixed timeframe for a particular type of activity, and it is not obligatory for one activity
      to precede or be followed by another (Cardy & Leonard, 2014).
             According to the research findings, the planning process at SMK Negeri 1 Dlanggu can be
      elucidated in the following segment. The school's vision represents a goal targeted for
      accomplishment over a minimum of five years, addressing aspects such as academic quality,
      facility and infrastructure fulfillment, and overall school management. This vision is formulated
      through a SWOT analysis of the school's current conditions, involving all stakeholders in both the
      preparation and socialization phases. Lewis and Smith emphasize that the vision statement should
      consistently align with any potential changes that may arise.
             Based on the aforementioned discussions, the program planning at SMK Negeri 1 Dlanggu
      is deemed commendable and aligns with the policies governing school management. This
      planning encompasses the development and establishment of the school's vision, mission, and
      goals, the formulation of both four-year and one-year school work plans, and adherence to various
      aspects of school planning and guidelines. Nonetheless, certain considerations should be taken
      into account. These include the imperative for a more comprehensive socialization process
      regarding school goals to ensure understanding among all members of the school community.
      Additionally, there is a need to align the preparation of school work plans with educational
      management standards, which advocate for the creation of RKJM as the foundation for RKAM
      and CTR as the basis for RAPBS preparation. In terms of planning, it is recommended to enhance
      the program plan by incorporating details related to student involvement, cultural considerations,
      and the school environment.
      Implementation
             The execution of school programs encompasses the formulation of school guidelines,
      establishment of school organizational structures, and the actualization of school activities. School
      guidelines cover elements such as the curriculum, academic calendar, school organizational
      structure, allocation of teaching responsibilities among teachers, assignment of duties for
      educational personnel, academic regulations, school policies, ethical guidelines, and operational
      expenses. The implementation of school activities is categorized into eight domains, including
      student affairs, curriculum and learning, educators and education staff, facilities and
      infrastructure, finance and financing, culture and environment, community relations, and
      partnerships (Abdurrahman, Hadijaya, & Sipahutar, 2021; Ateh & Ryan, 2023).




Bulan Rohmadiyah, Afif Zamroni, Ismawati/ Principal Strategies in School Management at the State Vocational High School

Kharisma: Vol,3 Issue 1 (2024):                                                                                       9 of 15




               Based on some of the discussions above, the implementation of the program at SMK Negeri
      1 Dlanggu includes (1) a description of the distribution of tasks through an organizational
      structure, (2) the implementation of school activities in general, (3) the implementation of student
      affairs consisting of the implementation of PPDB, the provision of counseling, extracurricular
      services, and tracking of alumi, (4) the implementation of curriculum and learning areas consisting
      of the preparation of curriculum documents, education calendar, implementation of learning
      programs oriented towards improving the quality of education, management of assessment of
      student learning outcomes, and having academic regulations governing learning activities and
      provisions for the use of learning infrastructure, (5) implementation of the field of educators and
      educational personnel consisting of the preparation of programs for the utilization of educators
      and education personnel, the implementation of career development and achievement, and the
      utilization of educators and personnel education which includes the duties of principals, vice
      principals, teachers and education staff, (6) implementation of facilities and infrastructure
      consisting of the preparation of infrastructure programs and library management as one of the
      learning resources, (7) implementation of cost and financial management based on existing
      regulations, namely derived from the APBN / APBD, School Operational Assistance Fund (BOS)
      committee, donors, school business results and non-binding income, (8) implementation of the
      cultural and environmental fields consisting of school efforts in creating a conducive educational
      environment, preparation of rules, codes of ethics, and school ethical awareness programs, (9)
      implementation of public relations and partnerships focused on cooperation in the context of
      education quality assurance through cooperation with aspects of management of facilities and
      infrastructure through cooperation with agencies that provide services procurement of services
      and services, as well as aspects of involving the community in some school activities. Based on the
      results of the study, the implementation of the program at SMK Negeri 1 Dlanggu is in accordance
      with the established indicators.


      Supervision and Evaluation
               Supervision and evaluation is one of the important components in school management.
      School supervision and evaluation are manifested in five main aspects, namely the preparation of
      supervision programs, school self-evaluation, evaluation and development of curriculum
      implementation, evaluation of the utilization of educators and education personnel, and the
      implementation of school accreditation (Zohriah, Fauzi, & Pandini, 2022). The implementation of
      supervision and evaluation is a reference in planning education quality assurance at the school
      level.
               In light of the research findings, the oversight and assessment procedures at SMK Negeri 1
      Dlanggu can be elucidated as follows: The supervision and evaluation program is conducted
      biannually in collaboration with school stakeholders. Subsequently, the program outcomes are
      disseminated, facilitating follow-up actions aimed at enhancing the school management
      performance (Bolatan, Gozlu, Alpkan, & Zaim, 2016). While the principal holds the authority to
      orchestrate the program, assistance can be enlisted from teachers and staff designated by the
      principal (Badrun, Sugiarto, Rachmadhani, & Sh, 2022). Besides the principal, supervision is also
      conducted by Ministry of Agriculture supervisors. According to the study results, the aspects of
      the supervision program align with the predefined indicators.




Bulan Rohmadiyah, Afif Zamroni, Ismawati/ Principal Strategies in School Management at the State Vocational High School

Kharisma: Vol,3 Issue 1 (2024):                                                                                     10 of 15




               Documentation of the supervision program is realized on the supervision implementation
      schedule that is adjusted to the course of KBM. So that the supervision process can run optimally,
      in addition to the schedule that has been prepared, supervision is carried out by the principal
      through class visits (visitation) when teachers teach or teach when there are empty classes. Based
      on the results of the study, the documentation aspect of the supervision program is in accordance
      with the indicators that have been set.
               The school self-evaluation process is carried out every semester by compiling school profiles
      and EDM documents, but self-evaluation is as stated in the EDM documents. Based on the results
      of the study, the implementation of school self-evaluation is in accordance with the established
      indicators. The curriculum evaluation program is carried out every year, when there are changes
      in demands, the curriculum at SMK Negeri 1 Dlanggu can be updated according to the demands
      of existing needs. Curriculum evaluation program by involving school stakeholders, especially
      teachers and curriculum areas. Curriculum evaluation includes evaluation of student learning
      outcomes, evaluation of learning implementation and evaluation of learning planning (Agus,
      Juliadharma, & Djamaluddin, 2023; Susanti & Rokhman, 2022). Based on the results of the study,
      the curriculum evaluation program is in accordance with the indicators that have been set.
               The evaluation program for educators and education personnel at SMK Negeri 1 Dlanggu
      is carried out, including DP3 assessment, supervision and monitoring carried out by the principal,
      evaluation and supervision, and other forms. Based on the results of the study, the evaluation
      program for educators and education personnel is in accordance with the established indicators.
               In November 2022, SMK Negeri 1 Dlanggu has just carried out accreditation. Relating to
      improving institutional status and quality, it is carried out by improving school quality
      management based on what is the need of school residents and the community. Based on the
      results of the research, the management of schools for development accreditation and status
      improvement is in accordance with the established indicators.
               Based on some of the discussions above, the supervision and evaluation at SMK Negeri 1
      Dlanggu includes (1) the preparation of supervision, evaluation, and supervision programs by the
      principal and functional supervisors, (2) the implementation of supervisory program
      documentation for one semester by the principal and agreed upon by the teacher, (3) school self-
      evaluation is prepared through EDM documents containing school profiles for one school year,
      and based on data achieved by schools (Guangul, Suhail, Khalit, & Khidhir, 2020), (4) curriculum
      evaluation programs are carried out annually consisting of evaluations on learning planning,
      implementation, and assessment of student learning outcomes, and (5) evaluation of the
      performance of educators and education personnel is carried out through DP3 assessment,
      supervision and monitoring by the principal, as well as evaluation and supervision (Forcher et al.,
      2022).
      School Leadership
                    Accountable school management requires a leadership pattern that supports it. The
      person in charge of school leadership is the principal, assisted by the vice principal (Day,
      Sammons, & Gorgen, 2020). In carrying out their duties, the principal can delegate the authority
      that is his responsibility to the vice principal as well as educators and education personnel who
      are considered capable of carrying out the duties of the principal.




Bulan Rohmadiyah, Afif Zamroni, Ismawati/ Principal Strategies in School Management at the State Vocational High School

Kharisma: Vol,3 Issue 1 (2024):                                                                                     11 of 15




             Based on the results of the research, the leadership at SMK Negeri 1 Dlanggu can be
      explained that school leadership essentially carries out management in an accountable and
      transparent manner, so as to support the achievement of optimal school quality. The main
      responsibility is the authority of the principal, but the implementation of leadership is assisted by
      the vice principal (Atstsaury, Hadiyanto, & Supian, 2024). Based on the results of the study, the
      management aspect of school leadership is in accordance with the established indicators.
             The principal, holding the responsibility for school management, exhibits the capability to
      provide vision and serves as a positive role model for all members of the school community
      (Arifin, Sutama, Aryani, Prayitno, & Waston, 2023). The execution of the principal's
      responsibilities adheres to the specified job description located in the principal's office. According
      to the research findings, the aspects concerning the principal's capability and fulfillment of duties
      align with the predetermined indicators (Alwi & Mumtahana, 2023).
             The organizational framework of the school leadership comprises the head of the madrasah,
      supported by a vice principal. However, management is further facilitated by coordinators
      overseeing various domains, including student affairs, curriculum, facilities and infrastructure, as
      well as public relations and partnerships. The research findings indicate that the school leadership
      structure aligns with the established indicators, with the notable inclusion of coordinators
      overseeing specific affairs (Sutrisno, Hayati, Saputra, Arifin, & Kartiko, 2023).
             The principal's role in executing leadership functions involves adopting a visionary stance
      and serving as a model for every member of the school community. Effective communication is a
      notable aspect, characterized by delivering information in a familial manner. This approach aims
      to enhance the effectiveness of criticism directed towards staff, fostering self-improvement and
      ultimately boosting performance. Instructional duties are fulfilled through coordinated activities
      and briefings, facilitating optimal delegation of authority and task distribution. The supervision
      and oversight activities are organized by preparing a schedule that aligns with teachers' schedules,
      ensuring adjustments to teaching and learning activities, conducting classroom visits, and
      employing various forms of supervision (Johnsen, Watson, Erford, Crockett, & Byrd, 2021).
      According to the research findings, the principal's roles align with the established indicators.
             Drawing from the preceding discussions, the administration at SMK Negeri 1 Dlanggu
      encompasses the managerial responsibility vested in the principal, supported by the vice principal
      and affairs coordinator. The principal demonstrates a commendable inclination towards executing
      duties that offer foresight (vision) to all staff and personnel. The organizational structure of school
      leadership features the principal, aided by one vice principal, and four coordinators overseeing
      various domains (student affairs, curriculum, infrastructure, public relations). Moreover, the
      principal has effectively fulfilled management functions, including leadership, communication,
      instructional direction, as well as supervision and oversight.
      Management Information System
                    A management information system is a set of systems used to support the decision-
      making process. As a supporter, using information technology-based applications. The
      implementation of management information systems in schools is carried out through several
      efforts, namely (1) The school manages an adequate management information system to support
      effective, and efficient education administration, (2) the school provides information facilities that
      are efficient, effective, and easily accessible to the community, (3) the school assigns a teacher or




Bulan Rohmadiyah, Afif Zamroni, Ismawati/ Principal Strategies in School Management at the State Vocational High School

Kharisma: Vol,3 Issue 1 (2024):                                                                                     12 of 15




      education staff to serve requests for information or provision of information or complaints from
      the community related to school management, both in writing and all recorded and documented,
      and (4) schools report documented data and information to the District Education Office.
             The first indicator is that schools have a management information system development
      program that supports the improvement of the quality of fish education services (Sirojuddin,
      Amirullah, Rofiq, & Kartiko, 2022). Based on the results of the study, school planning that
      originally did not have an internet or online network then in school planning became improved
      every room in the school had an online network. Then the ability to use computers is also
      improved so that every educator and education staff is able to operate computers (Arnold, Söbke,
      & Reichelt, 2019). Based on the results of this research, the SIM development program is in
      accordance with the established indicators.
             The second indicator is that schools use facilities that are adapted to the development of
      science and technology in the development of management information systems. Utilization
      includes providing WiFi network signals so that every school resident is able to access the internet
      more optimally. Utilization is also carried out through the management of the school website,
      although the updating or management process has not been optimal. Based on the results of this
      research, the utilization of science and technology-based facilities is in accordance with the
      established indicators, but still needs to be improved.
             Based on some of the discussions above, the development of management information
      systems at SMK Negeri 1 Dlanggu is quite good in the aspect of SIM development planning, but
      some things still need to be addressed, especially in the use of ICT-based facilities that support
      school administration activities. So it is hoped that in the future the management of SIM as one of
      the supporting capacities for improving the quality of schools at SMK Negeri 1 Dlanggu can be
      further optimized
     4.   CONCLUSION
             Program planning at SMK Negeri 1 Dlanggu is in accordance with Education Management
      Standards because it includes the formulation and determination of the vision, mission, and goals
      of the school, as well as the preparation of school work plans in accordance with management
      standards. Supervision and evaluation at SMK Negeri 1 Dlanggu are carried out in accordance
      with aspects of curriculum implementation and the performance of educators and education staff
      by the principal and functional supervision. School leadership at SMK Negeri 1 Dlanggu is in
      accordance with education management standards because it consists of one principal assisted by
      four vice principals. The development of management information systems at SMK Negeri 1
      Dlanggu has been very good in the planning aspect of SIM development, very well used, especially
      in the use of ICT-based facilities that support school administration activities. SIM management at
      SMK Negeri 1 Dlanggu is known as SIAKAD because it is one of the supporting capacities for
      improving school quality. School management at SMK Negeri 1 Dlanggu runs according to the
      principal's management. Planning, implementation, supervision and evaluation, as well as
      management information systems are carried out well and are in accordance with management
      standards. Management at SMK Negeri 1 Dlanggu has good implications with good principal
      management.




Bulan Rohmadiyah, Afif Zamroni, Ismawati/ Principal Strategies in School Management at the State Vocational High School

Kharisma: Vol,3 Issue 1 (2024):                                                                                           13 of 15




      REFERENCES
     Abdurrahman, A., Hadijaya, Y., & Sipahutar, M. L. (2021). Implementation Of Group Guidance
               Program Management in Improving Cooperation Learning. Nidhomul Haq : Jurnal
               Manajemen Pendidikan Islam, 6(3), 548–558. https://doi.org/10.31538/ndh.v6i3.1677
     Abdussyukur, A., Mursyidi, M., Nicolas, D. G., Syarfuni, S., & Muflihah, S. (2023). Learning
               Process for Islamic Religious Education Based on Minimum Service Standards for
               Education.        Tafkir:    Interdisciplinary    Journal     of    Islamic     Education,     4(3),       458–472.
               https://doi.org/10.31538/tijie.v4i3.536
     Agus, A., Juliadharma, M., & Djamaluddin, M. (2023). Application of the CIPP Model in Evaluation
               of The Inclusive Education Curriculum in Madrasah Aliyah. Nidhomul Haq : Jurnal
               Manajemen Pendidikan Islam, 8(1), 31–50. https://doi.org/10.31538/ndh.v8i1.2705
     Aisyah, S., Ilmi, M. U., Rosyid, M. A., Wulandari, E., & Akhmad, F. (2022). Kiai Leadership Concept
               in The Scope of Pesantren Organizational Culture. Tafkir: Interdisciplinary Journal of Islamic
               Education, 3(1), 40–59. https://doi.org/10.31538/tijie.v3i1.106
     Alwi, M., & Mumtahana, L. (2023). The Principal’s Strategy in Improving the Quality of Teacher
               Performance in the Learning Process in Islamic Elementary Schools. Kharisma: Jurnal
               Administrasi                Dan          Manajemen                 Pendidikan,             2(1),             66–78.
               https://doi.org/10.59373/kharisma.v2i1.18
     Arifin, S., Sutama, S., Aryani, S. A., Prayitno, H. J., & Waston, W. (2023). Improving The
               Professional Teacher Competence Through Clinical Supervision Based on Multicultural
               Values       in     Pesantren.      Nazhruna:        Jurnal        Pendidikan     Islam,      6(3),        386–402.
               https://doi.org/10.31538/nzh.v6i3.4037
     Arnold, U., Söbke, H., & Reichelt, M. (2019). SimCity in Infrastructure Management Education.
               Education Sciences, 9(3), 209. https://doi.org/10.3390/educsci9030209
     Ateh, C. M., & Ryan, L. B. (2023). Preparing teacher candidates to be culturally responsive in
               classroom         management.        Social      Sciences     &     Humanities      Open,      7(1),        100455.
               https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ssaho.2023.100455
     Atstsaury, S., Hadiyanto, H., & Supian, S. (2024). Principal’s Strategy to Improve Teachers
               Professional Competence. Munaddhomah: Jurnal Manajemen Pendidikan Islam, 5(1), 1–10.
               https://doi.org/10.31538/munaddhomah.v5i1.775
     Azizi, M. R., Atlasi, R., Ziapour, A., Abbas, J., & Naemi, R. (2021). Innovative human resource
               management strategies during the COVID-19 pandemic: A systematic narrative review
               approach. Heliyon, 7(6), e07233. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.heliyon.2021.e07233
     B, A. M., Kardini, N. L., Elshifa, A., Adiawaty, S., & Wijayanti, T. C. (2023). The Role of Quality
               Human Resources in Developing Missions of Future Universities in Indonesian Higher
               Education.         Munaddhomah:        Jurnal      Manajemen         Pendidikan      Islam,        4(1),     49–59.
               https://doi.org/10.31538/munaddhomah.v4i1.342
     Badrun, B., Sugiarto, F., Rachmadhani, A., & Sh, H. (2022). Principal’s Leadership Strategy in
               Strengthening Character Education. Edukasi Islami: Jurnal Pendidikan Islam, 11(01).
               https://doi.org/10.30868/ei.v11i01.2290
     Basari, D. J., Sebgag, S., Noval, S. M. R., Mudrikah, A., & Mulyanto, A. (2023). Human Resource
               Management Model in Islamic Boarding School-Based Private Madrasah Tsanawiyah.




Bulan Rohmadiyah, Afif Zamroni, Ismawati/ Principal Strategies in School Management at the State Vocational High School

Kharisma: Vol,3 Issue 1 (2024):                                                                                               14 of 15




               Nidhomul           Haq :     Jurnal       Manajemen            Pendidikan              Islam,        8(1),       14–30.
               https://doi.org/10.31538/ndh.v8i1.2884
     Bolatan, G. I. S., Gozlu, S., Alpkan, L., & Zaim, S. (2016). The Impact of Technology Transfer
               Performance on Total Quality Management and Quality Performance. Procedia - Social and
               Behavioral Sciences, 235, 746–755. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.sbspro.2016.11.076
     Cardy, R., & Leonard, B. (2014). Performance Management: Concepts, Skills and Exercises. Routledge.
     Day, C., Sammons, P., & Gorgen, K. (2020). Successful School Leadership. In Education Development
               Trust. Education Development Trust. Retrieved from https://eric.ed.gov/?id=ED614324
     Estiani, S. W., & Hasanah, E. (2022). Principal’s Leadership Role in Improving Teacher
               Competence. Nidhomul Haq : Jurnal Manajemen Pendidikan Islam, 7(2), 229–241.
               https://doi.org/10.31538/ndh.v7i2.2281
     Forcher, L., Forcher, L., Härtel, S., Jekauc, D., Wäsche, H., Woll, A., … Altmann, S. (2022). Does
               Technical Match Performance in Professional Soccer Depend on the Positional Role or the
               Individuality         of     the      Player?        Frontiers            in       Psychology,           13,    813206.
               https://doi.org/10.3389/fpsyg.2022.813206
     Guangul, F. M., Suhail, A. H., Khalit, M. I., & Khidhir, B. A. (2020). Challenges of remote
               assessment in higher education in the context of COVID-19: A case study of Middle East
               College.      Educational     Assessment,       Evaluation          and        Accountability,     32(4),      519–535.
               https://doi.org/10.1007/s11092-020-09340-w
     Hasibuan, S. (2022). The Effect of Organizational Culture, Principal Leadership and Motivation on
               Teacher Performance in Madrasah. AL-TANZIM: Jurnal Manajemen Pendidikan Islam, 6(1),
               41–53. https://doi.org/10.33650/al-tanzim.v6i1.3228
     Johnsen, S., Watson, K., Erford, B. T., Crockett, S. A., & Byrd, R. (2021). A Metastudy of Counselor
               Education and Supervision: An Analysis of Publication Characteristics From 2000 to 2019.
               Counselor Education and Supervision, 60(1), 22–34. https://doi.org/10.1002/ceas.12194
     Miles, M. B., Huberman, A. M., & Saldana, J. (2018). Qualitative Data Analysis: A Methods Sourcebook.
               SAGE Publications.
     Mohzana, M., Masita, M., Adnan, M., Murcahyanto, H., & Kulsum, U. (2023). Madrasah Principal’s
               Strategy in Improving Student Recruitment Results at State Aliyah Madrasas. Tafkir:
               Interdisciplinary          Journal         of        Islamic              Education,             4(3),         389–400.
               https://doi.org/10.31538/tijie.v4i3.425
     Musyaffa, A. A., B, A. M., Ichsan, I., Setianto, A. Y., & Hasanah, M. (2023). Examining It-Based
               Human Resources Strategies in Islamic Higher Education and Islamic Boarding Schools In
               Indonesia.      Tafkir:    Interdisciplinary     Journal       of     Islamic       Education,       4(3),     519–534.
               https://doi.org/10.31538/tijie.v4i3.664
     Sirojuddin, A., Amirullah, K., Rofiq, M. H., & Kartiko, A. (2022). Peran Sistem Informasi
               Manajemen dalam Pengambilan Keputusan di Madrasah Ibtidaiyah Darussalam Pacet
               Mojokerto. ZAHRA: Research and Tought Elementary School of Islam Journal, 3(1), 19–33.
               https://doi.org/10.37812/zahra.v3i1.395
     Susanti, S., & Rokhman, M. (2022). Fostering Learners’ Interpersonal Intelligence through
               Religious Extracurricular Activities: A Case Study in An Islamic School. Tafkir:
               Interdisciplinary          Journal         of        Islamic               Education,             3(1),         92–104.
               https://doi.org/10.31538/tijie.v3i1.115




Bulan Rohmadiyah, Afif Zamroni, Ismawati/ Principal Strategies in School Management at the State Vocational High School

Kharisma: Vol,3 Issue 1 (2024):                                                                                     15 of 15




     Sutrisno, S., Hayati, H., Saputra, N., Arifin, S., & Kartiko, A. (2023). The Influence of The Head of
               Madrasah and Infrastructure Facilities on The Quality of Education Through Teacher
               Competence. Tafkir: Interdisciplinary Journal of Islamic Education, 4(2), 274–288.
               https://doi.org/10.31538/tijie.v4i2.423
     Tafsir, A., Supardi, A., Basri, H., Mahmud, M., Kurahman, O. T., Fathurrahman, P., … Suryana, Y.
               (2004). Cakrawala Pemikiran Pendidikan Islam (T. Priatna, Ed.). Bandung: Mimbar Pustaka:
               Media Tranformasi Pengetahuan. Retrieved from https://scholar.google.co.id
     Yamin, M., Basri, H., & Suhartini, A. (2023). Learning Management in Salaf Islamic Boarding
               Schools. At-Tadzkir: Islamic Education Journal, 2(1), 25–36.
     Zohriah, A., Fauzi, A., & Pandini, I. R. (2022). The Impact of Managerial and Principal Academic
               Supervision on Teacher Performance. Nidhomul Haq : Jurnal Manajemen Pendidikan Islam,
               7(3), 434–449. https://doi.org/10.31538/ndh.v7i3.2607




Bulan Rohmadiyah, Afif Zamroni, Ismawati/ Principal Strategies in School Management at the State Vocational High School