Research in Educational Administration & Leadership
                                       Volume: 8, Issue: 3 / September 2023



            Studying Negative Aspects in Educational
             Leadership: The Benefits of Qualitative
                         Methodologies

                                Izhar Oplatka
                        Tel Aviv University, Tel Aviv, Israel

    Abstract                                                              Article Info
    The aim of this paper is to encourage researchers to
                                                                       Article History:
    employ qualitative methodologies when studying the
                                                                              Received:
    negative aspects in educational leadership. To this end, I            July 21, 2023
    focus on one negative aspect in organization – abusive                   Accepted:
                                                                     September 18, 2023
    leadership and use it to exemplify the benefits of
    qualitative research and its potential methodologies. More
    specifically, I pose two questions: (1) How can the
    qualitative research improve our understanding of
    abusive leadership in schools; (2) what are the practical
    tools to study abusive educational leadership from a
                                                                             Keywords:
    naturalistic perspective? Through qualitative research            abusive leadership,
    methods, researchers are likely to explore the complexity          sensitive topics in
    of human behavior and thereby generate deeper                        leadership, semi-
                                                                   structured interviews,
    understanding of leaders' negative behaviors as well as of
                                                                            unstructured
    toxic interactions in the school. In this paper, I emphasize             observations
    the epistemological contributions of qualitative
    methodologies to the research on abusive educational
    leadership and probe into the kind of knowledge we may
    gain when employing these methodologies.

            Oplatka (2023). Studying negative aspects in educational leadership: The benefits of
                                       qualitative methodologies.


Cite as:
Oplatka, I. (2023). Studying negative aspects in educational leadership:
        The benefits of qualitative methodologies. Research in
        Educational Administration & Leadership, 8(3), 549-574.
        https://doi.org/10.30828/real.1330936

                                     Introduction

       The research on the negative elements in organizations has
received much attention in recent years. Researchers have studied
workplace violence, workplace harassment, psychopathic employees,
abusive leadership, toxic environments, narcissistic leadership and so
forth (Bhattacharjee & Sarkar, 2022; Oplatka, 2016; Neall & Tuckey,
2014; Pelletier, 2010). Regardless of the term used, this kind of research
focused on the negative aspects in the organizational life, exploring the
'dark side of leadership' or examining the effects of organizational
maltreatment on employees and stakeholders, including teachers.
These negative elements have been found also in schools worldwide
(Khumalo, 2019; Oplatka, 2016; Wang et al., 2023)

       However, most of the research on the negative elements relied
heavily on quantitative research studies to provide its evidence base
(Fischer, Wei-Tian, Lee & Hughes, 2021), and consequently there are
concerns that limited methodologies are used to explore complex
emotional and leadership issues in the workplace. A lack of
interpretive, inductive knowledgebase is evident and the voice of the
qualitative paradigm is missing, though.

       The purpose of this paper, then, is to encourage researchers in
educational administration and leadership to employ qualitative
methodologies when studying the negative aspects in the school, be it
on the teacher or the educational leader levels. To this end, I focus on
one negative aspect in organization – abusive leadership and use this



                                                                                               550

             Research in Educational Administration & Leadership
                        8(3), September 2023, 549-574.



organizational phenomenon to exemplify the benefits of qualitative
research and its methodologies. This model of destructive leadership
is most studied, according to the review written by Fischer et al. (2021).
More specifically, I pose two questions: (1) How can the qualitative
research improve our understanding of abusive educational
leadership; (2) what are the practical tools to study abusive leadership
from a naturalistic perspective?

       Through qualitative research methods, researchers are likely to
explore the complexity of human behavior, according to Johnson and
Waterfield (2004), and thereby generate deeper understanding of
leaders' negative behaviors as well as of toxic interactions in the
organization. In this paper, I emphasize the epistemological
contributions of qualitative methodologies to the research on abusive
educational leadership and probe into the kind of knowledge we may
gain when employing these methodologies.

       In the rest of the paper, the model of abusive leadership is
discussed to allow readers understand the current state of the art in the
literature, followed by an analysis of the limitations of the quantitative
methodologies used by and large to study this model. Then, the value
of the qualitative research to understand abusive leadership is
emphasized and practical tools to explore this kind of leadership are
suggested. The paper ends with some ethical considerations.

The model of abusive leadership

       Leaders are considered to be powerful individuals in
organizations who wield influence over many aspects of employees’
working lives (Fischer et al., 2021). Unfortunately, nevertheless, some
leaders exploit and mistreat followers (Schmid et al., 2019) and ignore
ethical and moral values. One model of leadership that has been



551

            Oplatka (2023). Studying negative aspects in educational leadership: The benefits of
                                       qualitative methodologies.


considered to have detrimental effect on staff is abusive or destructive
leadership. Several definitions were suggested to depict this model:

       A subjective evaluation resting on “subordinates’ perceptions
       of the extent to which supervisors engage in the sustained
       display of hostile verbal and nonverbal behaviors, excluding
       physical contact (Tepper, 2000, p. 178).


       Volitional behavior by a leader that can harm or intends to
       harm a leader’s organization and/or followers by: (1)
       encouraging followers to pursue goals that contravene the
       legitimate interests of the organization; and/or (2) employing a
       leadership practice that involves the use of harmful methods of
       influence with followers, regardless of justifications for such
       behavior (Krasikova et al., 2013).


       Destructive leadership in this sense would be defined as
       behaviour that directly or indirectly prevents organizational
       (e.g. quality and quantity of work) and personal goal
       attainment of followers (e.g. job satisfaction) (Chilling, 2009,
       p.103).

       Tepper's (2000) original definition states clearly that abusive
leadership does not refer to leader behaviors but to followers'
subjective evaluations of these behaviors. After all, one employee
could view a manager's behavior as abusive while another employee
may view it as non-abusive behavior. But, sometimes the leader's
unethical behavior is unquestionable; abusive leaders may engage in
consistent hostile verbal and non-verbal actions towards a follower
(Richard et al., 2020).

       Overall, the experience of abusive leadership is subjective,
including hostile and non-hostile verbal or non-verbal behaviors




                                                                                               552

             Research in Educational Administration & Leadership
                        8(3), September 2023, 549-574.



towards subordinates that are not always intended, yet have some
individual and organizational implications (Starratt & Grandy, 2010).
For example, abusive leaders might inflict serious and enduring harm
on their employees by using malicious tactics of influence that decay
their moral, motivation and self-esteem (Lipman-Blumen, 2005).
Examples of these behaviors include demeaning teachers by criticizing
their work or ideas in public, going behind teachers' back to attain their
goals, concealing critical information needed to perform work tasks
effectively, or negating the teacher's attitudes or abilities.

       The model of abusive leadership is both dispositional (part of
the leader’s personality) and contextual (Krasikova et al., 2013).
Abusive leadership may occur when a leader's goals are thwarted and
threatened or when the leader's self-image and competence are on the
line (Bhattacharjee & Sarkar, 2022). Likewise, abusive leaders have a
dispositional inclination to promote self-interest above the interests of
others or the organization.

       Numerous outcomes have been examined in relation to abusive
supervision. It was found that abusive leadership influences direct
subordinates, teams, and the entire organization and leads to
workplace      deviance,          destructive           attitudes,   and   daily
counterproductive work behaviors (Bormann, 2017; Mitchell &
Ambrose, 2007). Many employees report losing their mental energy,
blaming the organization for the abuse received, developing
contradictory emotions, and experiencing damage to work-life balance
due to their abusive leader (Bowling and Michel, 2011; Tepper et al.,
2017). Abusive supervisors consistently humiliate their direct
employees, undermine their privacy, remind them of their past
mistakes or failures, break promises made to them, and put them down
in public.



553

             Oplatka (2023). Studying negative aspects in educational leadership: The benefits of
                                        qualitative methodologies.


        While quantitative methodologies have provided much
knowledge about abusive leadership and its antecedents and effects in
a wide variety of organizations, based on large-scale survey, Gallegos
et al. (2022), nevertheless, highlighted the gap in research on the
outcomes of abusive leadership:

        Abusive leaders affect employees’ emotions and health and
        produce counterproductive behaviors that cause economic
        damage to organizations. The literature has focused
        predominantly on the antecedents of abusive supervision and
        its negative impact, providing knowledge on mechanisms that
        link abusive supervision to consequences for subordinates.
        There has been limited research on the supervisor perspective,
        on the group level, and on recovery (p.1).

        Their criticism leads us to the next section in which I analyze
the limits of the current literature about abusive leadership due its
overemphasis on positivistic, quantitative methodologies, at least in
my view as a qualitative researcher.

The limits of the (quantitative) research on abusive leadership

        Abusive supervision research, like many studies about the
negative aspects in organizations, has been largely driven by
quantitative studies, most of which have employed correlational
designs (Bhattacharjee & Sarkar, 2022). In many of the studies
researchers have asked employees to make subjective assessments of
leader behaviors instead of acknowledging their existence in their
work life. Based on Tepper’s (2000) 15-irwm measure of abusive
supervision, researchers collected a single assessment of abusive
supervision via employee ratings of their leader or leader self-ratings
(Fischer et al., 2021).

        According to Bhattacharjee & Sarkar (2022), the methodologies



                                                                                                554

             Research in Educational Administration & Leadership
                        8(3), September 2023, 549-574.



used to examine abusive leadership raise several questions; how do the
perception and subsequent rating of abusive supervision vary between
individuals? Is abusive leadership a sustained phenomenon or
changes every day? In their criticism of Tepper’s scale they further
illuminated the weaknesses and limitations of current researches on
abusive leadership that do not necessarily reflect the reality:

       Different items in the 15-item scale have varying severity and
       consequently, they do not rise to the level of abuse. For
       example, one item in this scale, “My supervisor lies to me”
       differs in severity from “My supervisor ridicules me”. A
       supervisor lying to his or her subordinate is an unethical act but
       it may not be deemed as abuse by the subordinate. On the other
       hand, a supervisor ridiculing his or her direct report would be
       perceived as abuse by the direct report. Since the 15-item scale
       comprises items that could be perceived as abusive supervision
       mixed with items that may not be perceived as abusive
       supervision, it becomes hard to interpret the total abusive
       supervision score when the frequencies of these items are
       summed up (p.4).

       The weakness of subjective assessments of abusive leadership
is reflected in other items in Tepper’s (2000) scale. For example,
‘ridicules me’ (p.189) requires employees to judge if a concrete
behavior can be classified as ridiculing. However, perceiving and
acknowledging the existence of single behaviors is insufficient (Fischer
et al., 2021). Some employees may consider a certain leadership
behavior as a joke while others as ridiculing. Thus, in the spirit of
Tepper (2000, “[t]he same individual could view a supervisor's
behavior [here: a leader’s joke] as abusive in one context and as non-
abusive in another context, and two subordinates could differ in their
evaluations of the same supervisor's behavior [here: joking]” (p. 178).
Hence, conflating evaluations of leader behaviors with the behaviors



555

           Oplatka (2023). Studying negative aspects in educational leadership: The benefits of
                                      qualitative methodologies.


themselves impede both theoretical and empirical precision. Similar
critiques have been levied previously and retorted (Tepper et al. 2017).

       Likewise, 91% of the studies utilized survey-based, using
convenience or snowball samples of participants drawn from a range
of organizations, and many sought to examine causal hypotheses (e.g.,
employees’ evaluations of abusive supervision cause employee
turnover) (Fischer et al., 2021). The abusive leadership literature has
centered on linking moderators or mediators with result-orientation to
work overload, job strain, frustration, turnover intentions, employee
frustration and authoritarian leadership (Gallegos et al., 2022).
However, questions such as, when do we speak of abusive leadership?
What are the negative/abusive intentions of these leaders? What are
the contexts in which abusive leadership grows? Or what are the
consequences of abusive leadership behavior? Remain relatively
unanswered. Qualitative research may help fill the gap in this respect.

The possible epistemological-ontological contributions of
qualitative research

       What are the benefits of qualitative research to the study of
abusive educational leadership? What kind of knowledge could be
produced if researchers decided to explore abusive educational
leadership from the view of the qualitative paradigm?

       First, qualitative methodologies such as semi-structured
interviews, focus groups, or open observations can help us initially
understand employees' interpretations and their reactions to abusive
leadership behaviors and how they respond to daily changes in these
behaviors. Such studies involving small numbers of individuals
selected on the basis of purposeful sampling can generate hypotheses
to be more rigorously tested on larger numbers of participants, in order




                                                                                              556

              Research in Educational Administration & Leadership
                         8(3), September 2023, 549-574.



to develop generalizable conclusions and test theory, as Thyer (2012)
indicated. Thus, qualitative studies may enlarge our survey methods
and include more elements and aspects of abusive leadership than we
know todays.

        Above all, qualitative research takes the view that reality is
socially constructed by each individual and should be interpreted
rather than measured (Johnson & Waterfield, 2004). Attention, then, is
paid to diversity of perspectives of the participants (Fink et al., 2004)
and their interpretations of the studied phenomenon are analyzed in
light of the contexts in which they live and work.

        In this sense, instead of trying to control extraneous variables
when examining abusive educational leadership, qualitative research
may explore the subjective interpretations given by teachers to an
'abusive behavior' and 'abusive leadership.' Their interpretive voices
may extend our common definitions and constructions of abusive
educational    leadership,        much        beyond        scholars   had   already
conceptualized as 'abusive leadership behavior.' A support in this
methodological conjecture we receive from Pelletier's (2010) study in
which the researcher asked: "what are the behaviors and rhetoric of
leaders that followers perceive to be harmful to their psychological or
organizational well-being?" (p. 378). In addition, based on followers’
social constructions of leadership, as illustrated by the basketball coach
example, Pelletier further asked: "do followers agree as to what
constitutes harmful leader behavior and rhetoric?’ (p. 379). These
questions allowed him to suggest a manifold view of abusive
educational leadership that is based on psychological aspects of the
observer or relational elements characterizing the leader-follower
dyad.

        Qualitative research may contribute also to our understanding


557

              Oplatka (2023). Studying negative aspects in educational leadership: The benefits of
                                         qualitative methodologies.


of the determinants and consequences of abusive educational
leadership because it enables employees provide their subjective
interpretations of the relations between abusive leadership and
personal and organizational conditions/states much beyond what had
been constructed in common scales of abusive leadership. For
example, Chilling (2009) aimed to explore the experiences of
leadership practitioners concerning the antecedents, behaviors, and
consequences of negative leadership. He showed the impressive
complexity of negative leadership, its antecedents and consequences,
as explained below:

        The named antecedents emphasized obstacles to effective
        leadership rather than facilitators of destructive leadership.
        The most salient antecedents were the followers, the leader’s
        immediate working field and role, and organizational
        processes, structures, and resources. The underlying idea is
        that the influence of leaders is rather limited: if the followers
        lack motivation, work ethics and competence, are fearful, and
        are not accepted by their co-workers, then the leader will not
        be able to execute effective leadership (p. 112).

        The     complexity           of    negative         leadership         (e.g.,     abusive
leadership) and its subjectively- held relationships with personality
and context is illustrated in Chilling's results. Similarly, in a qualitative
study of 30 recruits in the Canadian service and manufacturing
industry, Starratt and Grandy (2010) revealed that new workers had
experienced emotional fallout from abusive leadership that included
hopelessness, humiliation, anxiety, and physical consequences such as
retaliation against the organization, distancing oneself from the
abusive leader and leaving the organization. They also found that
abusive leadership was detrimental to the organization as a whole, due
to high employee turnover and the development of a destructive



                                                                                                 558

             Research in Educational Administration & Leadership
                        8(3), September 2023, 549-574.



organizational culture. Needless to say, the interpretive, narrative data
allowed the researchers find new impacts of abusive leadership that
had not necessarily indicated by past research that examined the
relations between abusive leadership and predetermined dependent
variables.

       After all, researchers cannot hypothesize every potential
impact of abusive educational leadership. We can just imagine how the
results of Lavoie-Tremblay et al., (2016) indicting that abusive
leadership practices had a negative influence on the quality of patient
care and nurses' intentions to quit their job would look like if they used
also a qualitative research design. Most probably, it would enable them
better understand the subjective interpretations of 'quality of patient
care' and the interpretive elements consisting 'intentions to leave the
nursing profession altogether.' They would have received a manifold
view of personal intentions within a larger context (e.g., the moment
nurses began to develop intentions to leave, the abusive leader's
behavior that broke their heart, and so on).

       This brings us to discuss another major benefit of qualitative
research - thick description of the reality that provides a detailed
narrative and report of the researched phenomenon rather than a
narrow part of it. In fact, qualitative research has a strong orientation
to everyday events and/or the everyday knowledge of those under
investigation. Data, according to Filck et al. (2004, p. 8), "are collected
in their natural context, and statements are analyzed in the context of
an extended answer or a narrative, or the total course of an interview,
or even in the biography of the interview partner." Thyer (2012) further
explains the contribution of qualitative methods to social work and
implicitly illuminates some points that are relevant to the research on
abusive leadership:



559

               Oplatka (2023). Studying negative aspects in educational leadership: The benefits of
                                          qualitative methodologies.


           Qualitative methods can provide social workers with rich
           insights into the lives of clients and other participants in social
           work research. By talking with them clinically, informally, or
           within the context of a research interview, we can learn about
           their lives, their experiences with mental illness or psychosocial
           challenges such as poverty, sexual assault, abuse, and other
           issues. This information can be sifted using conventional
           methods of qualitative analysis for themes, commonalities,
           discrepancies, and convergences" (p. 120).

           In other words, by talking with teachers informally and within
their daily contexts we can learn about their experiences in the school,
in general, and about their relationship with and perceptions towards
their educational leaders, in particular. Thus, abusive leadership
behavior can be analyzed within a larger context rather than a sole
phenomenon in their working life and, thereby better grasp the place
and influence of these negative behaviors on their work and well-being
in life.

           In this sense, qualitative research enables exploring how and
when the process of abusive educational leadership occurs. Consistent
with Bhattacharjee and Sarkar (2022) who reviewed leadership studies
involving qualitative designs and noted that such designs help to
examine how a leadership behavior changes in response to
circumstances, researchers could trace the development of abusive
leadership within a mosaic of contexts and along different stages. In
this way, we could learn more about changes in abusive educational
leadership in the long-run, and how it is influenced by evolving
situations in the school and in its environments.

           Qualitative research not only gives entry to employee
perspectives, but also suggests a rich range of methods to explore
varied aspects of abusive educational leadership. Our knowledge



                                                                                                  560

             Research in Educational Administration & Leadership
                        8(3), September 2023, 549-574.



about this kind of leadership should come from small, in-depth
qualitative studies, as well as from information generated through a
large-scale survey. For example, educational leaders and teachers can
have quite different understandings of abusive behaviors, and these
differences can lead to “ruptures in communication," resulting in
pressure and distress. In this sense, the epistemological principle of
qualitative research is the understanding of complex relationships
rather than explanation by isolation of a single relationship (Flick et al.,
2004). Let's exemplify these advantages through Fischer et al.'s (2021)
insights into the research on abusive leadership:

       …The research base should be able to provide us with evidence
       relating to questions such as: How much, and how frequently
       does leader ‘wrongdoing’ result in evaluations of abuse?
       Should we invest time and money in selecting out abusive
       leaders and/or training leaders to be non-abusive? Should we
       focus less on leaders and more on increasing
       employee resilience or changing organizational culture? (pp. 1-
       2)

       While quantitative methods are likely to answer the 'how
much/frequency' questions, the practice-oriented questions in the
citation may gain a lot from qualitative methodologies. For example,
semi-structured interviews may generate subjective interpretations of
abusive vs. non-abusive leadership behaviors and unearth the process
through which an abusive leadership behavior emerges. Interviewees
may expose how they responded to abusive educational leadership in
a certain negative event in the school or elaborate on the ways in which
they minimize abusive leadership behaviors in their workplace. This,
in turn, will help researchers answer the second and third questions
posed above by Fischer et al. (2021).

Practical tools to study abusive leadership from a qualitative stance


561

            Oplatka (2023). Studying negative aspects in educational leadership: The benefits of
                                       qualitative methodologies.


       Of the common methods in qualitative research, the semi-
structured interview and open observation can contribute a lot to our
understanding of abusive educational leadership. But, it is suitable to
research design whose sample focuses on a particular group of
participants, i.e., those teachers who have experienced abusive
educational leadership in their workplace and are ready to talk about
it with the researcher.

       The semi-structured interview. This type of interview is an
interaction between an interviewer and a respondent in which the
interviewer has a general plan of inquiry, including a set of topics to
be discussed in depth through a careful questioning and listening
approach. Kvale and Brinkmann (2009) emphasized the strengths of
this interview:

       The qualitative research interview attempts to understand the
       world from the subjects' points of view, to unfold the meaning
       of their experiences, to uncover their lived world prior to
       scientific explanations (p. 1).

       The interview allows disclosing the interviewee's personal
experiences, life histories, and feelings, and is useful for gaining in-
depth information about sensitive topics and contextual influences
upon the researched phenomenon (Hennink, Hutter & Bailey, 2011)
such as abusive leadership. The interviewee can provide rationales,
explanations, and justifications for their actions, feelings, and
attitudes, as Tracy (2013) explains:

       Qualitative interviews provide opportunities for mutual
       discovery, understanding, reflection, and explanation via a
       path that is organic, adaptive, and oftentimes energizing…
       They can explain why they employ certain clichés, jargon, or
       slang (p.132).



                                                                                               562

             Research in Educational Administration & Leadership
                        8(3), September 2023, 549-574.



       Back to our issue, through a semi-structured interview, the
researcher may receive information about the jargon or clichés teachers
use when feeling abused by their educational leaders or when
evaluating a certain leadership behavior as non-abusive. Teachers as
interviewees can be asked to reflect on abusive experiences in the
school and connect them to their broader life experiences, colleagues,
personality, personal histories, and so forth.

       As far as a semi-structured interview is concerned, its flexibility
by questioning and structure allows the emergence of new topics and
findings during the conversation, but at the same time requires
thorough preparation before the interview meeting begins and careful
listening throughout the conversation (Gillham, 2005). Thus, although
an interview meeting about abusive behaviors and destructive
leadership might evoke negative emotions among interviewers
(Oplatka, 2018), the interviewer should be on the alert and listen very
carefully to the interviewee in order to be able to ask questions in
response to his or her statements, stories, feelings, interpretation, and
meanings. The questioning, then, is not based on a set of questions that
must be asked in a particular order. For example, in their study about
child abuse, Hoskins & Kunkel (2020) used ethnographic interviews to
trace the abusive experiences of their participants. The following
citation illustrates the flexible aspect of the qualitative interviewing:

       …Interviews were conducted with a foundational knowledge
       about interview participants that informed the use of the
       interview protocol and allowed for individualized and
       nuanced follow-up questions. For example, when a participant
       mentioned in the weekly group meeting that they had their first
       experience of childhood adversity when they were only 5-
       years-old, [the interviewer] was able to use that information to
       make questions more focused and precise in the interview



563

            Oplatka (2023). Studying negative aspects in educational leadership: The benefits of
                                       qualitative methodologies.


       process. Instead of asking, “When was the first time you
       remember experiencing abuse?” [The interviewer] was able to
       ask, “In group, you mentioned that your first memory of abuse
       was when you were 5-yearsold? Would you mind telling me
       more about that experience?” This strategy allowed for greater
       fluidity and depth in the conversation and resulted in more
       efficient use of time and arguably a greater degree of disclosure
       from participants (p. 1031).

       Note, however, that as a result of taking part in the interview,
any employee (i.e., the interviewee) may start thinking about aspects
of abusive educational leadership and in a new or different way,
thereby allowing new knowledge and understanding about this and
related negative elements in the workplace. The questions in Table One
may help researchers write an interview guide in their study about
abusive leadership and still remain flexible, asking further questions
during the interview meeting. They are formed based on current
surveys of abusive leadership and reshaped to accommodate the
principles of qualitative research. I encourage researchers to use them
in their research on abusive leadership in educational organizations.

Table 1.
A sample of questions from an interview Guide:

 1    Could you indicate several harmful behaviors in your workplace?
      Whose behaviors are they? (e.g. co-workers, superiors)
 2    What would you consider 'a toxic work environment'? Why? Please
      explain.
 3    How would you define an abusive or toxic leadership? Why?
 4    What kind of behaviors abusive leaders express in the workplace?
 5    Have you ever experienced abusive leadership in your job? If not,
      how could you explain your good luck? If yes, why do you think it
      was abusive?




                                                                                               564

              Research in Educational Administration & Leadership
                         8(3), September 2023, 549-574.



 6    Can you describe your relationships with your
      boss/superior/manager? What are the good/bad aspects of it? What
      are the destructive/abusive aspects in these relationships?
 7    When is the first time you can remember being treated cruelly in the
      workplace?
 8    How did you feel after experiencing an abusive leadership behavior?
 9    How does it feel to talk about it?
 10   Could you think of any positive consequences of abusive leadership?
 11   What, in your view, caused your manager to express abusive
      behaviors?
 12   How did you react when feeling abused by your manager?
 13   How do leaders demean or intimidate their subordinates? Have you
      ever experienced these behaviors in your workplace?
 14   How is it to work with a manager who marginalize and demoralize
      subordinates?
 15   How does an abusive leader look like?
 16   Who are the victims of abusive leaders?

       The interview guide includes questions designed to elicit types
and prevalence of adverse leadership behaviors and experiences. It
also contains questions that encourage storytelling, one of the richest
methods of data collection, because it enables employees to 'tell it as it
was' and facilitates an understanding of the richness of a personal
event and the factors surrounding it. The personal story enables
putting the abusive behavior in context, providing insight into the
abusive event per se.

       Observation. Consistent with Chai et al. (2021), the observational
method is particularly suitable in exploring situations in which
discrepancies exist between what people do and what they say (e.g.,
the leader denies behaving abusively), and in complex interactions that
involve an environment or physical context (e.g., abusive leadership
behaviors may occur in particular contexts or be disguised by other
behaviors).




565

           Oplatka (2023). Studying negative aspects in educational leadership: The benefits of
                                      qualitative methodologies.


       Observation is used as a research method in two distinct ways
– structured and unstructured (Pretzlik 1994). While the former way
pertains to the positivistic paradigm, the latter is grounded in the
naturalistic one and is used to understand and interpret cultural
behavior within a particular context (Mulhall, 2003). Researchers using
unstructured methods usually enter ‘the field’ with no predetermined
notions as to the discrete behaviors that they might observe. Thus,
unstructured observations can provide insight into interactions
between abusive educational leaders and their subordinates (i.e.,
teachers) individually or with a group of employees and are likely to
illustrate the whole picture of abusive leadership behaviors, from their
beginning through employees' responses until their end. Thus,
unstructured observations may capture the context in which abusive
educational leadership acts as well as the process through which
educational leaders and teachers are engaged in abusive behaviors and
their consequences. Researchers who observe abusive leadership
behaviors in the workplace may also trace a sequence of
events/activities that precede these behaviors as well as the various
results of them.

       Note, however, that observational data, rather more than
interview data, are subject to interpretation by the researcher
(Mullhall, 2003). After all, observers have a great degree of freedom
and autonomy regarding what they choose to observe (e.g., the
meetings of the executive management or the operation department),
how they filter that information (e.g., what will be considered abusive
leadership), and how it is analyzed. To face this weakness, I would
recommend presenting the data collected during the unstructured
observation to the observed subjects and ask whether they agree with
your interpretations of them. For example, you observed an interaction




                                                                                              566

                Research in Educational Administration & Leadership
                           8(3), September 2023, 549-574.



between a principal and one of his/her teachers in which he called her
'lazy'. Is this considered to be an abusive leadership behavior in the
studied school? Is this a normal behavior? While the observer may
attach negative meaning to such a behavior, teachers (i.e.,
interviewees) may consider it a non-abusive behavior, because it
reflects the low performance of this teachers or because the principal
uses much more insulting words than that in his/her interaction with
his teachers.

Ethical considerations

       Studying abusive educational leadership is related, explicitly
and implicitly, to the literature about researching sensitive topics
defined as those that might cause harm to participants, arouse
powerful        negative        emotions         (e.g.,     anger,    sadness,   fear,
embarrassment), and increase distress among researchers and
respondents (Sieber and Stanley, 1988). Lee (1993) defined sensitive
research as "research which potentially poses a substantial threat to
those who are or have been involved in it" (p.4), conceptualizing
"sensitivity" as an emergent rather than an inherent feature of the
relationship between topic and research. Some authors have paid
attention to the emotional well-being of the researchers, rejecting a
model of the research as detached and objective, and warning that
researchers of sensitive issues might experience dire emotional
consequences (Lee & Lee, 2012). The study of abusive educational
leadership is very sensitive, given the potentially dire consequences of
discussing the negative aspects in the workplace.

       To face the hazards of doing a research on sensitive topics like
abusive leadership, researchers suggested employing strategies such
as building rapport (e.g., promising full anonymity), avoiding
personal questions that might expose the interviewee, beginning the



567

            Oplatka (2023). Studying negative aspects in educational leadership: The benefits of
                                       qualitative methodologies.


interview with self-disclosure, planning the interview very carefully
(e.g., beginning with general questions about educational leadership
and abusive leadership), and supporting the interviewee in extremely
sensitive situations such as a personal distress (Lee, 1993).

       The protection of human subjects through the application of
appropriate ethical principles is important in any research study
(Mohd-Arifin, 2018), and particularly in a study that explores negative
sensitive organizational phenomena that might cause harm to the
participants due to their vulnerable position. The interviewees and the
observed subjects may become stressed while expressing their feelings
towards and experiences with abusive leaders in their organization.

       To follow ethical rules in studies about abusive leadership,
interviewees have to be adequately informed about the research (e.g.,
the negative aspects of leader-followers / employee relations),
comprehend the information (e.g., the negative implications of abusive
leadership), and have a power of freedom of choice to allow them to
decide whether to participate or decline, particularly if they are afraid
to be personally harmed by their participation in the study. Likewise,
the anonymity and confidentiality of the interviewees must be
preserved by not revealing their name, position, social identity and any
other detail that might expose the interviewees in the collection,
analysis and reporting of the study findings. Privacy and
confidentiality of the interview environment have to be managed
carefully during telephone communication, interview session, data
analysis and dissemination of the findings. This is particularly
important when sensitive topics come up in semi-structured
interviews about abusive educational leadership and its impact on the
school and its members and stakeholders. Interviewers must build




                                                                                               568

             Research in Educational Administration & Leadership
                        8(3), September 2023, 549-574.



rapport with teachers and establish trustful relationships with them
prior to the beginning of the interview.

                                   Conclusions

       In their review of the research on abusive leadership, Zhang
and Liu (2018) concluded as follow:

       The preceding review shows that various new trends emerge
       in the examination of abusive supervision. All six of these new
       trends share similar mechanisms that point to the possible
       positive effects of abusive supervision. The findings on the
       possible positive effects of abusive supervision are of the
       greatest importance and interest to us. We believe that this
       stream of research may lead to novel thoughts and ideas about
       the development of abusive supervision and may guide this
       topic to a new developmental stage" (p.730).

       Indeed, new streams of research may generate new ideas and
understandings      of    abusive       educational         leadership.   However,
methodology matters; new streams of research should include
multiple research paradigms and methodologies that are critical to any
progress in knowledge production. Therefore, the research on the
negative aspects in educational leadership should be open to new
research paradigms and foster qualitative methodologies as a means
to enlarge our knowledge of abusive leadership and its factors and
consequences in organizations.

       More specifically, I encourage researchers in the field of
educational administration and leadership to initiate research
programs about abusive (and related) educational leadership from an
interpretive point of view. Thus, instead of focusing on correlations
and cause-and-effect relations, researchers may want to consider the




569

            Oplatka (2023). Studying negative aspects in educational leadership: The benefits of
                                       qualitative methodologies.


unique behaviors of abusive leaders in the educational contexts, based
on the subjective voices of teachers, students, and stakeholders,
explore the determinants facilitating the growth of abusive leadership
in schools, or tracing the implications of abusive educational
leadership for student achievement, teacher moral, or parents'
tendency to be involved in the schooling process. After all, the
educational organization has particular aspects that are likely to
influence the patterns and behaviors of abusive leaders in education.

                                      References

Bhattacharjee, A. & Sarkar, A. (2022). Abusive supervision: A
       systematic literature review. Management Review Quarterly,
       https://doi.org/10.1007/s11301-022-00291-8
Bormann, K. C. (2017). Linking Daily Ethical Leadership to Followers’
      Daily Behavior: the Roles of Daily Work Engagement and
      Previous Abusive Supervision. European Journal of Work
      Organizational Psychology, 26(4), 590–600.
Bowling, N. A., and Michel, J. S. (2011). Why Do You Treat Me Badly?
      The Role of Attributions Regarding the Cause of Abuse in
      Subordinates’ Responses to Abusive Supervision. Work Stress,
      25(4), 309–320.
Chai , H.H., Gao, S.S. Chen, K.J. Duangthip , D. Man Lo, C. & Chu,
        C.H. (2021). A Concise Review on Qualitative Research in
        Dentistry. International Journal of Environmental Research and
        Public Health, 18, 1-13.
Chilling, J. (2009). From Ineffectiveness to Destruction: A Qualitative
       Study on the Meaning of Negative
       Leadership. Leadership, 5(1), 102–128.
Fischer, T., Wei-Tian, A., Lee, A. & Hughes, D.J. (2021). Abusive
       supervision: A systematic review and fundamental rethink.
       The Leadership Quarterly, 32(6), 1-19.



                                                                                               570

             Research in Educational Administration & Leadership
                        8(3), September 2023, 549-574.



Flick, U, von Kardorff, E. & Steinke, L. (2004). What is Qualitative
        Research? An Introduction to the Field. In, U. Flick, E. von
        Kardorff & I. Steinke (eds.), A companion to qualitative research
        (pp. 3-12). London: Sage Publication.
Gillham, B. (2005). Research interviewing: The range of techniques.
       Maidenhead, New York: Open University Press
Khumalo, S.S. (2019). Analyzing abusive school leadership practices
     through the lens of social justice. International Journal of
     Educational Management, 33(4), 546-555.
Hennink, M., Hutter, I., & Bailey, A. (2011). Qualitative research
      methods. Los Angeles: Sage.
Hoskins, N., & Kunkel, A. (2020). "I Don’t Even Deserve a Chance":
      An Ethnographic Study of Adverse Childhood Experiences
      Among Male Perpetrators of Intimate Partner Violence. The
      Qualitative Report, 25(4), 1009-1037.
Gallegos I., Guàrdia-Olmos J. & Berger, R. (2022). Abusive
       Supervision: A Systematic Review and New Research
       Approaches. Frontiers in Communication, 6, 640908. doi:
       10.3389/fcomm.2021.640908
Johnson, R. & Waterfield, J. (2004). Making words count: the value of
      qualitative research. Physiotherapy Research International, 9(3)
      121–131.
Krasikova D.V., Green S.G. & LeBreton J.M. (2013) Destructive
       leadership a theoretical review, integration and future
       research agenda. Journal of Management 39(5), 1308–1338.
Kvale, S., & Brinkmann, S. (2009). Interviews: Learning the craft of
       qualitative research interviewing. Los Angeles: Sage
Lavoie-Tremblay, M., Ferent, C., Lavigne, G.L. & Austin, S. (2016)
       Transformational and abusive leadership practices: Impacts
       on novice nurses, quality of care and intention to leave.
       Journal of Advanced Nursing 72(3), 582–592. doi:
       10.1111/jan.12860



571

            Oplatka (2023). Studying negative aspects in educational leadership: The benefits of
                                       qualitative methodologies.


Lee, R.M. (1993). Doing Research on Sensitive Topics. London: Sage
       Publications.
Lee, Y.O., & Lee, R.M (2012). Methodological Research on ‘‘Sensitive’’
       Topics: A Decade Review. Bulletin de Methodologie Sociologique,
       114, 35–49.
Lipman-Blumen J (2005). The allure of toxic leaders: Why we follow
      destructive bosses and corrupt politicians – And how we can survive
      them. New York: Oxford University Press.
Mitchell MS and Ambrose ML (2007) Abusive supervision and
       workplace deviance and the moderating effects of negative
       reciprocity beliefs. Journal of Applied Psychology, 92(4): 1159–
       1168.
Mohd-Arifin, S.R. (2018). Ethical considerations in qualitative
     research. International Journal of Care Scholar, 1(2), 30-33.
Mulhall, A. (2003). In the field: Notes on observation in qualitative
      research. Journal of advanced nursing, 41(3), 306-313.
Neall, A.M. & Tuckey, M.R. (2014). A methodological review of
       research on the antecedents and consequences of workplace
       harassment. Journal of Occupational and Organizational
       Psychology, 87, 225–257.
Oplatka, I. (2018). Understanding emotion in educational and service
      organizations through semi-structured interviews: Some
      conceptual and practical insights. The Qualitative Report, 23(6),
      1347-1363.
Oplatka, I. (2016). Irresponsible leadership and unethical practices in
      schools. A conceptual framework of the 'dark side' of
      educational leadership. In, A.H. Normore & J.S. Brooks (eds.),
      The dark side of leadership: Identifying and overcoming unethical
      practice in organization (pp.1-18). Bingley, UK: Emerald Group
      Publishing.
Pelletier, K.L. (2010). Leader toxicity: An empirical investigation of
        toxic behavior and rhetoric. Leadership, 6(4), 373-389.



                                                                                               572

             Research in Educational Administration & Leadership
                        8(3), September 2023, 549-574.



Pretzlik U. (1994) Observational methods and strategies. Nurse
        Researcher, 2(2), 13–21.
Richard, O.C., Boncoeur, O.D., Chen, H. & Ford, D.L. (2020).
       Supervisor abuse effects on subordinate turnover intentions
       and subsequent interpersonal aggression: The role of power-
       distance orientation and perceived human resource support
       climate. Journal of Business Ethics, 164 (3), 549-563.
Schmid, E.A. Pircher Verdorfer, A. & Peus, C. (2019). Shedding light
      on leaders’ self-interest: Theory and measurement of
      exploitative leadership. Journal of Management, 45 (4), 1401-
      1433.
Sieber, J.E., & Stanley, B. (1988) Ethical and professional dimensions
        of socially sensitive research. The American Psychologist, 43, 1,
        49-55.
Starratt, A. & Grandy, G. (2010). Young workers' experiences of
        abusive leadership. Leadership & Organization Development
        Journal, 31(2), 136-158.
Tepper, B.G. (2000). Consequences of abusive supervision. Academy of
      Management Journal, 43 (2), 178-190.
Thyer, B.A. (2012). The scientific value of qualitative research for
       social work. Qualitative Social Work, 11(2) 115–129.
Tracy, S.J. (2013). Qualitative research methods: Collecting evidence,
       crafting analysis, communicating impact. Chichester, UK: Wily-
       Blackwell.
Wang, X.B., Zheng, H., Xu, X.S., Zhang, Y.F., Yue, Y. (2023). Abusive
      supervision and teachers' job vocational schools: The
      mediating effect of emotion regulation strategies. The
      International Journal of Educational Organization and Leadership,
      30(2), 19-37.
Zhang, J., Liu, J. (2018). Is abusive supervision an absolute devil?
       Literature review and research agenda. Asia Pacific Journal of
       Management, 35, 719–744.



573

              Oplatka (2023). Studying negative aspects in educational leadership: The benefits of
                                         qualitative methodologies.


About the author:

Izhar Oplatka is a professor of Educational Administration and
Leadership at The School of Education, Tel Aviv University, Israel.
Prof. Oplatka’s research focuses on the lives and career of school
teachers and educational leaders, educational marketing, emotions,
and the foundations of educational administration as a field of study.
His most recent books (and edited books) include Advanced Theories
in Educational Leadership (with K. Arar, 2022, Springer), Handbook of
gender and educational leadership and management (with Showunmi,
Moorosi    &       Shakeshaft,          2022,       Bloomsbury).            Prof.      Oplatka’s
publications have appeared in varied international journals including
Educational      Administration             Quarterly,         Journal        of     Educational
Administration, Educational Management Administration & Leadership,
Comparative Education Review, Teacher College Record, Qualitative Report,
Canadian Journal of Education Administration and Policy, International
Journal of Leadership in Education, Journal of Education Policy, School
Leadership & Management, Urban Education, International Journal of
Educational Management, and so forth.

E-mail: oplatka@tauex.tau.ac.il




                                                                                                 574