6

     Strategy Management Semi-Islamic Boarding Schools:
Case Study at Pesantren Anak Soleh (PAS) Baitul Qur'an Gontor
                  *Afiful Ikhwan1, Ariska Nupita Yuniana2
1,2
    Universitas Muhammadiyah Ponorogo, Jl. Budi Utomo No.10, Ronowijayan,
                        Ponorogo, East Java, Indonesia
                          *afifulikhwan@umpo.ac.id

 ABSTRACT: This paper aims to examine the madrasa development
 strategy in improving the quality of its Human Resources, which is not
 focused on just one, but as a whole, starting from the leaders, educators,
 education staff (staff), stakeholders, and guardians of the students.
 Correlate-apply between the family and school educational environment
 with the concept of semi-Islamic boarding school management. This study
 uses a descriptive qualitative method with a case study design, data
 acquisition using interviews and observation methods, and data analysis
 using triangulation with the research locus at Madrasah Ibtidaiyah
 Pesantren Anak Soleh (MI PAS) Baitul Qur'an Gontor, Ponorogo, East
 Java, Indonesia. The results of the study: (1) The implementation of
 strategies to improve the quality of human resources is very detailed, such
 as (a) upgrading teachers every semester, which aims to maintain the
 sincerity of ruhul-mudarris with the concept of the five strengths of K.H
 Abdullah Syukri, (b) workshops aimed at improving pedagogical and
 professional competencies, (c) comparative studies aimed at obtaining
 inspiration and public relations networks, and (d) training in al-Qur'an
 certification as an emphasis on the vision of the locus and (2) indicators
 and implications of integration using (a) musabaqah (competition) with the
 concept of competing with each other. in goodness (improvement of
 achievement), (b) parenting skills (childcare patterns) for wali santi, (c)
 family gathering for friendship events, (d) evaluation and scheduled work
 meetings. All are carried out to achieve good communication, coordination
 and collaboration. To deliver the institution in achieving the educational
 vision, mission and goals.

 Paper ini bertujuan mengkaji strategi pengembangan madrasah dalam
 meningkatkan kualitas Sumber Daya Manusia (SDM)nya yang tidak
 terfokus kepada salah satu saja, akan tetapi secara keseluruhan, mulai dari
 pimpinan, pendidik, tenaga kependidikan (staff), stakeholder, dan wali
 santrinya, uniknya adalah mengkorelasi-aplikasikan antara lingkungan
 pendidikan keluarga dan sekolah secara real dengan konsep pengelolaan
 semi pesantren. Penelitian ini menggunakan metode kualitatif deskriptif
 dengan rancangan studi kasus, perolehan data menggunakan metode
 wawancara dan observasi, analisis data menggunakan triangulasi dengan
 lokus penelitian di Madrasah Ibtidaiyah Pesantren Anak Soleh (MI PAS)
 Baitul Qur’an Gontor, Ponorogo, Jawa Timur, Indonesia. Hasil penelitian:
 (1) Penerapan strategi peningkatan kualitas SDM sangat terinci sekali,


                                            DOI: https://doi.org/10.35723/ajie.v6i1.222

75   Al-Hayat: Journal of Islamic Education (AJIE)
     e-ISSN: 2599-3046 (online) | Volume 6, Issue 1 | January - June 2022
     p-ISSN: 2657-1781 (print)

         seperti (a) upgradding guru setiap semesternya yang bertujuan merawat ke-
         ikhlasan ruhul-mudarris dengan konsep lima dayanya K.H Abdullah
         Syukri, (b) workshop bertujuan meningkatkan kompetensi pedagogi dan
         profesional, (c) studi banding bertujuan memperoleh inspirasi dan jaringan
         humas, dan (d) pelatihan sertifikasi al-qur'an sebagai penekanan visi dari
         fokus. (2) Indikator dan implikasi integrasi dengan cara (a) musabaqah
         (perlombaan) dengan konsep saling berlomba dalam kebaikan (peningkatan
         prestasi), (b) parenting skill (pola asuh anak) untuk wali santi, (c) family
         gathering ajang silaturahim, (d) evaluasi dan rapat kerja terjadwal. Semua
         dilaksanakan demi tercapainya good communication, good coordination
         dan good colaboration. Sehingga mengantarkan lembaga dalam mencapai
         visi, misi dan tujuan pendidikan.

         Keywords: Development Strategy, Human Resources, Islamic Education
         Management, Islamic Boarding School for Children, Gontor.
                Received: January 10, 2022; Revised: Marc 23, 2022; Accepted: June 18, 2022


I.   INTRODUCTION
     The madrasah ibtidaiyah (elementary school) is an introductory level in education and
     learning (Noor, 2022). Here the child goes through a period of transition from
     childhood to adolescence in terms of thinking, shifting from concrete to abstract
     thinking. Physical growth also undergoes rapid changes. In addition, mental must also
     improve because the basic mental formation of a person starts from childhood at the
     kindergarten and elementary school (SD/MI) levels (Asadullah & Maliki, 2018).
     Many components support the growth and development of children in madrasas and
     need to be considered. One of these components is educators. Educators are teachers.
     Both class teachers, subject teachers, religious teachers and any teacher.
     The ups and downs of an educator's spirit often occur but must constantly be revived.
     The essence of an educator can be restored with good management. Likewise, with the
     performance of educators, it can also be improved with various planned programs
     (Ikhwan, 2017).
     Human Resources in an educational institution is the leading indicator that is active
     and responsible for achieving the vision and mission of the institution (Lambrechts &
     Gnan, 2022). Human resources in educational institutions are not only academic staff
     because educational staff, parents and institutional committees also significantly
     influence success in achieving education's vision, mission and goals (Mncube &
     Mthethwa, 2022).
     Education Development Strategy
     Development strategies in education are often referred to as education management
     (Kaelani, 2020). Educational management is carried out on all education-related
     matters (Wahyu & Swandari Tatik, 2021). The primary purpose of management is to
     increase the contribution of human resources to the organization to achieve
     organizational productivity in achieving its mission and goals are very dependent on
     the humans who manage the organization (Notoatmojo, 1998). Human resource
     management is all efforts related to the recognition of the importance of educators and



                                                                   DOI: https://doi.org/10.35723/ajie.v6i1.222

                         Strategy Management Semi-Islamic Boarding Schools... – Afiful Ikhwan et al. 76




educational staff in institutions as vital human resources which contribute to school
goals and utilize activity functions that ensure that human resources are used
effectively and fairly for the benefit of individuals, schools and society (Supiah &
Saputera, 2020);(Hifza, Susilawati, Nuraini, & Suriadi, 2020).
According to Deden Makbullah, the management process involves the main functions
performed by a manager, namely: planning, organizing, Leadership and supervision
(Makbullah, 2011). The definition of management from the point of view of its
function in the process, planning, organizing, directing, implementing, and controlling
organizational resources to achieve goals effectively and efficiently (Ilyasin, 2019).
The fundamental function of management includes several stages. These stages are
planning, organizing, actuating, and controlling. Planning is a management process
determining the organization's human resources movement from its current position to
the desired position in the future (Pfeffer, 2003). Planning is the first step before
carrying out all management processes. Planning should be carefully designed so there
are no complicated obstacles during the management process. In planning
management, one must think ahead to achieve future goals and look back to improve
or improve evaluations in the past (Gaol, 2021).
An organization is a collection of people with a system of cooperation to achieve a
common goal (Anugerah & Prabandini, 2019). The characteristics of cooperation can
be seen, among others: 1) there is communication between people who work together,
2) individuals in the organization can work together, and 3) cooperation is aimed at
achieving goals (Fattah, 2000). While organizing in the realm of management has two
general meanings. First, it is defined as an institution or functional group. Second, it
refers to a process of how work is organized and allocated among members.
Implementation or actuating is an urgent matter in management. Implementation is an
effort to move all members to be willing and willing to try to achieve organizational
goals. In addition to trying to make members want to achieve goals, actuating should
also make members more enthusiastic about acting.
An activity can be supervised or controlled to find correct deviations in the results
achieved from planned activities. Supervision in the sense of management will not
exist without planning, organizing and prior movement. Supervision is part of the
output of the other three types of management functions.
Human Resource Development in Education
Development is also known as development. Development is an increase that is
intentional by certain parties. Development is an effort to improve employees'
technical, theoretical, conceptual and moral abilities according to the needs of the job
or position through education and training. Education improves employees' theoretical,
conceptual and ethical skills, while training aims to improve the technical skills of
employees' work implementation (Hasibuan, 2016). There are many kinds of
development, including in the realm of education. One aspect that must be developed
is the existing Human Resources (Sujarwo, 2008).
Human Resources is an integrated ability of the power of thought and physical
strength of individuals. Behaviour and character are determined by heredity and
environment, while work performance is motivated by the desire to fulfil their
satisfaction (Hasibuan, 2016). Humans are the primary and strategic factor in an
organization or institution that can do a job by the vision, mission and goals. Human


                                                    DOI: https://doi.org/10.35723/ajie.v6i1.222

77   Al-Hayat: Journal of Islamic Education (AJIE)
     e-ISSN: 2599-3046 (online) | Volume 6, Issue 1 | January - June 2022
     p-ISSN: 2657-1781 (print)

     resources in educational institutions include educators and education staff. They start
     from teachers to employees of educational institutions.
     Human resource management is planning, organizing, directing and supervising the
     activities of procurement, development, compensation, integration, maintenance and
     release of human resources to achieve various individual, organizational and
     community goals (Molina-Azorin, López-Gamero, Tarí, Pereira-Moliner, & Pertusa-
     Ortega, 2021). Thus, human resource management is very closely related to the
     management of individuals in the organization so that each individual contributes to
     achieving organizational goals. Human resources in educational institutions must go
     through the existing Human Resources management processes: planning, organizing,
     directing and monitoring/evaluating, and follow-up.
                        MANAGEMENT
                      IMPROVEMENT OF
                     HUMAN RESOURCES

                                                                                     Planning
                           Supervision




                                   Briefing                                         Organizing

                     Figure 1. Human Resource Management for Educational Institutions
     Thus, it is essential to pay attention to the professionalism of Human Resources in an
     institution. If Human Resources is a professional institution, achieving its vision,
     mission and goals will be easier. Many things are done to improve the professionalism
     of Human Resources in an institution. This study discusses the management of
     improving human resources for educators and education personnel.
     Management of improving human resources involved in educational institutions is
     critical. Many studies discuss and examine Human Resources management in
     Madrasahs. With a variety of goals, institutions create activities and tricks to improve
     human resources in education. Few studies examine the improvement of human
     resources in an educational institution (Collins, 2021).
     First, the research is written by Ika Dewi Rahmawati with the title "Human Resource
     Management in Improving School Quality". This research is an empirical study
     conducted at MI Muhammadiyah Kartasura in a particular class for 2011/2012. The
     results of this study describe the principal's efforts to improve human resources quality
     through several things: planning, selection, procurement and placement, training and
     development, job appraisal, welfare and termination of employment. In addition to
     this, there are also several ways to improve the professionalism of Human Resources,
     namely: attending training, workshops, seminars, upgrading, Teacher Working Groups
     (KKG), participating (Subject Teacher Conferences (MGMP), career development,
     giving rewards for achievers, creativity, as well as further education for those who
     have not or who have a bachelor's degree (Rahmawati, 2012).



                                                                   DOI: https://doi.org/10.35723/ajie.v6i1.222

                         Strategy Management Semi-Islamic Boarding Schools... – Afiful Ikhwan et al. 78




Second, Nurdin wrote a journal in the form of school development management,
"Management of Elementary School Development Based on National Character
Education". This research was conducted at a primary educational institution in the
Bandung area, West Java. This journal used the quantitative descriptive method. The
study found that the influence of school culture, teacher professionalism and parental
participation on national character education was 33.8%, while the remaining 66.2%
was influenced by other factors (Nurdin, 2012).
Third, Abbas, in the educational journal "Development of Teacher Professionalism,"
wrote about several efforts made by an institution to improve teacher professionalism,
such as pre-service education, in-service coaching mechanisms and the role of
professional organizations (Abas, 2018).
Fourth, Basuki Jaka Purnama, in his journal entitled "Optimizing Human Resource
Management in Efforts to Improve School Quality", states that the factors that support
and hinder human resource management must be adequately managed so that good
performance will be obtained, school goals can be achieved. The quality of graduates
will increase (Purnama, 2016).
Fifth, according to Meila Hayudiyani, Ahmad Supriyanto and Agus Timan, examining
regional cultural values can improve and develop the quality of school institutions.
The research is structured with a descriptive qualitative approach. The results of the
study are: planning is carried out to improve the quality of education through the
development of regional culture by setting goals and analyzing the potential of the
region so that it can determine the program to be implemented. The activities carried
out were parenting past in the form of Panggereng and enrichment of regional
languages. The organizing stage includes the selection of human resources, namely
regional language teachers and the infrastructure that supports the program is the
Madurese language laboratory (Hayudiyani & Supriyanto, 2020).
Sixth, Roemintoyo, in his study entitled Management of Education Quality
Improvement, revealed that improving the quality of education can be achieved if
schools with various varieties are given the authority to regulate and manage
themselves according to environmental conditions and the needs of their students. This
thinking has encouraged efforts to provide broad autonomy to school principals so that
they can actively and dynamically seek to improve the quality of education through
managing school resources (Roemintoyo, 2010).
Seventh, according to Rohmat, with the results of his research on the Management
Model of Character Education Based on the Integration of Religious and Multicultural
Values. His research uses research and development methods. The research results are:
The character education management model based on integrating religious and
multicultural values is effectively used in character education at madrasah ibtidaiyah.
The results of the t-test through the paired t-test method showed a significant
difference between the character values before and after the implementation of
character education in Madrasah Ibtidaiyah (Rohmat, 2019).
Thus, from several studies of the results of the research mentioned above that the
author has explored, there have been many studies on the strategy of developing
educational institutions but limited to the author's search, so far, no one has studied it
in detail the management of Human Resources.




                                                    DOI: https://doi.org/10.35723/ajie.v6i1.222

79   Al-Hayat: Journal of Islamic Education (AJIE)
     e-ISSN: 2599-3046 (online) | Volume 6, Issue 1 | January - June 2022
     p-ISSN: 2657-1781 (print)

II. METHOD
     The research used in this study is a descriptive qualitative method with a case study
     design, namely in a naturalistic way, using the natural environment not being
     manipulated in specific settings. Real situations are used as data (Hasyim, 2016).
     Events that occur naturally in a social situation are the main focus of research because
     researchers want to understand the performance of individuals or groups in-depth, with
     the research focus on Human Resources at Madrasah Ibtidaiyah Pesantren Anak Soleh
     (MI PAS) Baitul Qur'an Gontor naturally. The role of researchers in qualitative
     methods involves directly interacting and communicating with participants and
     informants, especially in continuous experience over a long period. To avoid
     subjectivity, the researcher identified the intervention of opinion, belief, espoused
     values and personal background in interpreting the analyzed data and information. The
     role of the researcher in this research is passive. Researchers here, as observers, do not
     participate actively in the activities carried out by the observed actors. Data collection
     techniques utilize observation and interviews. The analytical tool used is the Miles and
     Huberman qualitative analysis model of data reduction, display and verification. They
     check the data's validity using triangulation; credibility, transferability, dependability
     and confirmability (Ikhwan, 2021).


III. RESULT AND DISCUSSION
     Strategy to Improve the Quality of Human Resources at MI PAS Baitul Qur'an
     The use of management science in the development of educators is carried out as an
     effort of administrative innovation designed to develop the effectiveness of madrasas
     in providing educational services to educational stakeholders (Prasetyo, 2000). All
     educational institutions have tricks to improve the quality of their human resources.
     The jokes are very diverse. Sometimes, one institution with another differs in
     managing human resource development. However, some create groups or join in an
     activity to increase the existing human resources in each institution.
     Researchers found management and tricks that are unique and rarely found in
     educational institutions other than the Islamic Boarding School for Children Sholeh
     Baitul Qur'an Gontor. Among these tricks are: holding teacher upgrading, holding
     workshops, comparative studies, conducting training, holding teacher competitions,
     parenting skills, certification of al-Qur'an teachers, family gatherings, monthly
     evaluations, and regular work meetings.
     1. Teacher Upgrades
     Teacher upgrading is carried out every semester. This program was formed to increase
     the knowledge and enthusiasm of teachers in teaching. In addition, this program also
     aims to raise the sincerity and ruhul-mudarris of every teacher.
     Presenters are brought in from various regions. According to the institution's needs
     and expertise and shared vision and mission, they are starting from Jakarta, Surabaya,
     and Pontianak. The presenters are the core of the activity. Suppose the presenters are
     experts in their fields. In that case, they will be very professional in delivering the
     material, especially if the presenters have certain tricks to continue to bind the focus of
     upgrading participants. So, the selection and determination of speakers are essential in
     this case.


                                                                   DOI: https://doi.org/10.35723/ajie.v6i1.222

                         Strategy Management Semi-Islamic Boarding Schools... – Afiful Ikhwan et al. 80




The upgrading form is not only indoor material but also outdoor. Thus, the teacher
does not feel bored and remains enthusiastic. Sometimes it even requires activity,
creativity and innovation from every teacher, thus challenging teachers to keep
moving and being creative.
Educators at this institution always emphasise applying the five leadership powers
described by the late. K.H. Abdullah Syukri, in his book, is used as a reference by the
research locus. The five forces are thrust, endurance, fighting, adaptability and creative
power. Every teacher is a leader, but leaders are not necessarily teachers. Thus, the
teacher must possess the five powers mentioned above.
2. Workshop
Workshops are also one way to improve the human resources of educators. Not only
homeroom and subject teachers (mapel). But it also applies to mosque takmir,
extracurricular teachers, administrative staff and the ziswaf handling section.
Workshops are not only conducted internally in madrasas. Often, the followed
workshops are workshops held by other institutions related to education and teaching.
3. Comparative Study
Comparative studies are also an urgent matter in improving the quality of human
resources. As an educational institution, it is not enough just to study theory. But must
use real examples. Thus, visiting other unique institutions will be better because they
will immediately see real examples. In addition, they can talk to specific sections of
the institutions called so that it will be more straightforward and transparent.
The comparative study destinations are located in various regions in Indonesia. The
institution is a preeminent institution with a unique and orderly system and
administration; that is the destination to be visited. Several times, he has seen the
districts of Malang, Surabaya, Yogyakarta, and even the capital city of Jakarta. All this
is to improve the quality of human resources and existing systems within the
institution (Interview, 2021).
The purpose of the comparative study is not only to visit. And the main thing is to get
positive inspiration that can be applied to the institution you are occupying. So that the
programs in the curriculum will be better and more developed, the right program will
make the existing education staff and students better and achieve better.
4. Certification Training
Conducting training for educational staff is a must that is always carried out in an
educational institution. It's different from workshops, which tend to be primarily
theoretical. Training is more about practicum and application. Among the activity that
has been carried out is training in making learning media and training for the Qur'an
and tahfidz.
Learning training is specifically for teachers, so the learning continues to develop and
improve. Various teacher training was carried out, starting from homeroom teachers,
subject teachers, Koran teachers and tahfidz teachers. All aspects of educators need to
be trained because theories are often found that are different from the actual situation
when implemented.
The Qur'an and tahfidz training is aimed at reciting and tahfidz teachers. The training
tutors are experts and experts in the field. Teacher training participants were given



                                                    DOI: https://doi.org/10.35723/ajie.v6i1.222

81   Al-Hayat: Journal of Islamic Education (AJIE)
     e-ISSN: 2599-3046 (online) | Volume 6, Issue 1 | January - June 2022
     p-ISSN: 2657-1781 (print)

     material in theory, field practice, evaluation and mentoring. The tutor carries out the
     every semester one to two times supervision. All of this shows the seriousness of the
     institution in improving the quality of education and totality of learning. All carried
     out lillah, hoping to achieve all educational goals as much as possible.
     Not only recitation and tahfidz teachers but even mosque ta'mir training was also
     carried out. The mosque is an educational centre for a pesantren. This institution is
     based on Islamic boarding school education, so of course, the centre of its activities is
     the mosque. Thus, reviving the mosque with various Islamic activities is very
     necessary. Thus, it is essential to carry out mosque ta'mir training to increase mosque-
     based Islamic movements.
     Principles of Human Resource Development at PAS Baitul Qur'an
     Everything carried out in actuating HR management in institutions cannot be separated
     from the principles of developing educators. The codes are as follows:
          a. Performed for all types of education personnel, both for structural staff,
             operational staff and technical personnel for education providers.
          b. Oriented to changes in behaviour in the context of increasing professional and
             technical abilities to implement daily tasks by their respective portions.
          c. Encourage and increase each individual's contribution to the educational
             organization or school system and provide rewards, welfare and incentives for
             the optimal fulfilment of socio-economic and socio-psychological needs.
          d. Educate and train someone before and after occupying a position.
          e. They are designed to meet the demands of job growth, professional
             development, problem-solving, remedial activities, maintenance of work
             motivation and resilience of educational organizations.
     Integrated Indicators & Implications of Human Resources PAS Baitul Qur'an
     1. Musabaqah (Contest)
     A teacher creativity competition was also held to measure and improve the integrity
     and creativity of teacher human resources at PAS Baitul Qur'an Gontor. All teachers
     are required to participate in the contest. With a match, automatically, all teachers
     learn to practice and issue their creative ideas for musabaqoh in goodness. Various
     kinds of competitions are presented. Starting from the taste, thought and exercise.
     Apart from these events, competitions are also held on national and Islamic holidays.
     Competitions to commemorate significant holidays are applied to teachers, and all
     employees are allowed to participate. This type of competition is adapted to the theme
     of the big day. For example, on August 17, a kind of competition was held around the
     independence race. When commemorating Isra' Mi'raj, competitions were held around
     Islam, such as a storytelling competition for the story of Isra' Mi'raj of the Prophet
     Muhammad SAW., and so on.
     2. Parenting Skills
     Human resource development activities aim not only at educators and education staff
     but also at parents. The increase in human resources for the guardians of students is
     carried out with parenting skills. Parenting skills are skills in parenting. According to
     the Ministry of Education and Culture of the Republic of Indonesia, parenting is


                                                                   DOI: https://doi.org/10.35723/ajie.v6i1.222

                          Strategy Management Semi-Islamic Boarding Schools... – Afiful Ikhwan et al. 82




understood as an interaction between parents and children to support physical,
emotional, social, intellectual and spiritual development.
The process of educating children should not be left to the school alone. However, the
family also needs to pay attention to it. Schools provide theories and examples, while
their habits must be monitored with each child's family at home. So, every parent
needs to understand this.
In parenting activities, you don't just invite a guardian; some considerations are needed
to determine several things in the action. Among them are the selection of tutors and
parenting themes. Determination of parenting skills tutors based on the needs of the
school and the student's parents. The article's conclusion is based on a survey of
student problems from teachers and students' parents. When parenting skills activities
are carried out, all parents, teachers and employees must attend these activities.
Every teacher at this educational institution is a teacher of the Koran. So, every teacher
must participate in tahsin, tasih and teacher certification activities of the Qur'an.
Tahsin is an improvement in memorization. Tahsin is an assessment of the
achievement of tahsin. If you pass the tahsin, the teacher continues to the certification
level. Teachers who have been certified can teach at the initial level of the Koran.
Those who have not been approved can lead according to their tahsin achievements.
For example, if teacher A passes in volume 5, it can teach only volumes 1 to 5.
3. Family Gathering
Family gatherings are held as a forum for friendship between families of educators and
education staff. This activity is mandatory for teachers and school employees, bringing
their families. Thus, the families of teachers and employees know each other. In
addition, it aims to understand the family of the responsibilities of teachers and
employees while serving at school. The more teachers and employees of an institution,
the more critical the nature of family gatherings are. The bigger an institution, the
more critical this activity is.
4. Routine Evaluation
Evaluation is needed to measure and respond to learning and educational activities and
to renew the spirit of educators and education. Evaluation can be carried out once or
twice a month. Evaluation in education is critical. This serves to measure how far the
achievement of educators and educational staff in their targets is to achieve the agreed
goals. If the achievement is known, it can be estimated that it must be maintained or
improved again. In addition, evaluation is also necessary to enhance intentions. To be
more enthusiastic about acting in the field of education. Teachers and employees who
are getting bored and lazy to move will be charged again in the monthly evaluation
activities so that they are full of power and ready to carry out the existing tasks.
5. Scheduled Work Meeting
Before going through the educational process, it is necessary to carry out educational
planning and activities that will be passed for the following year. At this institution, it
is called a working meeting. Raker is the root of all activities. This is where the old
program is evaluated, and the formation of a new program is implemented. The
Working Meeting is held once a year, i.e. before the entry of the new school year. The
working meeting was attended by all educators and educational staff working in the
institution.


                                                     DOI: https://doi.org/10.35723/ajie.v6i1.222

83   Al-Hayat: Journal of Islamic Education (AJIE)
     e-ISSN: 2599-3046 (online) | Volume 6, Issue 1 | January - June 2022
     p-ISSN: 2657-1781 (print)

     The existing management aims to improve the human resources of educators and
     education personnel in an institution. If the human resources are good, the institution
     will want to continue to grow. Vice versa, if human resources are not good, the
     institution's development will also be hampered and move very slowly.
     From an institution's findings, it can be concluded that improving human resources in
     educational institutions is not only for teachers but includes principals, teachers,
     school employees, teachers' families and school employees, and parents.
     Human Resource Management at PAS Baitul Qur'an
     Human Resources development was carried out at MI PAS Baitul Qur'an as in the
     findings, including comprehensive or comprehensive Human Resources management.
     All the things that have been arranged and programmed are nothing but to improve the
     professionalism of human resources for educators and education staff and are
     supported by parents. Not only that, all programs must be able to cultivate ruuhuljihad
     and the spirit of sincerity in each personnel.
     With various activities, it creates a lot and frequent communication between one
     person and another. This has an impact on good communication between Human
     Resources. In addition, every program always has a committee, from which
     coordinated communication and activities are formed, so that collaboration between
     individuals will be excellent and effective in teamwork, as the author describes in the
     following chart:
                                                      Human resource
                                                       development
                                                         planning

                                  Emphasis                                        Ruhuljihad
                                 on practice                                     and Sincerity




                        Collaborative                  Accommod                          Clear
                       decision making                    ative                       development
                                                                                         tasks
                                                       leadership




                             Effective                                              Feedback
                           communication                                           and review



                                                         Openness
                                                        and candor



          Figure 2. Implementation of MI PAS Baitul Qur'an Gontor Management Management
     All Human Resources improvement management activities go through several
     processes. The process or steps the authors analyze are as follows:
     1. Analyze Needs
     Needs analysis is carried out by identifying performance skills, developing appropriate
     programs, conducting research and improving performance.



                                                                     DOI: https://doi.org/10.35723/ajie.v6i1.222

                            Strategy Management Semi-Islamic Boarding Schools... – Afiful Ikhwan et al. 84




  2. Develop Instructional Plans
  The instructional design includes several things, namely: objectives, instructional
  methods, media, sequence and description of the training material, which is the
  curriculum for the training program.
  3. Validate the Training Program
  A training program must obtain consideration and approval from the authorized
  agency element.
  4. Implementation Stage
  The implementation program stage uses various training techniques such as
  discussions, workshops, and seminars to convey knowledge to the training program
  participants.
  5. Evaluation and Follow-up Stage
  In the evaluation and follow-up stages, the extent of the success and failure of the
  program that has been implemented is assessed. Aspects that need to be evaluated
  include ability and learning outcomes, participants' reactions to the program, and
  performance behaviour after joining the program.
  With various programs to improve human resource management at MI PAS Baitul
  Qur'an Gontor, the head of the madrasa does not forget to always adhere to the
  principles of human resource management by the rules set by the government through
  the ministry of education. There are four basic principles in human resource
  management in schools that must be adhered to by school principals, namely: (1) In
  developing schools, human resources are the most valuable component; (2) Human
  resources will play an optimal role if appropriately managed to support the
  achievement of institutional goals; (3) The culture and organizational atmosphere in
  the school, as well as the managerial behaviour of the principal, greatly influence the
  achievement of school development goals; (4) Managerial personnel in schools in
  principle strive so that every school member can work together and support each other
  to achieve school goals (Depdikbud, 1999).


IV. CONCLUSION
  Human resource management is all efforts related to the recognition of the importance
  of educators and education personnel in institutions as vital human resources, which
  contribute to the goals of madrasas and utilize the function of activities that ensure that
  human resources are used effectively and fairly for the benefit of individuals, schools
  and society.
  Management's fundamental function includes several stages: planning, organizing,
  actuating, and controlling. Planning is a management process in determining the
  organization's human resources movement from its current position to the desired
  position in the future.
  Management and tricks that are unique and rarely found in other madrasah institutions
  in a sustainable, comprehensive and consistent manner are: holding teacher upgrading,
  holding workshops, comparative studies, conducting training, holding teacher
  competitions, parenting skills, teacher certification of the Qur'an, family gatherings,
  routine evaluations, and scheduled work meetings that are not only applied to


                                                       DOI: https://doi.org/10.35723/ajie.v6i1.222

85    Al-Hayat: Journal of Islamic Education (AJIE)
      e-ISSN: 2599-3046 (online) | Volume 6, Issue 1 | January - June 2022
      p-ISSN: 2657-1781 (print)

      educators and education staff but parents of students are also included as a form of
      implementing the integration of the family and madrasa education environment which
      is provided as a whole.


V. REFERENCES
     [1] Abas. (2018). PengembanganProfesionalisme Guru. Jurnal Manajemen Pendidikan
         Islam Adaara, 7(1), 648–654.
     [2] Anugerah, U., & Prabandini, O. (2019). Psikologi Industri & Organisasi.
         Prenadamedia Group.
     [3] Asadullah, M. N., & Maliki. (2018). Madrasah for girls and private school for
         boys? The determinants of school type choice in rural and urban Indonesia.
         International      Journal     of    Educational     Development, 62, 96–111.
         https://doi.org/https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ijedudev.2018.02.006
     [4] Collins, C. J. (2021). Expanding the resource based view model of strategic human
         resource management. International Journal of Human Resource Management.
         https://doi.org/10.1080/09585192.2019.1711442
     [5] Depdikbud. (1999). Panduan Manajemen Sekolah. Jakarta.
     [6] Fattah, N. (2000). Landasan Manajemen Pendidikan. Bandung: Remaja Rosdakrya.
     [7] Gaol, P. L. (2021). Implementation of Performance Management in Artificial
         Intelligence System to Improve Indonesian Human Resources Competencies. IOP
         Conference         Series:     Earth      and    Environmental     Science.
         https://doi.org/10.1088/1755-1315/717/1/012010
     [8] Hasibuan, M. S. P. (2016). Manajemen Sumber Daya Manusia, Edisi Refisi.
         Jakarta: Bumi Aksara.
     [9] Hasyim, A. (2016). Metode Pengembangan dan Peneltian Di Sekolah. Yogyakarta:
         Media Akademi.
     [10] Hayudiyani, M., & Supriyanto, A. (2020). Manajemen Peningkatan Mutu
          Pendidikan Melalu Pengembangan Budaya Lokal. Jurnal Administrasi Dan
          Mnajemen Pendidikan, 3(1), 102.
     [11] Hifza, Susilawati, Nuraini, & Suriadi. (2020). Change Management in Educational
          Institutions: Problems, Causes and Alternative Solutions. Al-Hayat: Journal of
          Islamic Education, 4(1), 69–78.
     [12] Ikhwan, A. (2017). Development Of Quality Management Islamic Education In
          Islamic Boarding School (Case Study Madrasah Aliyah Ash Sholihin). Al-Hayat:
          Journal of Islamic Education, 1(1), 91–117.
     [13] Ikhwan, A. (2021). Metode Penelitian Dasar (Mengenal Model Penelitian dan
          Sistematikanya). Tulungagung: STAI Muhammadiyah Tulungagung.
     [14] Ilyasin, M. (2019). Inovasi Manajemen Pendidikan di Madrasah Tsanawiyah
          Negeri Model Samarinda. Jurnal Penelitin, 11(2), 95.
     [15] Kaelani, K. (2020). Strategi Pengembangan Pendidikan Islam. Eduprof : Islamic
          Education Journal. https://doi.org/10.47453/eduprof.v2i1.33



                                                                    DOI: https://doi.org/10.35723/ajie.v6i1.222

                          Strategy Management Semi-Islamic Boarding Schools... – Afiful Ikhwan et al. 86




[16] Lambrechts, F., & Gnan, L. (2022). Human resources and mutual gains in family
     firms: New developments and possibilities on the horizon. Journal of Family
     Business                               Strategy,                     100502.
     https://doi.org/https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jfbs.2022.100502
[17] Makbullah, D. (2011). Pendidikan Agama Islam. Jakarta: PT. Raja Grafindo
     Persada.
[18] Mncube, L. S., & Mthethwa, L. C. (2022). Potential ethical problems in the
     creation of open educational resources through virtual spaces in academia. Heliyon,
     8(6), e09623. https://doi.org/https://doi.org/10.1016/j.heliyon.2022.e09623
[19] Molina-Azorin, J. F., López-Gamero, M. D., Tarí, J. J., Pereira-Moliner, J., &
     Pertusa-Ortega, E. M. (2021). A literature review of environmental, human, and
     green       human      resource   management.       Administrative    Sciences.
     https://doi.org/10.3390/ADMSCI11020048
[20] Noor, H. (2022). Integrasi Character Value Melalui Pendidikan Agama Islam di
     Sekolah Dasar. Muallimuna : Jurnal Madrasah Ibtidaiyah, 7(2), 21–30.
     https://doi.org/http://dx.doi.org/10.31602/muallimuna.v7i2.5469
[21] Notoatmojo, S. (1998). Pengembangan Sumber Daya Manusia. Jakarta: PT. Rineka
     Cipta.
[22] Nurdin. (2012). Manajemen Pengembangan Sekolah Dasar Berbasis Pendidikan
     Karakter. Jurnal Pendidikan UPI, (2).
[23] Pfeffer, J. (2003). Paradigma Baru Manajemen Sumber Daya Manusia.
     Yogyakarta: Amra Books.
[24] Prasetyo, T. (2000). Praktek Sumber Daya Manusia yang Progresif, Upaya
     Membagun Keunggulan Bersaing. Jurnal Ekonomi Dan Manajemen, 1(1), 6.
[25] Purnama, B. J. (2016). Optimalisasi Manajemen Sumber Daya Manusia Dalam
     Upaya Peningkatan Mutu Sekolah. Jurnal Manajemen Pendidikan, 12(2).
[26] Rahmawati, I. D. (2012). Manajemen Sumber Daya Manusia dalam Peningkatan
     Kualitas Sekolah. Fakultas Agama Islam Universitas Muhammadiyah Surakarta.
[27] Roemintoyo. (2010). Manajemen Peningkatan Mutu Pendidikan. Jurnal Inovasi
     Pendidikan FKIP Universitas Sebelas Maret Surakarta, 11(1), 13.
[28] Rohmat. (2019). Model Manajemen Pendidikan Karakter Berbasis Integrasi Nilai-
     Nilai Religius dan Multikultural. Jurnal Pendidikan Agama. Institut Agama Islam
     Negeri (IAIN) Purwokerto, 20(2), 228.
[29] Sujarwo. (2008). Evaluasi Kinerja Penyelenggaraan Pendidikan dan Pelatihan
     Kepemimpinan Tingkat IV pada Balai Diklat Keagamaan Semarang. Tesis.
[30] Supiah, & Saputera, A. R. A. (2020). Implementasi Dan Strategi Pengembangan
     Konsep Pendidikan Akhlak Di Madrasah Aliyah Al-khairaat Kota Gorontalo.
     Jurnal Kariman. https://doi.org/10.52185/kariman.v8i1.131
[31] Wahyu, P. G., & Swandari Tatik, M. R. (2021). Manajemen Strategi
     Pengembangan Pendidikan Non Formal. Chalim Journal of Teaching and
     Learning.




                                                     DOI: https://doi.org/10.35723/ajie.v6i1.222