JME Volume 8, No. 1 Juni 2022 ; hlm 43- 47
ISSN : 2580-3522

   AN ANALYSIS OF THE ROLE OF THE PRINCIPAL TO IMPROVE
          THE QUALITY OF SCHOOL MANAGEMENT
                 AT SMP NEGERI 4 TOLITOLI

                                                    Diyenti Rusdin
                                                 diyenti17@gmail.com

                                         English Education Study Program
                                                Madako University



                                                        ABSTRACT

            The purpose of this research was to analyze the role of the principal to improve the quality of school
management. This research used descriptive qualitative design and it was conducted in SMP Negeri 4 Tolitoli.
The technique of collecting data used interview and questionnaire, were the data obtained from the principal, five
teachers and six students. The result of this research is the principal carrying out her role properly. The principal
plays the role of educator, planner and implementer.

Key words: Principal, Management, Principal Leadership


                                                         ABSTRAK

            Tujuan penelitian ini adalah untuk menganalisis peran kepala sekolah dalam meningkatkan kualitas
manajemen sekolah. Penelitian ini menggunakan desain deskriptif kualitatif yang dilakukan di SMP Negeri 4
Tolitoli. Teknik pengumpulan data menggunakan wawancara dan kuesioner yang diperoleh dari kepala sekolah
dan lima orang guru. Hasil dari penelitian ini adalah kepala sekolah menjalankan perannya dengan baik. Kepala
sekolah berperan sebagai pendidik, perencana dan pelaksana.

Kata kunci: Kepala Sekolah, Manajemen, Kepemimpinan Kepala Sekolah



Introduction

          The principal is a teacher who is given more responsibility in managing school
management in order to achieve educational goals. According to Zekan et al (2012) revealed
that leadership is someone who has the ability and inspire, guide his subordinates effectively,
and implement programs that have been established together in advancing education into a
quality school education and synergize to innovate. The success of an educational institution
depends on the principal's leadership. Then the principal must bring his institution towards a
better direction.
          Management is a series of actions and tasks relevant to highly well organized and
effectual application of resources within the organization in order to attain organizational
objectives (Sapre, 2002). Management in educational activities, can be interpreted as planning,
organizing, mobilization, supervision and evaluation in educational activities carried out by
education managers to form learners who quality in accordance with the purpose. So that the
optimal results can be achieved, then everything needs to be management.

                                                                                                                  43

JME Volume 8, No. 1 Juni 2022 ; hlm 43- 47
ISSN : 2580-3522

           Education component that has a strategic role in improving the quality of education
in the school environment is the principal leadership role. Principal leadership is the principal
method or effort in influencing, encouraging, guiding, directing, and mobilize teachers, staff,
students, parents, and other parties involved, to participate in order to achieve the goals set.
Therefore principal management is very important because it will make it easy to achieve goals,
with the management will be arranged effectively and efficiently.
            Based on the researcher observation when conducting PPL, it seemed that the
curriculum implemented in SMP Negeri 4 Tolitoli is the 2013 curriculum, where the 2013
curriculum demands that students be more active in the teaching and learning process. It has a
variety of learning facilities that are sufficient to support the teaching and learning process.
Facilities used to support the learning process are books and projectors. The teacher uses books
for teaching and learning in the classroom. Books are one of the supports because it has a lot
of numbers. In the learning process needed a projector as a support, but the teacher has not
fully used it because of the limited amount. Other facilities are buildings, it building is
sufficient to support the learning process because they have classrooms in accordance with the
number of students. It has IPA laboratory, but has no listening laboratory.
            The principal has more responsibility for the success of the school. The responsibility
is not only to meet the facilities needed in the teaching and learning process, but also to observe
the process of teaching and learning. So this research will be conduct to find out how the role
SMP Negeri 4 Tolitoli principal to improve school.
           There are some researchers conducted the research of the role of the Principal.
Related to this research, the researcher chooses some literature about the previous study which
is role of the principal in improving the quality of school management. The first research is
conducted by Nellitawati (2018). The findings show the role of the principal is simple because
it has a mean value of 3:50 with a standard deviation of 659. This finding means that the overall
level is still modest principal role. Therefore, that needs to improve in the future. This study
found that the principal role as an innovator and motivator are also at a moderate level only.
Because the mean value of the principal role as an innovator is 3:55 with a standard deviation
of 742 and as a motivator has a simple mean value of 3:53 with a standard deviation of 650.
The second research is conducted by Muhammad Ubaidillah (2018). This research finds out
the hard efforts in innovation leadership by conducting quality education through the
management of inputs, processes and educational resources conducted optimally to improve
the quality of education. The third research is conducted by Syukri (2013). Based on the results
of research at the location shows that the role of the principal has carried out his duties with
full responsibility, with the aim to improve performance teacher, by taking a normative
approach, which can persuade or motivates teachers to always work in accordance with their
duties respectively, with expertise in the field of study they teach. Procedures and steps taken
by the principal at improve teacher performance at Nurul Ihsan Middle School, Tolitoli
Regency oversee deliberation, communication, planning, coordination, evaluation, with this
application finally everything intention will be realized, to improve teacher performance.
           Based on the background above, the formulation of the problem can be written as
follow analyze how is the role of the principal to improve the quality of school management at
SMP Negeri 4 Tolitoli?


                                                                                                44

JME Volume 8, No. 1 Juni 2022 ; hlm 43- 47
ISSN : 2580-3522

Method of the Research
        This research use descriptive qualitative design. The technique of collecting data used
interview and questionnaire, were the data obtained from the principal, five teachers and six
students.

Finding and Discussion
            One of the roles of the principal is as an educator. As an educator the principal is
tasked with guiding teachers, education staff and students. Principal guiding teacher in
improving teaching skill. Analyzing and follow up on the result of learning evaluation. Provide
good role models to students. The principal must set a good example for both teachers and
students. One good example is arriving on time. The principal provides motivation and a sense
of comfort to students. The principal's task in educating is to provide direction to teachers in
the organization towards a better direction. After supervising, the principal evaluates the results
of the teacher's teaching and learning process and giving motivation.
The Principal as a Planner to Improve the Quality of School Management
            As a planner, the principal is in charge of planning, holding meetings, making
decisions and managing the learning process. School development planning is a process for
making changes for the sake of achieving educational. Every principal wants to develop a
school that is led. Therefore the principal makes school development plans. In making plans
the principal carries out a meeting with all teachers. The principal makes decisions together.
Principal make planning is conducting financial planning by proposing and ratifying the school
budget and income. Planning improvement to school work programs. Planning the guidance,
development and improvement of the teaching and learning process
            As implementer, principal must be able to carry out her role well. In this case the
principal and the teacher carry out the planning that has been made. The principal must not
impose her own will on her group. She must try to fulfill the will and needs of her group, as
well as the program or plan that has been determined together. As implementer principal
creating an effective and efficient school organizational structure. Supervising and controlling
school organizations.
            The principal carries out her role as implementer, namely by conducting supervision,
evaluation and assessment. Principal tries to provide facilities and infrastructure for the
smoothness of the teaching and learning process. Facilities and infrastructure are supporting
factors for learning, with the facilities and infrastructure that can help students and teachers in
the teaching and learning process. The principal collaborates with the person in charge of
facilities and infrastructure in managing school facilities and infrastructure.
The researcher described the result of the research about the role of the principal to improve
the quality of school management.
         1. First, the researcher distributed question sheets to the principal five teachers and six
             students. After that, researchers conducted interviews.
         2. Second, the researcher examined the results of the questions and the results of the
             interviews.
         3. Finally, the researcher conducted an analysis by looking at the comparison between
             all teachers and students answers and then making conclusion.


                                                                                                 45

JME Volume 8, No. 1 Juni 2022 ; hlm 43- 47
ISSN : 2580-3522

Conclusion
Based on the finding and discussion on the analysis of the role of the principal to improve the
quality of school management at SMP Negeri 4 Tolitoli, it can be conclude that the principal
is carrying out her role properly. The principal plays the role of educator, planner and
implementer.


References

Appley,A.Lawrence dan Lee, Oey Liang. (2010). Pengantar Manajemen. Jakarta: Salemba
       Empat.

Arikunto. 2006. Prosedur Penelitian Suatu Pendekatan Praktek. Jakarta : PT. Rineka Cipta.

Asmendri. 2014. The Roles of School Principal in the Implementation of Character Education
       at Boarding School

Cindy Harrison and Joellen Killion. 2007. Roles for Teacher Leaders.

Erdin. 2017. Peran Kepala Madrasah dalam Meningkatkan Profesionalisme Guru melalui
        Manajemen Kerja berbasis Religius di Madrasah Aliyah Negeri 1 Man 1 Wakatobi.

Khairun Anam. 2017. Peran Kepala Sekolah dalam Menerapkan Manajemen
        Mutu Pendidikan di Sekolah Dasar.

Leedy, P. & Ormrod, J. (2001). Practical research: Planning and design (7th ed.). Upper
       Saddle River, NJ: Merrill Prentice Hall. Thousand Oaks: SAGE Publications.

Muhammad Ubaidillah, Ali Imron, Bambang Budi Wiyono, Imron Arifin, Innovation
     Leadership in Improving the Quality of Education, International Journal of
     Mechanical   Engineering   and   Technology  9(7),   2018,pp.1288–1299.
     http://www.iaeme.com/IJMET/issues.asp?JType=IJMET&VType=9&IType=
     7.

Muhammad Fauzi, Syafrudin, Joni Rokhmat. 2018. Principal’s Managerial Skill In
     Improving Teachers’ Performance. IOSR Journal of Research & Method in Education
     (IOSR-JRME) e- ISSN: 2320–7388,p-ISSN: 2320–737X Volume 8, Issue 3 Ver. IV (May.
     – June. 2018), PP 77-81 www.iosrjournals.org.

Nellitawati. (2018). Motivation and innovation role of school’s principal in improving
        teacher professionalism. Couns-Edu: International Journal of Counseling and
        Education, 3(2): pp. 48-56. DOI: https://doi.org/10.23916/0020180313520.

Nurhayati. 2018. The Principal’s Leadership Strategy in Improving Quality: A Study at
       Aron State Elementary School Pidie Aceh Indonesia. profcut@yahoo.com.

Schostak. 2006. Interviewing as a Data Collection Method: A Critical Review Linguistics
        Research Vol. 3, No. 1; 2014.


                                                                                            46

JME Volume 8, No. 1 Juni 2022 ; hlm 43- 47
ISSN : 2580-3522

Sugiyono. 2013. Metode Penelitian Pendidikan Pendekatan Kuantitatif, Kualitatif, dan R&D.
       Bandung: Alfabeta.

Syukri. 2013 Peranan kepemimpinan kepala sekolah dalam meningkatkan Kinerja guru.

Yin. 2003. Case Study Research: Design and Methods.

www.thoughtCo. 2019. The Role of the Principal in Schools.

Zekana, S.B. Peronjab, I. & Russo, A. (2012). Linking theory with practice: Students
        perceptions of leaders and leadership characteristics. Procedia - Social and Behavioral
        Sciences 41. 237 – 242.




                                                                                            47