SCHOOLAR: Social and Literature Study in Education
                                Vol. 1 No. 1 June 2021, Page. 1 - 5
                                E-ISSN: 2797-0299


          Implementation of School Management in Realizing Religious Culture




                                      Khoirun Nisa1*, Nabila Anisya2
                          1,2
                                Islamic Education, Universitas KH. A. Wahab Hasbullah
                                        *Email: neesaalkhoirot@unwaha.ac.id


ABSTRACT
This study aims to determine the religious culture developed and how school management strategies in
developing religious culture in MAN 3 Tambakberas Jombang. This research uses a qualitative
approach with a qualitative descriptive research type. Data collection techniques in this study using
observation, interviews and documentation. The results showed that the religious culture developed in
MAN 3 Jombang, namely 2S culture (greetings and salim), reading al-qur'an, praying before and after
teaching and learning activities, praying dhuha and praying dzuhur in congregation, cult after dhuha
prayer, memorization program, guidance program to read the Koran, protect the environment and
celebrate Islamic holidays. Among the management strategies implemented by schools in developing
religious culture in MAN 3 Jombang, namely habituation, exemplary, advice and punishment.

Keywords: Management Implementation; School Management; Religious Culture


INTRODUCTION
        Education plays an important role in ensuring the development and continuity of a nation's life.
The function of the educational process is to facilitate desired changes in behavior (Nisa’, 2021). Various
potentials can be developed through education, including the potential of religion or religious nature,
namely having faith and devotion to God Almighty. In the Koran, it explains that Allah will raise the
degree of those who believe and have knowledge (Hasanah, 2016).
       According to Law no. 20 of 2003 chapter I article 1, education is a conscious and planned effort to
create an atmosphere of learning and the learning process so that students actively develop their potential
to have religious spiritual strength, self-control, personality, intelligence, noble character, and the skills
are needed by them selves, society, nation and state (Machbubah, 2019). Meanwhile, national education
is education based on Pancasila and the 1945 Constitution of the Republic of Indonesia which is rooted in
religious values, Indonesian national culture and responses to the guidance of changing times (Zulhendri,
2018).
       The function of national education is to develop capabilities and shape the character and
civilization of the nation with dignity in the framework of developing the intellectual life of the nation.
Meanwhile, the aim of national education is to develop the potential of students to become human beings
who believe and believe in God Almighty, have a noble character, are healthy, capable, creative,
independent and become democratic, and responsible citizens (Murjani, 2017).
       Schools are complex and unique institutions. In school, there are various dimensions that are
interrelated and determine each other. Meanwhile, each school has certain characteristics that are not
owned by other schools. Therefore, schools as institutions and organizations need good management.
Including management in implementing religious culture in a school. The religious culture in an
educational institution really needs to be emphasized, even though the educational institution is based on
Islam. Because religious culture is a set of religious values that underlie the behavior, traditions, habits,
ways of thinking and acting that are practiced by teachers as educators in madrasas (Sholeh, 2016).
       Many parents, teachers and the public have complained about the moral decline of teenagers,
especially among today's students. This is closely related to the quality of education and the quality of

Khoirun Nisa’, Nabila Anisya
Implementation of School Management in Realizing Religious Culture in MAN 3 Jombang.

human resources, and shows how low and fragile the moral and spiritual foundations of our nation are. As
educated students, they should be able to reflect good behavior. This is where the important role of the
application of religious culture in daily activities at school in shaping the character of students. The
important reason religious culture needs to be applied in schools is because religious culture can shape
character education which is used as a basis for realizing the goals of national education.
       All changes and developments in religious culture in an educational institution are the result of
various experiences, invitations and habituation of religious attitudes towards God and towards fellow
school members. The impact of creating an atmosphere of religious life is the development of a view of
life that is inspired by the teachings and values of the Islamic religion, which are then manifested in
attitudes and life skills by school members, especially for students.
       In general, the purpose of this study is to determine the implementation of school management in
realizing religious culture in schools. Meanwhile, specifically the purpose of this study is to provide an
overview of the developed religious culture and school management strategies in realizing religious
culture in schools. This research will be carried out at the MAN 3 Jombang school. The reason the
authors carry out research at MAN 3 Jombang is because the school has a vision of realizing people who
are faithful, pious, knowledgeable, charitable, noble, global minded, superior and competitive based on
the environment by prioritizing character education and implementing various religious cultures not only
for their students, but also to all school members because the school is located in a boarding school
environment.

METHOD
       Research on the implementation of school management in realizing religious culture is a qualitative
descriptive study in which the researcher will explain, describe the events that researchers get in the field
related to the implementation of school management in realizing religious culture in MAN 3 Jombang
then draw conclusions inductively. The research subjects were the deputy head of the curriculum, PAI
subject teachers and students. The data collection techniques used were interviews, observation and
documentation. For data analysis, researchers used an interactive analysis model developed by Miles &
Huberman, namely by reducing, presenting data and drawing conclusions (Nisa’, 2017a).

RESULT AND DISCUSSION
Result
       MAN 3 Jombang is a school under the auspices of the Pondok Pesantren Bahrul 'Ulum
Tambakberas Jombang foundation. This school integrates general education and religious education and
has been awarded as a healthy madrasa, madrasah with character and madrasah adiwiyata. The character
madrasah award is reflected in the existence of various religious cultures that are implemented in MAN 3
Jombang.
       Based on the results of interviews and observations of researchers, religious culture developed in
MAN 3 Jombang, namely: 2S religious culture (greetings and handshake), tilawati qur'an activities,
habituation of reading prayers before and after learning, implementing dhuha prayers and dzuhur prayers
in congregation, cultum activities after dhuha prayer, al quran memorization program, qur'an reading
guidance program (BBQ), habituation to guard, activities to celebrate Islamic holidays.
       To realize the various religious cultures that have been mentioned, MAN 3 Jombang has various
management strategies. There is a strategy of habituation which is manifested in the implementation of
religious cultures on a daily basis so that students are able to accept it well and apply it outside the school
environment. There is an exemplary strategy carried out by the MAN 3 Jombang teacher by providing
examples of good words and deeds to students. There is a strategy of giving advice by providing
motivation and directing students to the goodness contained in Islamic law. The last one is a strategy of
punishment or sanctions for students who violate or do not implement religious culture in MAN 3
Jombang.

Discussion
      In the context of educational institutions, especially madrasas, the religious culture of madrasas is a
manifestation of religious values and these values are the core of culture. Religious values are values
based on religion, namely values that come from the highest truths that come from God which are very
broad in scope and govern all aspects of human life (Mulyadi, 2018). Therefore, MAN 3 Jombang
combines general education with religious education through religious cultures which have a great

SCHOOLAR: Social and Literature Study in Education
Vol.1 No.1 June 2021

influence on the understanding of student’s religious value. In developing these values, the following
forms of religious culture are developed in MAN 3 Jombang:
       The first is a cultural greeting and handshake. This 2S religious culture is a process of cultivating
religious attitudes that expect students to be kind, polite and courteous to anyone. Polite manners are
similar to morals, but manners that are considered good are those that refer to the norms prevailing in
society. From there morals give birth to courtesy (Nurjanah, 2020). This program is implemented in the
form of habituation of students to say greetings then salim or shake the teacher's hand when meeting both
inside and outside the school environment. In addition, when the teacher opens and closes learning
activities, the teacher is also required to say greetings.
       The second is recitation of the Qur’an. Every morning there are scheduled male students who lead
tilawati quran. For male students who get the assignment, he will arrive earlier than other students. This
qur'an recitation activity aims so that students do not feel unfamiliar with the verses of the al-qur'an
because they are used to listening to the chanting of the holy qur'an so that when students have graduated
from MAN 3 Jombang their hearts will soften every time they hear Qur'anic verses.
       The third is pray before and after studying. When the first class bell rings, the student who is in
charge of leading the quran tilawati, then leads the other students to read the prayer before studying.
Students who are in class participate in reading the prayer before studying. Some classes continue with
reading the Asma'ul Husna. When the bell rings the end of teaching and learning activities, students who
lead the prayer before learning in the morning, return to guide other students to read prayers after
learning. Students who get these assignments are always different every day.
       The fourth is dhuha prayer and dzuhur prayer in congregation. Students are required to attend the
dhuha prayer in congregation even though they take turns in each local area because the facilities for
places of worship cannot accommodate all students of MAN 3 Jombang at the same time. Duha prayer
activities in congregation are carried out at the first break. The purpose of this dhuha prayer activity in
congregation is to form good morals and equip students to be able to apply Islamic teachings in their
entirety with the habit of carrying out sunnah worship so that after completing education at MAN 3
Jombang students do not only carry out compulsory worship. As for the dzuhur prayer which is required
in congregation at the Islamic Center, only male students and female students in superior class programs.
       The fifth is cultum after dhuha prayer. This cultum is an activity where one of the students will
deliver a speech in front of other students after the Duha prayer in congregation. This activity trains
students to dare to speak in public. Courage will lead to an independent attitude that will encourage
students to find innovative things (Berliani & Sudrajat, 2018). Before this activity starts, there are several
processes that must be passed. First, each class is required to prepare two students as representatives of its
class, consisting of one main delegation and one substitute delegation. Second, the two students along
with other class representatives will receive directions from several teachers in charge of cultum
activities. Third, the person in charge of cultum activities will make a schedule for when this class will
get cultum assignments. This cultum has been scheduled for one semester so that all students in charge
can prepare material and practice ahead of time.
       The sixth ia al qur’an memorization program. This al-Quran memorization program is a condition
of whether or not students are allowed to take semester exams. Students have 1 semester or approximately
5 months to complete their memorization targets. Each grade level has a different level or target of
memorization. All students of MAN 3 Jombang are required to complete the target of this memorization
program before the semester exams are held. Students usually deposit their memorization to their
homeroom teacher every Monday in the first hour.
       The seventh is quran reading guidance program (BBQ). This Quran Reading Guidance Program is
intended for students who are not fluent in reading al-quran. In this activity, students who are not fluent in
reading al quran will be gathered and given guidance to read al-quran until fluently on Tuesday after
school hours are finished in a centralized Islamic center.
       The eighth is protecting the environment. Students and all school members who are in the
environment of MAN 3 Jombang are aware of the importance of cleanliness. The culture of protecting the
environment has a big role in developing the religious character of students. MAN 3 Jombang is a school
that has received awards as a healthy madrasah, madrasah with character and madrasah adiwiyata. This
award is not just an award. MAN 3 Jombang sees that the culture of protecting the environment is one of
the social attitudes that must be owned and becomes a habit for students. Caring for the environment is an
attitude and action that always tries to prevent damage to the natural environment around it, and develops
efforts to repair natural damage that has occurred (Muhamad Asvin Abdur Rohman, 2019). They are

Khoirun Nisa’, Nabila Anisya
Implementation of School Management in Realizing Religious Culture in MAN 3 Jombang.

accustomed to always throwing garbage in its place. Students are also familiar with the activity of sorting
waste from class with trash bins that have the words organic, plastic and paper waste written on the front
porch of the class. With the Adiwiyata program, it is hoped that healthy and clean conditions will be
created for schools so that students and all school members can carry out teaching and learning activities
comfortably.
        The last culture is celebration of islamic holidays. The activities of the Islamic Holiday Celebration
held at MAN 3 Jombang are the commemoration of the Islamic New Year (1 Muharram), the Prophet
Muhammad’s Birthday (12 Rabi'ul Awwal), Isra Mi'raj (27 Rajab), distributing zakat fitrah and zakat
mal, sacrificial animal slaughter and prayer together aimed at the success and fluency of grade 12 students
who will face the tests. These activities are one of the efforts of MAN 3 Jombang in commemorating
meaningful historical events, as well as to instill a religious personality in students.
        School management strategies in realizing religious culture can be done with the following
strategies. The first is habit. Habit is an activity that students carry out continuously and consistently. In
Islamic teachings character education can be called morals (Nisa’, 2017b). Morals are the potential
embedded in a person's soul who is able to encourage action (good and bad) without being preceded by
reason and emotional considerations. The point is an act that has become a habit so that it becomes a
personality (Harahap, 2017). Examples of this activity are saying greetings and shaking hands when
meeting other people both at school and outside of school. Then the habituation of praying before and
after learning is done every day, praying dhuha in congregation even though the place has to take turns
and cleaning the class as an effort to maintain the school environment so that teaching and learning
activities become comfortable.
        The second is exemplary. The exemplary referred to here is an action that can be imitated as a tool
of Islamic education by providing good examples in the form of real behavior, especially those
concerning worship and morals (Yasmansyah, 2019). This exemplary or exemplary activity can be carried
out by all school members. It can be started with the principal, administrative staff, then teachers or even
fellow students who can provide good examples for each other in realizing religious culture in the school
environment. For example, when a student meets a teacher but the student does not say hello, the teacher
will first say hello. Also, when the prayer reading before learning begins, all school members are required
to stop their work for a moment so that they can participate in reading the prayer before studying. Even
the teacher who was parking his motorbike also stopped his activities and then read a prayer. After that,
just continue their activities again. These small steps are important to show the implementation directly to
students so that it is easier for them to practice them in everyday life.
        The third is advice. Advice is a flexible form of planting that can be carried out anytime and
anywhere when the teacher sees a violation committed by students (Fanani, 2018). Teachers need to
provide advice to students in an effort to help students change their behavior by constantly reminding
them to practice good religious values and reprimand them when they do bad behavior so that students
don't repeat it.
        The last strategy is punishment. Punishment strategies or sanctions for students who violate or do
not implement religious culture in MAN 3 Jombang, for example, students who do not follow the dhuha
prayer in congregation will be dried in the sun in the courtyard of the mosque until other students have
finished praying dhuha in congregation. Then the imposition of sanctions for classes that do not send
class representatives to cult after dhuha prayer, then all class students must write a letter al baqarah. This
punishment strategy is a measure to enforce the rules. Because rule enforcement is an aspect that must be
considered in education, especially in shaping the religious character of students. By enforcing the rules,
it is hoped that all religious cultures in schools can shape the character of the student's behavior (Hasanah,
2016).

CONCLUSIONS
      The religious cultures developed in MAN 3 Jombang, namely: 1) the culture of saying greetings
and shaking hands, 2) reading al-qur'an, 3) reading prayers before and after studying, 4) dhuha prayers
and dzuhur prayers in congregation, 5) cultum after dhuha prayer, 6) memorizing short letters, 7)
guidance to read al qur'an for those who are not yet fluent, 8) always protecting the environment, 9)
celebrating the big day of Islam. The school management strategy in building a religious culture in MAN
3 Jombang, namely: carrying out habituation activities at school, exemplary from teachers to students,
giving advice as well as motivation to students to always behave well and giving sanctions or
punishments to students who violate the rules.

SCHOOLAR: Social and Literature Study in Education
Vol.1 No.1 June 2021

REFERENCES
Berliani, Y. M., & Sudrajat, A. (2018). Implementasi Pendidikan Karakter di Sekolah Berbasis Pondok
     Pesantren. Jurnal Pendidikan Karakter, 8(2), 161–171.
Fanani, A. A. (2018). Nilai-nilai Pendidikan Islam dalam Membentuk Budaya Religius di SMA Negeri 1
     Genteng Tahun Pelajaran 2017-2018. Journal of Materials Processing Technology, 1(1), 1–8.
     http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.cirp.2016.06.001
Harahap, L. (2017). Strategi Pendidikan Karakter di Sekolah. Studi Multidisipliner: Jurnal Kajian
     Keislaman, 4(1), 109–129. https://doi.org/10.24952/multidisipliner.v4i1.924
Hasanah, U. (2016). Model-Model Pendidikan Karakter di Sekolah. Jurnal Pendidikan Islam, 7, 18–34.
Machbubah, R. (2019). Perbandingan Model Pembelajaran Reciprocal Teaching dengan Bamboo
     Dancing Berbasis Cooperatife Learning. Dinamika, 4(2), 37–50.
Muhamad Asvin Abdur Rohman. (2019). Pendidikan Karakter di Sekolah Menengah Pertama (SMP):
     Teori, Metodologi dan Implementasi. Qalamuna: Jurnal Pendidikan, Sosial, Dan Agama, 11(2),
     125–146. https://ejournal.insuriponorogo.ac.id/index.php/qalamuna/article/view/96/89
Mulyadi, E. (2018). Strategi Pengembangan Budaya Religius di Madrasah. Jurnal Kependidikan, 6(1), 1–
     14. https://doi.org/10.24090/jk.v6i1.1688
Murjani. (2017). Model Kepemimpinan Kepala Sekolah dalam Pengembangan Budaya Religius di
     SMAN 1 Mentaya Hilir Selatan Kabupaten Kotawaringin Timur. Jurnal Transformatif (Islamic
     Studies), 1(2), 213–246.
Nisa’, K. (2017a). Komponen-Komponen dalam Pengembangan Kurikulum Pendidikan Islam. Murobbi:
     Jurnal Ilmu Pendidikan, 1(1), 64–83.
Nisa’, K. (2017b). Konsep Filsafat Pendidikan Islam dan Implikasinya Terhadap Pengembangan
     Kurikulum Pendidikan Islam. Nidhomul Haq: Jurnal Manajemen Pendidikan Islam, 2(3), 125–136.
     https://doi.org/10.31538/nidhomulhaq.v2i3.83
Nisa’, K. (2021). Pengembangan Permainan Ludo Edukasi Sebagai Media Altenatif Pembelajaran PAI
     Kelas VIII di SMPN 2 Perak Jombang. Attaqwa: Jurnal Ilmu Pendidikan Islam, 17(2), 16–25.
Nurjanah, I. (2020). Implementasi Program Budaya Sekolah 5S (Senyum, Salam, Sapa, Sopan, Santun)
     dalam Menanamkan Sikap Religius Siswa di MIN 02 Kota Tangerang Selatan. Jurnal Qiro’ah,
     10(1), 58–73.
Sholeh, M. (2016). Pendidikan Karakter Melalui Implementasi Budaya Religius di Sekolah (Studi di SD
     LPI Zumrotus Salamah Tulungagung). Al-Adzka, Jurnal Ilmiah Pendidikan Guru Madrasah
     Ibtidaiyah, VI(01), 129–150.
Yasmansyah. (2019). Strategi Guru PAI dalam Penerapan Budaya Religius Sekolah di SMA Negeri 3
     Batusangkar. Jurnal Al-Fikrah, 6(2), 159. https://doi.org/10.31958/jaf.v6i1.1380
Zulhendri. (2018). Manajemen Kepala Sekolah dalam Menerapkan Budaya Religius di SMA Negeri 2
     Sijunjung. Jurnal Al-Fikrah, 6(1), 45. https://doi.org/10.31958/jaf.v6i1.1376