Edunesia: Jurnal Ilmiah Pendidikan                                                                 p-ISSN 2722-5194
Vol 4 No 2 June 2023                                                                               e-ISSN 2722-7790




                                Mapalus in Educational Leadership

     Theo Chanra Merentek1; Shelty Deity Meity Sumual2; Paulus Robert Tuerah3
                                Welky Karauwan4
                 1,2,3Department of Master of Education, Manado State University, Indonesia
         4Department of Doctor Theology, Christian University of Indonesia Tomohon, Indonesia
              1Corresponding Email:         theochanra@gmail.com, Phone Number: 0852 xxxx xxxx

     Article History:                        Abstract: Mapalus is the philosophy of life for the people of
     Received: Jan 30, 2023                  Minahasa, North Sulawesi, in the general sense of mutual
     Revised: Feb 25, 2023                   cooperation. This study describes Mapalus' relationship with types,
     Accepted: Mar 07, 2023                  styles, principles, and principles in educational leadership. This
     Online First: Mar 08, 2023              study uses library research methods (library research). Data was
                                             collected through books, literature, references, and articles related to
     Keywords:                               Mapalus and Educational Leadership. The results showed that
     Mapalus Tradition,                      Mapalus, which contains the principles of kinship, cooperation, and
     Cooperation,                            religion with the principles of mutual assistance, openness,
     The Principles of Educational           discipline, and togetherness, has a relationship with democratic
     Leadership                              leadership, free leadership, charismatic leadership, paternalistic
                                             leadership, expert leadership, visionary leadership, and moralist
     Kata Kunci:                             leadership, but not has a relationship with authoritarian leadership
     Gotong Royong,                          because it is not by the principles and principles of Mapalus.
     Prinsip-Prinsip                         Meanwhile, the principles and principles of Mapalus have a very
     Kepemimpinan Pendidikan                 close relationship with educational administration.
     Tradisi Mapalus,
                                             Abstrak: Mapalus adalah falsafah hidup masyarakat Minahasa,
                                             Sulawesi Utara dalam arti secara umum adalah gotong royong.
     ______________________                  Penelitian ini bertujuan untuk mendeskripsikan hubungan Mapalus
     How to cite:                            dengan tipe, gaya, asas dan prinsip dalam kepemimpinan
     Merentek, T. C., Sumual, S. D. M.,      pendidikan. Penelitian ini menggunakan metode penelitian
     Tuerah, P. R., & Karauwan, W.
                                             kepustakaan (library research). Data dikumpulkan melalui buku,
     (2023). Mapalus in Educational
     Leadership. Edunesia: Jurnal Ilmiah
                                             literatur, referensi, dan artikel yang berhubungan dengan Mapalus
     Pendidikan, 4(2), 574-586.              dan Kepemimpinan Pendidikan. Hasil penelitian menunjukkan
                                             Mapalus yang mengandung asas kekeluargaan, kerja sama dan
     This is an open-access article under    religius dengan prinsip tolong-menolong, terbuka, disiplin serta
     the CC-BY-NC-ND license                 kebersamaan memiliki hubungan dengan kepemimpinan
                                             demokratis, kepemimpinan bebas, kepemimpinan karismatik,
                                             kepemimpinan paternalistik, kepemimpinan ahli, kepemimpinan
                                             visioner dan kepemimpinan moralis, tetapi tidak memiliki hubungan
                                             dengan kepemimpinan otoriter karena tidak sesuai dengan asas dan
                                             prinsip dari Mapalus. Sedangkan asas dan prinsip Mapalus memiliki
                                             hubungan yang sangat erat dengan kepemimpinan pendidikan.




                                                          574

 Merentek, T. C., Sumual, S. D. M., Tuerah, P. R., & Karauwan, W.   Educational Research in Indonesia (Edunesia)
                                                                      https://doi.org/10.51276/edu.v4i2.411


A. Introduction
        The G20 Summit in Bali on 10-17 November 2022 is a forum for multilateral
cooperation with 19 major countries and the European Union (EU), South Africa, the United
States, Saudi Arabia, Argentina, Australia, Brazil, India, the United Kingdom, Italy, Japan,
Germany, Canada, Mexico, Republic of Korea, Russia, France, China, and Turkey which
cover more than 60% of the world's population, 75% of global trade and 80% of global GDP
are already represented by the G20.
        Indonesia is one of the countries with the largest economies in the world and can
represent other developing countries because it is the only ASEAN member of the G20
Summit. At the G20 Summit, the Ministry of Education and Culture, which led the G20
education working group, raised four priority agendas in the education sector: 1). Quality
of education for all (Universal Quality Education); 2). Digital technology and education
(Digital Technologies in Education); 3). Solidarity and partnerships; and 4). The future of the
post-Covid-19 world of work (The Future of Work Post Covid-19) (Kemendikbudristek,
2022).
        To achieve success in this priority agenda in education, educational leadership
requires urgently embracing thought changes, global thinking, and communicative action,
reimagining educational leadership as a social practice in an interdependent world
(Gardner-McTaggart, 2020) and the most prominent thing currently being pushed by
Indonesia is cooperation which is carried out massively globally by the priority agenda of
point three.
        Gotong royong is a term in Indonesian that describes working together to achieve a
desired result (Sitompul et al., 2022). Gotong royong is a cultural value and is Indonesia's
identity, giving the spirit of global collaboration. Therefore, besides encouraging
Indonesians to work together, gotong-royong is a cultural value closely embedded in
people's lives (Simarmata et al., 2020). The value of Gotong Royong significantly influences
every social and economic activity of the community.
        The ability to complete a task for the good of oneself and the good of society
exemplifies the value of Gotong Royong, which is a symbol of community unity (Lukiyanto
& Wijayaningtyas, 2020). Until now, almost no one disputes that the Indonesian people do
not recognize the cooperation custom. Regardless of whether the activity is in the economic,
social, or religious fields, all terms used in each tribe are summarized and equated with the
phrase "cooperation" (Endro, 2016).
        Gotong royong is a local wisdom that has taken root in all corners of Indonesia. The
culture of gotong royong is usually called the Mapalus culture in Minahasa society, North
Sulawesi. The culture of Mapalus Tanah Toar and Lumimuut of the Minahasa tribe is a
system or method of cooperation for the benefit of the community that has been passed
down from generation to generation from their ancestors (Lumantow et al., 2017). In
Minahasa, Mapalus has the same value as gotong-royong as ancestral heritage (Rumbay et
al., 2022).




                                                                                                             575

 Merentek, T. C., Sumual, S. D. M., Tuerah, P. R., & Karauwan, W.   Educational Research in Indonesia (Edunesia)
                                                                      https://doi.org/10.51276/edu.v4i2.411


        Education is critical in shaping character and developing a more purposeful nature.
The purpose of character education is to create a nation that is tough, competitive, moral,
tolerant, mutually cooperative, and so on (Merentek et al., 2022). Education significantly
impacts how people relate to each other, act, think, and behave in the future. First, education
is taught at home, then in schools or other educational facilities. Someone considers this
educational institution a second home for them.
        A leader must have leadership qualities, and a leadership spirit embodied by the
leader is obtained through a process that is created from time to time and is not formed
instantly (Hapudin & Praja, 2022). A leader is someone who has particular expertise and is
not only tasked with transferring knowledge (Merentek et al., 2022) but with influencing,
encouraging, guiding, and directing others related to the implementation and development
of education, teaching, and training so that all activities can run effectively and efficiently
which in turn will help achieve a goal. Because a leader is a position in a particular system,
someone in a formal position may need help to lead or have leadership qualities (Yuliana &
Widayati, 2018).
        In government, organizations, and universities, the leader of an educational
institution determines the progress of a nation and state. Not only does it require a manager
to manage the resources of an educational institution that is more focused on budgetary
issues and other administrative matters, but it also requires a leader who can set goals and
everything related to an institution (Manullang et al., 2023). The capacity of organizational
leaders to foster a climate of cooperation in mobilizing existing human resources to utilize
them and control the organizations they lead determines the success or failure of the
organization or institution (Hapudin & Praja, 2022). Leadership practice is about influencing
the behaviour and emotions of other people, both individually and in groups, in a specific
direction, so leadership means the process of helping to direct and move people or their
ideas (Yuliana & Widayati, 2018).
        Fundamentally, leadership talks about human society and how it works. Humans
are social beings who are connected to interact with others. As a result, they form groups,
communities, nations, and countries that need leaders (Purba et al., 2021). The goals to be
achieved and the maturity level of the subordinates determine the leadership style used in
an organization or educational institution. According to Hersey and Blanchard, the
"maturity" of subordinates influences the effective leadership style. According to him,
maturity or maturity does not refer to age or emotional stability. Instead, it relates to the
desire to succeed, the willingness to assume responsibility and the abilities and experience
needed for the task (Rahmat, 2021). In educational institutions, exercising leadership means
carrying out a leadership process that encourages academic staff resources to work together
to achieve educational goals. (Manullang et al., 2023).




                                                                                                             576

 Merentek, T. C., Sumual, S. D. M., Tuerah, P. R., & Karauwan, W.        Educational Research in Indonesia (Edunesia)
                                                                           https://doi.org/10.51276/edu.v4i2.411


B. Method
         This article uses the library research method. Library research involves collecting
data and information from various library sources, such as reference books, articles, notes,
and multiple journals related to the problem under study (Sari & Asmendri, 2020). The
library research method is also a scientific or theoretical study of culture, values, and norms
at the research location (Sugiyono, 2012). Finding sources of data or references in the form
of books, articles, journals, and other scientific works, both research and non-research, is the
first step in research. Collections of scientific results, book authors, academics, intellectuals,
and experts in Mapalus studies and educational leadership are used as a source of literature
for data collection. The selected literature as a data source becomes material for a
comprehensive study by researchers. After that, a critical analysis of the selected data
sources was carried out. Systematically the steps in this library research are as shown below:


   Study of              Data               Researched              Drafting            Data              Results and
  literature           collection            Concepts               Concept            analysis           Discussion


                                      Figure 1. Library Research Flowchart

C. Result and Discussion
Result
Mapalus' Relationship with Educational Leadership
         Seven of the eight styles and types of educational leadership that have been
described previously have a relationship with the principles and principles of Mapalus,
namely: democratic leadership, free leadership, charismatic leadership, paternalistic
leadership, expert leadership, visionary leadership, and moralist leadership. At the same
time, the authoritarian leadership style has no relationship with the Mapalus principle,
which is based on kinship, cooperation, and religion, as well as the Mapalus principles of
helping each other, being open, disciplined, and constantly emphasizing the focus of
togetherness.
         Mapalus is a place for continuously exchanging information, experience, ideas, and
skills from generation to generation. It is considered a "knowledge transfer" to the next
generation (Wuryaningrat et al., 2017). To transfer this knowledge, the father is responsible
for exchanging information, experiences, ideas, and skills. This relates to paternalistic
leadership which plays a fatherly role by maintaining and fostering the institution it leads
and links to the principles of effective leadership conveyed by Stephen R. Covey, a person
who is willing to learn for life and is always service-oriented (Aimah & Hadiono, 2019) as
well as what the Minahasa people do.
         Tonaas, who is a term for leaders in the Minahasa tradition, also has special skills
obtained from repeated and continuous observations so that he can start Mapalus' work
simply by hearing a sign from a bird's sound (Mansi, 2007) and this has a relationship with




                                                                                                                  577

 Merentek, T. C., Sumual, S. D. M., Tuerah, P. R., & Karauwan, W.   Educational Research in Indonesia (Edunesia)
                                                                      https://doi.org/10.51276/edu.v4i2.411


leadership. Experts based on personal experience so that this knowledge can be used to help
others complete assignments and solve problems (Rahayu et al., 2022).
        In terms of developing personal discipline and democracy, the Mapalus Principles
have links to educational leadership. The Mapalus Principle when someone violates the
rules of the group, they will be publicly punished morally. Violations that are serious and
detrimental to Mapalus can result in the violator being expelled from membership if Tonaas
and other Mapalus members reach an agreement. This is also done within the educational
leadership to foster a harmonious work environment with colleagues and uphold the
company's fundamental values and discipline.

Discussion
       In Minahasa culture, mapalus refers to the spirit of working together to achieve
common objectives. In contrast, educational leadership is the capacity to lead and direct the
educational process to achieve desired goals. These two concepts are inextricably linked in
the context of education in the Minahasa region.
       Mapalus is regarded as a significant cultural value in Minahasa education and must
be applied by educational leaders. This is due to the fact that society as a whole is responsible
for education rather than just a few individuals or groups. As a result, educational
leadership must foster a sense of community and cooperation throughout the educational
process.
       Education leadership must be able to reconcile local culture with modern educational
principles. Effective educational leadership must also establish and maintain positive
relationships with the district to create a learning environment conducive to learning and
be oriented toward the community's interests.
       In Minahasa, for instance, effective educational leadership entails collaborating with
the community to improve school infrastructure, facilities, and education quality. In
addition, effective educational leadership must prioritize students' interests in education to
benefit students and society.
       Education challenges in Indonesia's border regions differ from those in the other
areas. Cultural and linguistic differences that can impact the educational process are one of
these obstacles. As a result, academic leaders in border regions must be able to comprehend
and use the richness of local culture to raise educational standards.
       The Minahasa culture and work ethic of the Minahasa people are reflected in the
Mapalus philosophy of life. Etymologically, Mapalus comes from the verb "ma" which
means working on and "palus" which means pouring (Merentek, 2022), pouring out,
together. So in terminology, Mapalus means working together. According to the Big
Indonesian Dictionary, Minahasa's spirit of gotong royong is called Mapalus. The word
Mapalus is produced by “ma” which means an active process, while “palus” refers to sharing
energy, effort, and property with others based on mutualism (Rumbay et al., 2022). Thus
Mapalus is a community activity to complement each other by helping each other or mutual
cooperation.



                                                                                                             578

 Merentek, T. C., Sumual, S. D. M., Tuerah, P. R., & Karauwan, W.   Educational Research in Indonesia (Edunesia)
                                                                      https://doi.org/10.51276/edu.v4i2.411


        The Minahasa people adhere to several fundamental traditional values which have
developed into a standard of living, namely: Religious values, aesthetic values, essential
truth values (wisdom), ethical values, truthful values, democratic values, togetherness
values, family values and shared complex work values (Salaki, 2014).
        Mapalus was first recognized as a management system in the agricultural sector
where all community members voluntarily contribute their labour and skills in agriculture
to everyone who might need them, for example, during planting and harvesting periods.
Mapalus (Wuryaningrat et al., 2017) mainly involves energy, skill, and skill exchange.
However, Mapalus has also developed into five models, one of which is Mapalus money, to
provide cash assistance to people who need help (Umbas, 2011).
        According to the quantitative research of Lumantow et al (2017), which was carried
out in Tombasian Village, Minahasa Regency, it was found that the spirit of togetherness
and kinship is the essence of Mapalus culture, the Minahasa people also use Mapalus culture
as a form of development activity to meet mutual needs that are mutually beneficial.
        Mapalus has frequently made it possible for generations of people to share
knowledge, experiences, concepts, and skills. "Knowledge transfer" can be defined as
exchanges between members of the same family. A father imparts knowledge and skills to
his son. These experiences and skills will be passed on to his son when this boy is older.
Mapalus is, in principle, a form of knowledge transfer based on this description. Mapalus
can help people become more innovative as a method of knowledge transfer. This hope can
once more be realized if knowledge can be passed down from generation to generation
(Wuryaningrat et al., 2017).

Basic of Mapalus
1. The principle of kinship, Mapalus has a spirit of familiarity, enthusiasm, warm
   intimacy, a strong sense of responsibility, and genuine help. The act of offering
   assistance to other Mapalus members or to Mapalus Leaders has no personal
   motivation. Like the father in the family, the leader of Mapalus is the protector,
   protector, and decision-maker in life together. Mapalus always adheres to the principles
   of mutual understanding, mutual hearing, and mutual trust between fellow members
   and between one member and another, thanks to the direction of deliberation and
   consensus.
2. The principle of cooperation, Mapalus' work mechanism, is, at the same time, the
   driving force, binder, and yardstick for measuring or assessing work performance.
   Mapalus because every member can collaborate in Mapalus form, there is a strong
   desire to do so.
3. Based on the religious principle, initially, a person was chosen to become the Head of
   Mapalus or what is called Tonaas because they are believed to have "supernatural
   powers" which become "intermediaries for their ancestors and grandchildren", making
   them considered the wisest in determining the time to work. When Tonaas hears the
   "voice of the Manguni bird" approving work, he will start working. However, today's



                                                                                                             579

 Merentek, T. C., Sumual, S. D. M., Tuerah, P. R., & Karauwan, W.   Educational Research in Indonesia (Edunesia)
                                                                      https://doi.org/10.51276/edu.v4i2.411


     society has abandoned these beliefs and been replaced by religious beliefs taught by the
     religions adhered to by Mapalus members once the faith entered Minahasa Land
     (Mansi, 2007).

The Mapalus Principles
1. The principle of mutual assistance is not only in the sense that those who have
   advantages must help those who do not. However, Mapalus members who take turns
   are given the principle of cooperation in the form of the additional workforce, funds, or
   materials so that those involved can build something and overcome obstacles to
   increase their level of welfare.
2. The principle of openness. The three pillars of openness are as follows: (1) openness in
   planning and implementing Mapalus activities; (2) the openness of each member's heart
   in expressing their wishes, difficulties, or feelings; and (3) openness in welcoming all
   new members who wish to join. Mapalus' life is stable and dynamic thanks to these
   three types of openness and does not result in discontent, disagreement, or opposition
   from non-Mapalus members.
3. The principles of discipline and the disciplinary guidelines of the Mapalus group are
   respected and deserve to be accepted by every member, group, or individual of
   Mapalus. When someone broke the group's rules, they would be publicly punished
   morally. Violations severe and detrimental to Mapalus may result in the violator being
   expelled from membership if Tonaas and the rest of Mapalus agree.
4. The principle of togetherness facilitates everyone's participation in every Mapalus
   activity. The existence of Mapalus and its development are primarily the responsibility
   of each member. Each member has obligations and rights that must be recognized.

Educational Leadership
     Leadership is a process of influencing the attitudes and behaviour of other people to
carry out orders or requests given (Laoli et al., 2023). Leadership can be interpreted as the
ability to move, influence, motivate, invite, direct, advise, foster, guide, train, order, order,
prohibit, or even punish with the intention that members of the organization want to work
effectively. And efficiently achieve their own goals and organizational goals (Syahril, 2019).
     Carrying out a leadership process that affects human resources in which teaching and
educational staff take joint action to achieve academic goals is what being a leader in an
educational institution (Manullang et al., 2023). One of the most common explanations for
the success or failure of an organization is leadership, meaning that educational institutions
or institutions are declared successful or fail, leadership is the main factor. Leadership is the
subject of the human desire to unlock the potential of any organization.
     The capacity to direct the implementation of education to achieve educational goals is
educational leadership. This understanding aligns with the leadership philosophy that
prioritizes humanitarian principles (Saefurridjal et al., 2023). Therefore, the process of




                                                                                                             580

 Merentek, T. C., Sumual, S. D. M., Tuerah, P. R., & Karauwan, W.   Educational Research in Indonesia (Edunesia)
                                                                      https://doi.org/10.51276/edu.v4i2.411


influencing, mobilizing, and coordinating every educational institution or organization
member to achieve academic goals is known as educational leadership.

Types and Styles of Educational Leadership
      The leadership type of a leader is a leadership style or pattern that uses various
supporting behaviours or leadership styles. At the same time, leadership style is a leader's
choice of conduct or method to influence his followers' thoughts, attitudes, and actions.
      When a leader leads an organization, the model or type of leadership can be seen from
various perspectives. Because this type of leadership requires leaders to follow patterns
influenced by personality, values, perceptions, assumptions, and so on (Utaminingsih,
2014).
      External factors have a significant influence on individual leadership styles. According
to Kenneth Blanchard and Paul Hersey, leadership style is influenced by four factors: values,
subordinates' trust, leadership tendencies, and a sense of security in some situations.
Consequently, this kind of leadership can be learned from a leader's leadership style
(Nadapdap et al., 2022).
      There are at least three of the most basic styles and types of leadership that are included
in the field of leadership studies: democratic leadership, free or laissez-faire leadership, and
authoritarian leadership. In addition, there are several styles and types of leadership, such
as expert leadership, charismatic leadership, paternalistic leadership, and so on (Rahayu et
al., 2022).
 1. Democratic leadership, participation in goal setting, and combining different
      viewpoints or ideas to determine the most effective work method are the hallmarks of
      this democratic leadership. Besides being open and characterized by a supervisory
      process, this type of leadership encourages subordinates to take the initiative.
      Institutions that use an available management system with the following characteristics
      can use democratic leadership like this: (A). Assistants participate (social participation)
      in institutional processes; (b). Leaders are responsible to their subordinates (social
      responsibility); (C). Leaders are supported (social support); and D). Leaders are
      supervised by aides (social control).
 2. Authoritarian leadership, because he believes that he has legitimate power, an
      authoritarian leader always believes that he can organize and control other people.
      Several actions characterize this kind of leadership, often centred on the leader's role as
      a policymaker in achieving organizational goals. An authoritarian leader operates on
      the assumption that they only need to direct what they want to do rather than
      consulting others beforehand. As a result, subordinates are denied participation in the
      decision-making process. Associates do not have the authority to set organizational
      policies because a leader needs power. Following a strict system of control, the
      authoritarian leadership style usually uses authority to enforce doctrines and intimidate
      subordinates. The leader is responsible for the state of the subsidiaries and the dynamics




                                                                                                             581

Merentek, T. C., Sumual, S. D. M., Tuerah, P. R., & Karauwan, W.   Educational Research in Indonesia (Edunesia)
                                                                     https://doi.org/10.51276/edu.v4i2.411


     of the organization in this setting. Aides must submit to the leader's authority because
     the leader's power is enormous.
3.   Free leadership (laissez-faire) this leadership style is based on the idea that employees
     and subordinates in an organization can take care of themselves and make their own
     decisions with as little direction as possible from the leader. The only communication
     between the leader and subordinates is exchanging information necessary to complete
     organizational tasks. Members of this kind of laissez-faire leadership often have total
     freedom to carry out activities without strict control mechanisms. If deemed necessary,
     the administration provides oversight, so the leadership often acts as an advisor. The
     strenuous effort by a leader to influence members' thoughts, attitudes, and actions.
     Authoritarian leadership is different from this leadership.
4.   Charismatic leadership this charismatic leadership style emphasizes the unique
     qualities of the leader. The term "charismatic leadership" can be interpreted as
     leadership with considerable authority and admired by its followers. Followers of
     charismatic leaders experience profound and unusual effects: They accept the leader
     without hesitation, happily submit to the leader, feel sorry for the leader, are
     emotionally invested in the organization's mission, believe they can contribute to
     mission success, and have performance goals—tall one. Charismatic leadership can
     influence subordinates by exploiting the privileges and strengths of the leader's
     character. A charismatic leader's actions inspire great respect and obedience from his
     followers. Leaders are considered people who must be followed in achieving
     organizational goals because of the influence of their personalities.
5.   Paternalistic leadership, the word "paternalistic" means "fatherly" this leadership style
     plays a fatherly role by looking after, fostering, and helping the members of the
     organization it leads. When solving existing problems, the leader becomes a haven for
     his subordinates. Leaders like this always try to protect and improve the welfare of their
     subordinates or followers. Group interests take precedence over the leader's interests in
     paternalistic leadership. However, this kind of paternalistic leadership has drawbacks
     and can only be used in specific organizations under certain conditions. One drawback
     is that it undermines the leader's and subordinates' confidence. In traditional
     agricultural societies, this kind of leadership is common. Sondang P. Siagian
     emphasized that a leader's popularity is influenced by several things, including: (A).
     Strong ties to the past; (b). extended family system; (C). Social life in society; (D). In
     society, customs play an essential role; (E). Close relationships and high respect for
     parents Siagian (2003) cited by (Haya & Khusnuridlo, 2020).
6.   Expert leadership, this kind of leadership is based on the knowledge or special skills of
     a leader related to the work being done. In this setting, the leader must be a professional
     learner through experience or education. This knowledge can be used to help others in
     completing tasks and solving problems.




                                                                                                            582

 Merentek, T. C., Sumual, S. D. M., Tuerah, P. R., & Karauwan, W.   Educational Research in Indonesia (Edunesia)
                                                                      https://doi.org/10.51276/edu.v4i2.411


7. Visionary leadership by providing direction and meaning to a job and business carried
   out by a clear vision, visionary leadership aims to give meaning to efforts that need to
   be carried out jointly by company members.
8. Moralist Leadership, the moralist approach to leadership has the advantage of being
   generally polite to everyone. They are patient and generous, in addition to having a
   high level of empathy for all the problems of their subordinates. These leaders have
   every kind of virtue. Despite the drawbacks, people will still visit because of the
   warmth. Emotions are the weakness of this kind of leader. The typical person in this
   situation is volatile, sometimes appearing sad and frightening but being very pleasant
   and friendly at other times.

Principles of Educational Leadership
     According to Bernes' book Behavior in Organizations, kaizen team leaders prioritize
new hires over results, so the responsibilities of the supervisor conflict with those of the
leader. Bernez proposes the following principles of kaizen leadership:
 1. Make continuous improvements. The nature of work makes success. Move on to other
     jobs because success is determined by the heart of the position. Success is the next step,
     not the result of a task.
 2. Acknowledge the problem openly. Openness is a power that can quickly control and
     solve various problems while realizing skills.
 3. Openness is encouraged because traditional organizations view knowledge as a
     personal power. Instead, knowledge must be shared within a kaizen organization, and
     the communication channels that help facilitate this sharing are highly efficient.
 4. Establish a working group. Teams are the fundamental building block of the
     organizational structure in Kaizen organizations. The reputation for efficiency,
     performance, and improvement is the result of the individual contribution made by
     each employee.
 5. Develop personal discipline. To foster a harmonious work environment with colleagues
     and uphold the company's fundamental values, the field at work is innate and requires
     personal sacrifice (Baidan & Aziz, 2014).
In addition, Stephen R. Covey mentions the following eight characteristics of principled
leaders that show their effectiveness as leaders: (1). Lifelong learning; (2). focus on service;
(3). Carry a positive attitude; 4). Trust others; 5). Life balance; (6). Seeing life as a challenge;
7). Harmony; (8). exercises for self-development

D. Conclusion
       Mapalus is the philosophy of life of the Minahasa people in the general sense that it
is cooperation which contains the principles of kinship, collaboration, and religion with the
principles of mutual help, openness, discipline, and togetherness having a relationship with
democratic leadership, free leadership, charismatic leadership, paternalistic leadership,



                                                                                                             583

 Merentek, T. C., Sumual, S. D. M., Tuerah, P. R., & Karauwan, W.   Educational Research in Indonesia (Edunesia)
                                                                      https://doi.org/10.51276/edu.v4i2.411


expert leadership, visionary leadership, and moralist leadership, but has no relationship
with authoritarian leadership because it is not by the principles of Mapalus. Meanwhile, the
principles and principles of Mapalus have a very close relationship with educational
administration.
         Good educational leadership must pay attention to the Mapalus factor as an essential
factor in developing the quality of education. High self-awareness and culture can help
create a more harmonious, inclusive, and progressive educational environment. The results
of this research can provide information for educational leaders to consider the importance
of developing Mapalus in leadership and decision-making related to education policy.
Another important implication is that self-awareness and culture must be instilled in all
components of educational institutions. In this context, educational leadership must pay
attention to the needs and characteristics of different individuals and groups and reinforce
Mapalus values among them.
         Future research can explore other factors that may influence the relationship
between Mapalus and Educational Leadership, such as environmental and social factors.
Further studies may evaluate the impact and benefits of developing Mapalus on educational
leadership performance and quality. Future research may involve a larger and more varied
sample to increase the reliability and validity of the results and broaden the generalizability
of the research findings.

References
Aimah, S., & Hadiono, A. F. (2019). Refleksi terhadap Model Kepemimpinan Qurâ€™
      ani. Jurnal Darussalam: Jurnal Pendidikan, Komunikasi dan Pemikiran Hukum
      Islam, 10(2), 445-463. https://doi.org/10.30739/DARUSSALAM.V10I2.384

Aziz, N. B. E. (2014). Etika Islam dalam Berbisnis. Yogyakarta: Pustaka Pelajar.

Endro, G. (2016). Tinjauan Filosofis Praktik Gotong Royong. Jurnal Etika Sosial, 21(1), 89–
       111. https://doi.org/10.25170/respons.v21i01.526

Gardner-McTaggart, A. C. (2022). Educational Leadership and Global Crises; Reimagining
      Planetary Futures Through Social Practice. International Journal of Leadership in
      Education, 25(4), 647-663. https://doi.org/10.1080/13603124.2020.1811900

Hapudin, M. S., & Praja, A. K. A. (2022). Kepemimpinan Pendidikan: Konsep dan Strategi
     Peningkatan Mutu Pendidikan. Medan: Cahaya Harapan.

Haya, & Khusnuridlo, Moh. (2020). Kepemimpinan & Manajemen Konflik (I. O. Rospita, Ed.;
      Januari 2020). Probolinggo: El-Rumi Press.

Kemendikbudristek. (2022). Pimpin Pokja Pendidikan dalam Presidensi G20,
     Kemendikbudristek      Angkat      Empat      Isu.     Retrieved   from
     https://www.kemdikbud.go.id/main/blog/2022/01/pimpin-pokja-
     pendidikan-dalam-presidensi-g20-kemendikbudristek-angkat-empat-isu




                                                                                                             584

 Merentek, T. C., Sumual, S. D. M., Tuerah, P. R., & Karauwan, W.   Educational Research in Indonesia (Edunesia)
                                                                      https://doi.org/10.51276/edu.v4i2.411


Laoli, R. Y., Naibaho, R., Sitorus, S. A., & Turnip, H. (2023). Kepemimpinan Pendidikan.
        Jurnal Pendidikan Sosial dan Humaniora, 2(1), 139–146.

Lukiyanto, K., & Wijayaningtyas, M. (2020). Gotong Royong as Social Capital to Overcome
      Micro and Small Enterprises’ Capital Difficulties. Heliyon, 6(9), 1-8.
      https://doi.org/10.1016/j.heliyon.2020.e04879

Lumantow, M. E., Tampi, G. B., & Londa, V. Y. (2017). Pengaruh budaya Mapalus
     terhadap Partisipasi Masyarakat dalam Pembangunan di Desa Tombasian Atas
     Kecamatan Kawangkoan Barat Kabupaten Minahasa. Jurnal Administrasi Publik,
     3(046), 1–18.

Mansi, L. (2007). Fungsi dan Peran Tradisi Mapalus Dalam Masyarakat Minahasa,
      Sulawesi Utara. Al-Qalam, 13(2), 73–84. https://doi.org/10.31969/ALQ.V13I2.565

Manullang, T. E., Simanjuntak, V. N., Sipayung, W. A., & Turnip, H. (2023).
      Kepemimpinan Pendidikan. Jurnal Pendidikan Sosial Dan Humaniora, 2(1), 139–145.

Merentek, T. C. (2022). Kamus Saku Bahasa Tontemboan: Tontemboan - Indonesia. UKIT Press.

Merentek, T. C., Saerang, H. M., Lantang, D., & Sumual, S. D. M. (2022). Implementation
      of Character Education Values in Orphanages (Literature Review). Journal of
      International       Conference      Proceedings      (JICP),      5(5),    22–31.
      https://doi.org/10.32535/JICP.V5I5.2037

Merentek, T. C., Sumual, H., Usoh, E. J., & Rotty, V. N. J. (2022). Penggunaan Quizizz
      dalam Evaluasi Pembelajaran pada Pembelajaran Bahasa Indonesia di Sekolah
      Tinggi Ilmu Kesehatan Bethesda Tomohon. Celebes Education Review, 4(2), 101–109.
      https://doi.org/10.37541/cer.v4i2.848

Nadapdap, K. M. N., Handayani, S., Jasiyah, R., Permatasari, R. D., Haryati, E., Sinurat, E.
     J., Suriadi, Nurhayati, S., Rochaendi, E., Wairisal, P. L., Marbun, S. N. B., Rodiyah,
     I., Noviyanto, F., Setiyawami, Koli, D. Y., Panggabean, D. M., Hina, H. B., & Ilyas,
     G. B. (2022). MSDM (Konsep dan Tantangan Pengelolaan SDM). Bandung: Media
     Sains Indonesia.

Purba, S., Cendana, W., Salamun, D., Kato, I., Cecep, J. H. P., Karwanto, & Sianipar, P.
       (2021). Kepemimpinan Pendidikan. Medan: Yayasan Kita Menulis.

Rahayu, S., Kurniati, I., Suryani, I., Wahidin, D., & Muchtar, H. S. (2022). Hakikat
      Kepemimpinan dan Tipe-Tipe Kepemimpinan Pendidikan. Eduprof: Islamic
      Education Journal, 4(2), 187–198. https://doi.org/10.47453/eduprof.v4i2.141

Rahmat, A. (2021). Kepemimpinan Pendidikan. Yogyakarta: Zahir Publishing.

Rumbay, C. A., Lumapow, H., Tuerah, P. E. A., Usoh, E. J., Rotty, V. N. J., & Lengkong, J.
     S. J. (2022). Embracing Mapalus Traditional Management Values for Christian
     Religious      Education.    HTS       Theological      Studies,       78(1),   1–8.
     https://doi.org/10.4102/HTS.V78I1.7986




                                                                                                             585

 Merentek, T. C., Sumual, S. D. M., Tuerah, P. R., & Karauwan, W.   Educational Research in Indonesia (Edunesia)
                                                                      https://doi.org/10.51276/edu.v4i2.411


Saefurridjal, A., Purwaningsih, D., Marpuah, & Sari Miladiah, S. (2023). Niat atau Motivasi
       dalam Kepemimpinan Pendidikan. Jurnal Ilmiah Mandala Education, 9(1), 2442–
       9511. https://doi.org/10.58258/JIME.V9I1.4380

Salaki, R. J. (2014). Membangun Karakter Generasi Muda Melalui Budaya Mapalus. Jurnal
        Studi Sosial, 6(1), 47–52.

Sari, M., & Asmendri. (2020). Penelitian Kepustakaan (Library Research) dalam Penelitian
        Pendidikan IPA. NATURAL SCIENCE: Jurnal Penelitian Bidang IPA dan Pendidikan
        IPA, 6(1), 41–53.

Simarmata, N., Wahyu Yuniarti, K., Riyono, B., Patria, B., Saklofske, D. H., Ismail, R., &
      Lahlou, S. (2020). Gotong Royong in Indonesian History. Digital Press Social
      Sciences          and            Humanities,             5(00006),             1–15.
      https://doi.org/10.29037/DIGITALPRESS.45341

Sitompul, E., Dhieni, N., & Hapidin, H. (2022). Karakter Gotong Royong dalam Paket
      Pembelajaran Sema. Jurnal Obsesi: Jurnal Pendidikan Anak Usia Dini, 6(4), 3473–3487.
      https://doi.org/10.31004/obsesi.v6i4.1674

Sugiyono. (2012). Metode Penelitian Kuantitatif Kualitatif dan R&D. Bandung: CV. Alfabeta.

Syahril, S. (2019). Teori-teori Kepemimpinan. Riayah: Jurnal Sosial dan Keagamaan, 4(02),
       208–215.

Umbas, V. (2011). The Dynamics of Mapalus: Local Wisdom in Minahasan Etnic. ICRES-
     Ngaasan.

Utaminingsih, A. (2014). Perilaku Organisasi: Kajian Teoritik & Empirik terhadap Budaya
      Organisasi, Gaya Kepemimpinan, Kepercayaan dan Komitmen. Universitas Brawijaya
      Press.

Wuryaningrat, N. F., Kawulur, A. F., & Kumajas, L. I. (2017). Examining Anendangered
     Knowledge Transfer Practice Known As “Mapalus” in an Indonesian Village:
     Implications for Entrepreneurial Activitiesand Economic Development.
     International Journal of Business and Society, 18(S2), 309–322.

Yuliana, B., & Widayati, I. A. (2018). Analisis Karakteristik Pemimpin yang Dikagumi oleh
       Bawahan. Jurnal Ilmiah Administrasi Bisnis dan Inovasi, 2(1), 208–217.




                                                                                                             586