Journal URL: https://scholarsjournal.net/index.php/ijier
                                                                    DOI: https://doi.org/10.31686/ijier.vol10.iss10.3558


     Influence of Schools’ Management Financial Preparedness on the
  Implementation of Competence Based Curriculum in Public Primary
    Schools in Kirinyaga West Sub- County, Kirinyaga County, Kenya

                  Erick Mayienda Momanyi**, Dr. Ruth Thinguri, Dr. George Ogochi
                                          **Correspondent Author
                                    Email: erickmomanyi61@yahoo.com
                                       Mount Kenya University, Kenya


ABSTRACT
The competency-based curriculum (CBC) is presently being implemented in public primary schools in Kenya.
Yet, empirical evidence indicates that schools’ management faces a lot of challenges, hence making it very
difficult for the implementation of the new programme. The study sought to explore the influence of schools’
management financial preparedness on implementation of CBC in Kirinyaga west subcounty, Kirinyaga
County, Kenya. The study was anchored on Curriculum Implementation Theory, Theory of Organizational
Readiness for Change, and Kurt Lewin Change Management Model. The study adopted mixed method
approach, which allowed concurrent triangulation of data where both quantitative and qualitative
methodologies were used. Target population comprised 68 headteachers, 1,020 teachers, 15, 500 CBC pupils
and 4 sub-county education officials totaling to 16,592 respondents. Yamane Formula was used to sample
399 respondents that were identified using purposive and stratified random sampling techniques. A semi-
structured questionnaire was used to collect quantitative data from teachers whereas an interview guide was
used to collect qualitative data from head teachers and subcounty education official. Quantitative data was
organized and processed descriptively and inferentially using SPSS (version 23) and presented using frequency
tables. Linear regression was carried out under inferential statistics. Qualitative data was analyzed using
thematic content analysis technique and presented using narratives. All research protocols were observed
throughout the study, including obtaining all relevant authorizations and observing respect for the
participants. The study established that schools’ financial preparedness has significant influence on the
implementation of the CBC in public primary schools in Kenya. The study recommended that there is need for
the government to provide enough financial resources for implementation of the CBC. School managers
should be trained on how to mobilize financial resources to complement government efforts.


Keywords: Financial preparedness, curriculum, CBC implementation, schools’ management.


Introduction
The process of curriculum reform and implementation is a complex undertaking for any country where all
stakeholders must actively and effectively be involved in their respective roles in order to simplify procedures

             International Journal for Innovation Education and Research Vol. 10 No. 10 (2022), pg. 1

Influence of Schools’ Management Financial Preparedness on the Implementation of Competence Based
Curriculum in Public Primary Schools in Kirinyaga West Sub- County, Kirinyaga County, Kenya

(Wanyama, 2013; UNESCO, 2015a). Financial preparedness by schools’ management is one of the critical
areas for public primary schools to focus on. However, this area continues to lag behind in many countries
globally (Akomolafe & Adesua, 2016). According to Tan and Reyes (2016), curriculum reform involves risks
and therefore requires ingenuity and high capacity for those at the implementation level.
In other parts of the world, curriculum implementation has not been all smooth-sailing due to budgetary issues
and financial ill-preparedness at schools’ level. In the United States of America, curriculum reforms which
took place in 2009 encountered a number of challenges as the country was trying to align the learners’
education needs with current socio-economic needs (Cobbold et al, 2015). Despite the country’s endowment
in resources, the reforms process was marred by negative morale by teachers and the failure by key
stakeholders to have a convergent point in terms of what the country actually needed. Other challenges
revolved around ineffective collaborative learning, insufficient efforts to promote teacher professional
learning, inadequate provision of resources for teachers to actively and consistently improve learners’
performance in class and underinvestment in capacity building of teachers (Yichun, Rodney and Lance, 2012).
In China, Tan and Reyes (2016) argue that the country has over time tried to embrace a more modernized
education system that takes care of modern social needs to meet its current market demands. The success of
China’s education curriculum reforms was clearly in 2009 epitomized by Shanghai’s global topping in a world
education programme that tested learners on arithmetic and reading as well as scientific studies (Sellar &
Lingard, 2013). However, there are still challenges, including the need for key players such as the head
teachers to be more directly involved for sustainable best outcome. Prudent financial management played a
key role in helping China to achieve its curriculum reforms target.
Like in the Western and Eastern countries, curriculum change in developing countries has in the recent past
dominated the education scene, hence calling for all key stakeholders to take up an active role. According to
Hodge (2010), the success of curriculum reform in sub-Saharan African context needs to seriously adopt
certain considerations, including the head teachers’ competencies and preparedness in financial resources
management at the schools’ level. Matambo (2013) established that despite increased budget at the ministerial
level, this may not translate into good results unless finances in schools are managed well. In Tanzania, despite
the government’s initiatives through Education Sector Development Programmes meant to help the country
achieve its Vision 2025 development blueprint, a lot has not been achieved due to poor financial management,
especially by schools’ management (UNESCO, 2015b).
In line with the Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs), Kenya is striving to align its education system to
international standards where competency and relevant skills of the learner greatly dictate the kind of
education to be offered by the state. This has necessitated the introduction of a competency-based curriculum
(CBC) by the government as a tool for empowering citizens in preparation for actualizing the Vision 2030
development blueprint (IBE-UNESCO, 2017). Despite the government’s efforts to replace the 8-4-4 system
with CBC, implementation of CBC in Kenya continues to face several hurdles at schools’ level (Jonyo and
Odera, 2019).
According to Jonyo and Odera (2019), a school manager plays a critical role in giving direction on a number
of key administrative functions in line with the vision, mission, philosophy and objectives of the school.


              International Journal for Innovation Education and Research Vol. 10 No. 10 (2022), pg. 2

Influence of Schools’ Management Financial Preparedness on the Implementation of Competence Based
Curriculum in Public Primary Schools in Kirinyaga West Sub- County, Kirinyaga County, Kenya

Furthermore, the school manager has the responsibility to progressively evaluate the teaching staff in
anticipation for better curriculum implementation outcomes. Cobbold et al (2015) further observe that the
school manager has the responsibility to ensure that there is smooth transition of learners from one grade level
to the next. However, there are challenges that may require collaboration among all key stakeholders in the
learning process in order for the school manager to work effectively. For instance, collaboration and
cooperation of parents, teachers, and key Ministry of Education officials are required for the school head
teachers to proactively perform their tasks.


1.1 Statement of the Problem
School management preparedness plays a critical role in implementation of the CBC in all schools in Kenya.
Effective head teachers, for instance, ensure that good implementation outcomes are guaranteed in terms of
grade-to-grade transition, academic performance, and competencies among the learners. With all lower
learning institutions in Kenya currently undertaking the CBC learning model, it is expected that all schools
must be fully prepared for the implementation of this new learning model. However, most public primary
school management in the Kirinyaga West sub-county may be ill-prepared in terms of financial resources
management as an overarching element in CBC implementation process.
A report by Tan and Reyes (2016) shows that more than 35% of the schools in Kirinyaga West subcounty
have been demonstrating a below-par performance for the past five years. A government performance report
indicates that by 8th December 2020, 20 out of 40 public primary schools in Kirinyaga West subcounty had
not filed a NEMIS report with the Kenya National Examination Council (KNEC) (Ministry of Education,
2020). Such scenarios call for the government’s close monitoring of schools’ management preparedness,
especially regarding management and utilization of finances by head teachers. This is because the head
teachers are always at the center of schools’ administration, including in the management of financial
resources which basically influence virtually everything else. From the foregoing argument, it can generally
be surmised that performance in a good percentage of public primary schools in Kenya require improvement
hence necessitating conducting of this study to understand where the challenges lie.


1.2 Objective of the Study
This study examined the influence of schools’ management financial preparedness on the implementation of
competence based curriculum (CBC) in public primary schools in Kirinyaga West Sub-county, Kenya.


1.3 Significance of the Study
Research outcomes will significantly profit all stakeholders in Kenyan primary schools who have the
important task of overseeing CBC implementation in the country. This research is equally critical in informing
the government and all its relevant agencies on how to assist public primary school head teachers in prudent
management of financial resources as a key component in the CBC implementation process. Similarly, the
government may learn a lot from this study in terms of how to formulate more effective policies surrounding
the CBC and its implementation not only at primary schools’ level, but at all learning levels. In addition, the


              International Journal for Innovation Education and Research Vol. 10 No. 10 (2022), pg. 3

Influence of Schools’ Management Financial Preparedness on the Implementation of Competence Based
Curriculum in Public Primary Schools in Kirinyaga West Sub- County, Kirinyaga County, Kenya

research findings will provide reference to future studies on public primary schools’ financial management
preparedness on CBC implementation in the country. At regional level, the findings of this study will benefit
all the countries in this region which hope to institute education reforms. The study may then provide a basis
for important reforms in the education sector not only in the East African region but globally.


1.4 Delimitation of the Study
The study was restricted to public primary schools in Kirinyaga West subcounty in Kirinyaga County and
mainly focused its attention on head teachers from selected schools. The ideal research participants had served
in their positions for at least one year. The study was confined to the schools’ management financial
preparedness as a central element in all other activities in schools.


2.0 Empirical Literature and Theoretical Review
       2.1 Schools’ Management Preparedness and Education Reforms Implementation
The new CBC emphasizes skills development of the learners as opposed to obtaining content knowledge. This
means that the new model calls for significant preparedness of all the education stakeholders. Studies have
shown that headteachers have a very critical duty for guaranteeing rollout of the new learning program in
primary learning institutions (Kimosop, 2019). The new curriculum envisions a scenario where learners must
change direction to focus more on skills development in their learning endeavors. As the manager of the
school, the headteacher is mandated with making of important decisions on the everyday management of the
learning process and ensuring that the school is in a position to accommodate the needs of those learners
(UNESCO, 2017).
According to Kimosop (2019), there are various aspects that require the ingenuity of the headteacher for the
new curriculum model to succeed in its implementation. These include financial preparedness where the
headteachers are able to buy the necessary materials whenever they are required, the availing of relevant
learning materials such as textbooks and teachers’ guides among others, and the requisition of well-trained
specialized teachers to be able to deliver on the new schemes. It is also expected that the headteacher must
have the right attitude so as to easily make an impact on the teaching fraternity and learners (Mosha, 2012).
In the African setting, over time most countries have tried to revise their curriculum in order to meet their
growing societal demands, including their unique market needs as they strove to integrate into the global
arena. According to Taasisi Elimu (2013), by the 1990s there was need for most African countries to move
from content-based curriculum to a competency-based model. Luangala (2016) noted that in 2005 Tanzania
instituted curriculum reforms so as to address global market labour demands. Competency-based curriculum
was viewed as a possible solution to the hitherto learners’ lacking quality education that would address the
current development challenges.
Komba and Kira (2013) advanced a similar argument by contending that the old education curriculum in
Tanzania did not effectively address local, national and international market needs of the country hence
prompting the reform. At the same time, competency-based curriculum was viewed as capable for making it
easier for learners to acquire and later use the knowledge, attitudes and skills to solve practical issues in their


              International Journal for Innovation Education and Research Vol. 10 No. 10 (2022), pg. 4

Influence of Schools’ Management Financial Preparedness on the Implementation of Competence Based
Curriculum in Public Primary Schools in Kirinyaga West Sub- County, Kirinyaga County, Kenya

everyday lives. However, more than five years after the introduction of the new curriculum in Tanzania,
studies have found that the teaching methodologies of the new curriculum were not very much in line with
what had been anticipated at the launch of the CBC (Tilya and Mafumiko, 2010). This meant that curriculum
developers, book writers and publishers and teachers were working at cross-purposes.
Rwanda has also shifted to competency-based curriculum in the recent past (Republic of Rwanda, 2015).
Informed by dearth of relevant skills in the Rwandan education system with emphasis in science and
information and communication technology, the country decided to adopt competency-based curriculum in
2015. The Rwandan government was further driven by its big desire to transform its citizenry into a more
globally competitive lot by 2030 as it plans to achieve a major socio-economic transformation. The Rwandan
experience has not been without hitches. Lack of enough resources and inadequately skilled manpower is one
of the challenges that have continued to befall the system hence delaying full implementation of the new
education curriculum model in good time.          However, the government and other non-state education
stakeholders are doing all they can to ensure that there is no turning back in the introduction of CBC in their
respective country.
The Vision 2030 development blueprint in Kenya has made the government to generally attempt to align skills
of its citizens with the current developmental needs (Government of Kenya, 2012). In view of this, education
and training is a critical pillar of the Kenya Vision 2030 where a self-reliant and creative population is
encouraged. It is on this basis that the government embarked on a review of the education curriculum in 2011
in order to give its citizens the right competencies for them to be competitive nationally as well as
internationally. The CBC is intended to institute a platform through which to inculcate talents in learners.
However, with the rolling out of the CBC in 2019, numerous challenges are still evident. Some of these include
lack of enough financial resources, specialized teachers, relevant learning materials, and strained support
services among others.


       2.2 Schools’ Management Financial Preparedness on CBC Implementation
Finances are required in all departments in every school. This includes for hiring of competent and the right
number of teachers, recruiting specialized teachers, and putting in place systems and facilities as well as
purchasing the requisite learning materials. The management of schools is often a complex undertaking given
the dynamics involved especially if there are new programs being introduced. According to Bouchamma,
Basque, and Marcotte, (2014), effective management of schools requires competent headteachers and
managers who understand what it means to provide quality education to the learners. Against the backdrop of
implementing CBC, the role of primary headteachers is very important in the realization of seamless transition
from the old to the new learning model. Kiptum (2016) argues that the headteachers’ ability to understand the
needs of the learners and be able to assemble, provide and organize the right teaching staff is critical in the
general running of the school and meeting the needs of the learners. This calls for high caliber of leadership
abilities of the head teacher in terms of mobilization and management of financial resources.
In a study by Mosha (2012) to establish resources needed for delivery of CBC in Tanzania, it emerged that
several schools did not have enough facilities and well-trained teachers to deliver the new curriculum. Aside


             International Journal for Innovation Education and Research Vol. 10 No. 10 (2022), pg. 5

Influence of Schools’ Management Financial Preparedness on the Implementation of Competence Based
Curriculum in Public Primary Schools in Kirinyaga West Sub- County, Kirinyaga County, Kenya

from lack of competently trained teachers, most of these schools did not have enough text books for learners
and teaching guides for teachers. Similarly, the book writers were not well informed about the new curriculum
hence they had limited knowledge regarding the kind of input required in the textbooks. Some of the teachers
were even not sure of how to prepare lessons based on the provisions of the new learning model. This study
however did not focus on the direct role of the school heads in ensuring that there were enough facilities and
well-trained teachers to make it easier for the CBC introduction.
In a research carried out by Makunja (2016) done in Tanzania to establish the challenges teachers faced in the
implementation of CBC, it was discovered that the instructors were not well-equipped with relevant
knowledge and skills required to execute their roles. However, this study only focused on teachers as one
entity in that chain of implementation of the new learning model and did not articulate the role of headteachers
in terms of providing well-prepared teaching staff to contribute to effective CBC management. As other
previous studies have shown, often the capacity of teachers may be a reflection of the capabilities of their
headteacher as the main link between education players at the school level and external stakeholders.These
findings may be further interpreted alongside the concerns currently being raised by the Kenyan teachers’
umbrella body KNUT regarding implementation of CBC in the country. The major concern by KNUT has
been based on the push to equip and prepare teachers well to handle implementation of CBC in terms of giving
deliverables.
Another study carried out on the implementation of CBC in Tanzania found out that more than 86% of the
teachers interviewed did not understand the subject content and a number of them did not fully know about
the whole concept of the new programme (Komba & Mwandanji, 2015). The findings further revealed an
existing missing link between how the teachers were oriented and prepared for the new curriculum and what
the real situation presented in terms of instructional processes and implementation of the CBC. At the center
of the inadequacy of relevant of knowledge among teachers was lack of enough finances for funding important
relevant activities.


        2.3 Theoretical Literature Review
2.3.1   Organizational Readiness for Change Theory
The study adopted organizational readiness for change theory, which was first mooted by Coch and French
(1948) and reinforced by Schein and Bennis (1965). The theory talks about change valence and change
efficacy where collective behaviour change is important whenever change is anticipated and the outcome is
expected to benefit the majority of the people. Regarding change valence, the idea is that organizational
members should be able to value specific impending change if that change is to be supported. According to
Schein and Bennis (1965), if individuals or groups are involved and prepared for change right from the
beginning, they will be ready and willing to support all processes geared towards realizing that change.
Change efficacy has to do with the institutional staff’s capacity in implementing impending changes meant to
improve operations of the said institution. The capacity may be based on skills and level of adaptability to the
new or emerging demands. On the face of communicating any changes, key stakeholders in the change process



                International Journal for Innovation Education and Research Vol. 10 No. 10 (2022), pg. 6

Influence of Schools’ Management Financial Preparedness on the Implementation of Competence Based
Curriculum in Public Primary Schools in Kirinyaga West Sub- County, Kirinyaga County, Kenya

must be ready to embrace new knowledge for the sake of fitting in their new positions. Organizational
readiness for change in curriculum reforms setting is an important aspect in this process.
The study was also supported by Kurt Lewin Change Management Model which was developed in the 1940s
by Kurt Lewin as one of the foundation models for appreciating organizational change in public and private
institutions. Kurt Lewin tried to establish a link between theoretical and practical situations where he
particularly focused on the current and desired change/results. Lewin further posits that depending on the
forces driving and those resisting change, there was likely to be evolution of the current situation if no action
is taken. The model suggests that it is important first to create the need for change by influencing the culture
of doing things. The second step would be to create a platform where this change can be effected and embraced
as a norm.
At the second phase of change implementation, Lewin (1951) posits that the organization must transition into
a new state of being. At this level, change is viewed as real and most employees strive to adapt to the new
change by learning new ways of doing things. Furthermore, employees are forced to develop a thinking
paradigm shift so that they can withstand the new challenges posed by the embraced model. This view explains
why it is important for head teachers to adopt a forward-looking attitude as they prepare to implement CBC.
At the same time, the study adopted curriculum Curriculum Implementation Theory founded by Neal Gross
in 1971, and focuses on challenges likely to be encountered by stakeholders when introducing a new learning
model. The theory postulates that introduction of a new curriculum is a complex process which may encounter
obstacles, particularly at initiation stage. According to Gross (1971), the challenges can be addressed by
ensuring that all key stakeholders clearly understand the proposed curriculum. The theory further proposes
that implementers of a new curriculum must be equipped with requisite skills for them in order that they can
contribute fully to embracing of the current learning model by schools. In this sense, it would imply that the
school headteachers and classroom teachers must understand the curriculum well in order to enhance its full
implementation. Although there are various factors that would naturally come into play, financial resources
are always as the center of the CBC implementation debate.


3. Research Methodology
The research used mixed methodology which allowed triangulation of quantitative and qualitative data. Target
population comprised of 68 public primary schools in Kirinyaga west subcounty. Specifically, the research
featured head teachers in these schools. In addition, 15,500 pupils in CBC program, 1,020 teachers in these
schools, and 4 subcounty education officers were targeted for the study. This gave a total of 16,592 individuals
from which the final sample was picked.           The Yamane Formula was used to select a sample of 399
respondents who were interviewed using a questionnaire and an interview schedule.
The questionnaire was employed in collecting data from the teachers whereas interview schedule was used to
collect qualitative data from key informants comprising of education officials in the subcounty. Data analysis
was carried out descriptively and inferentially. Quantitative data was first coded and common themes
identified for qualitative data. Descriptive (frequencies and percentages) and inferential statistics (linear
regression analysis) were used to analyze quantitative data using SPSS Version 23. Qualitative data was


              International Journal for Innovation Education and Research Vol. 10 No. 10 (2022), pg. 7

Influence of Schools’ Management Financial Preparedness on the Implementation of Competence Based
Curriculum in Public Primary Schools in Kirinyaga West Sub- County, Kirinyaga County, Kenya

analyzed using thematic content analysis technique and was presented in narrative and verbatim forms. All
ethical considerations were observed during the entire research process.


4. Results and Discussions
          2.4 Response Rate
Out of the sample of 399, 326 respondents managed to participate in the study, which made a response rate of
81.7%, as illustrated in table 1.


Table 1: Response Rate
                                                                Those who            Achieved Return
 Respondents                           Sample Size (n)
                                                               participated              Rate (%)
 Headteachers                                  20                    18                     90.0
 Pupils                                       334                   271                     81.1
 Teachers                                      44                    36                     81.8
 Subcounty education officials                 1                      1                    100.0
 Total                                        399                   326                     81.7
The findings on table 1 indicate that in all categories of the respondents, the response rate was at least 81.1%,
with the overall response rate recorded as 81.7%. According to Creswell (2014), a response rate of 70% and
above is excellent for analysis and subsequent adequate answering of the research questions.


          2.5 Influence of Schools’ Management Financial Preparedness on Implementation of CBC
The study sought to establish the influence of schools’ management financial preparedness on implementation
of CBC. Both descriptive and inferential analyses were undertaken to address this research problem.


2.5.1     Descriptive Statistical Analysis on Influence of Schools’ Management Financial Preparedness
          on Implementation of CBC
Analysis of descriptive statistics on the influence of schools’ financial preparedness on the implementation of
CBC in public primary schools in Kirinyaga West Sub-county was carried out based on a number of test items.
This variable was measured based on the sub-variables where data was collected from teachers, headteachers
and subcounty education officials. The findings are summarized in table 2.




               International Journal for Innovation Education and Research Vol. 10 No. 10 (2022), pg. 8

Influence of Schools’ Management Financial Preparedness on the Implementation of Competence Based
Curriculum in Public Primary Schools in Kirinyaga West Sub- County, Kirinyaga County, Kenya

Table 2: Influence of Schools’ Management Financial Preparedness on the Implementation of CBC
                            1=strongly                                                5=Strongly
                                           2=disagree      3=neutral     4=Agree                      Total
  Test items                  disagree                                                   Agree
                                 %              %              %             %             %           %
  Majority of public
  primary schools
  lack sufficient
                                 5.6            0.0            8.3         33.3          52.8        100.0
  financial allocation
  for implementation
  of CBC
  Majority of public
  primary schools
  lack good financial
                                 5.6           19.4           11.1         33.3          30.6        100.0
  planning for
  implementation of
  CBC
  A number of public
  primary schools’
  face cash flow
  management                     2.8            8.3           11.1         38.9          38.9        100.0
  challenge for
  implementation of
  CBC
  Majority of public
  primary schools
  lack proper budget
  preparation and
                                 5.6            8.3           19.4         36.1          30.6        100.0
  management
  systems for
  implementation of
  CBC
The findings in table 2 show that 19 (52.8%) of the respondents strongly agreed that many public primary
schools lack sufficient financial allocation for implementation of CBC whereas 12 (33.3%) agreed. At the
same time, 3 (8.3%) of the respondents were unsure (neutral) while 2 (5.6%) of them strongly disagreed with
this account. The study also revealed that 12 (33.3%) of the respondents agreed that a number of public
primary schools lack good financial planning for implementation of CBC, 11 (30.6%) strongly agreed, and 4
(11.1%) had neutral views regarding this proposition. At the same time 7 (19.4%) of the respondents disagreed
with this view while 2 (5.6%) strongly disagreed.

                International Journal for Innovation Education and Research Vol. 10 No. 10 (2022), pg. 9

Influence of Schools’ Management Financial Preparedness on the Implementation of Competence Based
Curriculum in Public Primary Schools in Kirinyaga West Sub- County, Kirinyaga County, Kenya

The study also indicated that 14 (38.9%) of the respondents each, strongly agreed and agreed that a number
of public primary schools’ face cash flow management challenge for implementation of CBC. On the other
hand, 4 (11.1%) of the respondents had neutral views, 3 (8.3%) disagreed while 1 (2.8%) strongly disagreed.
It also emerged that 13 (36.1%) of the respondents agreed and 11 (30.6%) strongly agreed that many public
primary schools lack proper budget preparation and management systems for implementation of CBC. The
view was countered by 3 (8.3%) and 2 (5.6) of the respondents who disagreed and strongly disagreed
respectively while 7 (19.4%) of them were unsure.


2.5.2   Inferential Statistical Analysis on Influence of Schools’ Management Financial Preparedness
        on Implementation of CBC
In order understand the level of influence of schools’ financial preparedness on implementation of CBC, linear
regression was carried out. Statistics for the regression coefficients for schools’ financial preparedness is
presented in table 3.
Table 3 Regression Coefficients for Schools’ Management Financial Preparedness
                                                             Standardized
                         Unstandardized Coefficients         Coefficients
Model                          B            Std. Error           Beta              T           Sig.
1       (Constant)                 2.612             .601                           5.021          .000
        X1 Financial                 .15             .039               .301        3.810          .001
        preparedness


Based on the bivariate regression analysis in table 3, all factors held into account and assumed to be zero, the
constant was 2.612; which meant that at ceteris paribus, the level of CBC implementation in public primary
schools in Kirinyaga West Sub-county would be 2.612. But a unit increase in financial preparedness, all other
factors held constant, would lead to 0.15 improvements in implementation of the CBC in public primary
schools. Furthermore, at 5% level of significance where P=001<0.05, it implies that financial preparedness
positively influenced implementation of the CBC in public primary schools.


2.5.3   Thematic Analysis of Qualitative Findings on Influence of Schools’ Management Financial
        Preparedness on the Implementation of CBC
The respondents were also asked to give general comments regarding public primary schools’ financial
preparedness for implementation of CBC where there was a feeling that the government should set aside funds
for implementation of CBC. The respondents further opined that there was a general lack of adequate
preparedness by the government for the implementation of CBC. Relevant training was also required to ensure
that all relevant departments clearly understood their role. Headteachers and subcounty education officials
were interviewed on Influence of Schools’ financial preparedness on the implementation of CBC where they
gave varied responses to reinforce the teachers’ views. The EO1 had the following to say:



             International Journal for Innovation Education and Research Vol. 10 No. 10 (2022), pg. 10

Influence of Schools’ Management Financial Preparedness on the Implementation of Competence Based
Curriculum in Public Primary Schools in Kirinyaga West Sub- County, Kirinyaga County, Kenya

“Most public schools are not properly equipped by the government to facilitate implementation of CBC.
Hence, there is need for proper facilitation of schools so that the CBC implementation is successful. There is
also the aspect of financial challenges to implement the new curriculum which if not carefully considered will
lead to its collapse. The government should also be able to adequately train teachers so that they can
effectively perform their duties”.
Furthermore, there was the need for provision of enough textbooks which required sufficient money to cater
for. Involving of other key stakeholders in the education industry such as parents, teachers and well-wishers
was also critical in mobilizing resources and goodwill so that the implementation of CBC could be a success.
That also meant that learners must be given enough learning materials to support the overall success of
implementation of the CBC program. The findings by this study corroborated outcomes of a previous study
by Mosha (2012) which revealed that in for effective implementation of CBC in Tanzania, there was need for
the government to financially equip schools so that they could have enough facilities and well-trained teachers
to deliver the new curriculum.
There was also unanimous agreement by the headteachers that the government was not doing enough to
financially support the CBC implementation. It further emerged that, in the headteachers; assessment, over
80% of public primary schools in Kenya were not effectively financially prepared to successfully implement
the CBC program. HDT1 had the following to say about schools’ financial preparedness:
“CBC is largely activity-based and involves a lot of project resources, hence the need for adequate financial
resources. But unfortunately, inadequate finances have proven to be a major impediment to the
implementation of the program. That therefore means that the government must do it can to ensure that enough
money is allocated for this program. Without this, it would be extremely hard to achieve its objectives.
Furthermore, if there is not going to be adequate finances, then we cannot expect the CBC program to have
any impact as initially intended”.
The sentiments above are a reflection of an earlier study by Mosha (2012) who noted that aside from lack of
competently trained teachers, most of the public primary schools did not have enough text books for learners
and teaching guides for teachers; a problem that was directly attributed to lack of finances. Similarly, some of
the teachers were even not sure of how to prepare lessons based on the provisions of the new learning model
since they lacked relevant materials for teaching. Based on observation of checklists regarding financial
preparedness by public primary schools, it emerged that a at least 80.1% of the schools did not have budget
allocation for various CBC activities, lacked financial recordkeeping for CBC activities, and did not have cash
flow management records. This situation made it impossible for schools to implement CBC curriculum.
Considering descriptive findings where financial preparedness considerably affected implementation of CBC
and inferential analysis which indicated a strong relationship between the independent and the dependent
variables, it was evident that to a larger extent, these findings were a reflection of some of the previous studies
on the influence of financial preparedness on implementation of various programs in schools. A study by
Bouchamma et al (2014) noted that adequate finances are critical in all departments in the school, including
hiring of the right number of teachers, recruiting specialized teachers, and putting in place systems and
facilities as well as purchasing the requisite learning materials. On the same note, Kiptum (2016) argued that


             International Journal for Innovation Education and Research Vol. 10 No. 10 (2022), pg. 11

Influence of Schools’ Management Financial Preparedness on the Implementation of Competence Based
Curriculum in Public Primary Schools in Kirinyaga West Sub- County, Kirinyaga County, Kenya

effective management of schools’ financial resources requires competent headteachers and managers who
understand the need for providing quality education to the learners through prudent management of resources
and systems.
Asebiomo (2015) also noted that in implementing competency-based curriculum, the role of primary
headteachers is very important in the realization of seamless transition from the old to the new learning model.
The headteachers’ ability to understand the needs of the learners and be able to assemble, provide and organize
the right teaching staff is critical in the general running of the school and meeting the needs of the learners.
Asebiomo (2015) further posited that since it is the responsibility of the headteachers to oversee the general
performance of the school, human resource needs must be emphasized through effective mobilization of
financial resources for hiring of more teachers even if it means through the schools’ board of managements.
Sullivan and Burce (2014) further revealed that in order that the instructors can successfully face emerging
challenges presented by CBC and execute their responsibilities more effectively, they must be well equipped
with relevant knowledge and skills. As the executive officer of the school, the headteachers are tasked with
the responsibility of creating the right environment for learning. In a study by Mosha (2012) to establish
resources needed for delivery of CBC in Tanzania, it emerged that several schools did not have enough
facilities and well-trained teachers to deliver the new curriculum. Aside from lack of competently trained
teachers, most of these schools did not have enough text books for learners and teaching guides for teachers.


5. Summary of Findings, Conclusions and Recommendations
       2.6 Summary
The study established that schools’ financial preparedness significantly influences implementation of the
CBC. Several schools experience lack of adequate preparedness for the implementation of CBC which made
it difficult to achieve the objectives of the program. Both headteachers and subcounty education officials had
the impression that despite the government’s efforts to put in place structures for implementation of the CBC,
one of its serious hindrances is inadequate financing. Enough finances formed the basis for all other requisites
for the program, including properly trained teachers, teaching materials, learning infrastructure and support
services among other essential provisions. Requisition of enough textbooks also involved finances; hence it is
difficult for the schools to execute the CBC model without government’s financial support.
The study also established that many schools that are running on low budgets are also experiencing related
challenges, such as lack of enough learning materials and support services. This made it difficult for the
schools’ managers and the teaching staff to maintain a favorable learning environment and the general CBC
implementation process. Further, almost all the head teachers felt that the government is not doing enough to
financially support the CBC implementation. That left most schools to be grappling with the challenge of
requisition of enough text books for learners and teaching guides for teachers; a problem that was directly
attributed to lack of finances.




               International Journal for Innovation Education and Research Vol. 10 No. 10 (2022), pg. 12

Influence of Schools’ Management Financial Preparedness on the Implementation of Competence Based
Curriculum in Public Primary Schools in Kirinyaga West Sub- County, Kirinyaga County, Kenya

       2.7 Conclusions
Almost all public primary schools in the country are not fully financially prepared to handle implementation
of CBC. This was evident since very many schools did not have budget allocation for various CBC activities,
lacked financial recordkeeping for CBC activities, lacked cash flow management records, and did not have
funds mobilization initiatives. Hence, this situation calls for government’s timely intervention to enhance
implementation processes of CBC.


       2.8 Recommendations for the Study
There is need for the government to provide enough financial resources for implementation of the CBC. It is
also important for the government to involve other key stakeholders in the education industry such as parents,
teachers and well-wishers in mobilizing resources and goodwill for successful implementation of CBC. In
terms of policy, there is need for enactment of policy by the government to ensure that there are strong policy
guidelines that guarantee public primary schools to sustainably have adequate finances for CBC
implementation.


REFERENCES
Akomolafe, C. O. & Adesua, V. O. (2016): the impacts of school facilities on students’ level of motivation
       and academic performance in senior secondary schools in South West Nigeria. Journal of Education
       and practice. Files.eric.ed.gov/fulltext/EJ1092365.pdf.ISSN2222-288X.


Asebiomo, A.M. (2015), Mitigating with Global Trends in Curriculum Innovation: Mitigating the challenges
       of curriculum Implementation for effective teaching and learning in Nigeria.


Bouchamma, Y., Basque, M. & Marcotte, C (2014). School management competencies: perceptions and self-
       efficacy beliefs of school principals. Creative Education, 5, 580-589.


Cobbold, C., Kofie, S., Bordoh, A., & Eshun, I. (2015). Perception ofcurriculum leaders and teachers on
       feedback and conditions essential for effective supervision in senior high schools. International
       Journal of Educational Research and Information Science, 2(2), 21-26.


Coch, L., & French, J. (1948). Overcoming resistance to change. Human Relations, 1, 512-532.
Government of Kenya. (2012). Diploma in education management for primary schools. Nairobi: Kenya
Education Staff Institute.


Hodge, W. (2010). Basic Education Curriculum Revisited: A Look at the Current Content and Reform
       Director, Training and Development Division, Ministry of Education, Singapore.




             International Journal for Innovation Education and Research Vol. 10 No. 10 (2022), pg. 13

Influence of Schools’ Management Financial Preparedness on the Implementation of Competence Based
Curriculum in Public Primary Schools in Kirinyaga West Sub- County, Kirinyaga County, Kenya

IBE-UNESCO (2017), the Why, What and How of Competency-Based Curriculum Reforms: The Kenyan
       Experience, Current and Critical Issues in Curriculum, Learning and Assessment, UNESCO.


Jonyo, O. D. and Odera, J. B. (2019), Curriculum Supervision and Implementation in Kenya: The Role of
       Secondary School Heads, European Journal of Educational Sciences, June 2019 edition Vol.6 No.2
       ISSN: 1857- 6036.


Kimosop, H. (2019). Teacher Preparedness in the Implementation of Early Childhood Education Development
       Curriculum in Kenya: A Case of Baringo North Sub County Kenya. IOSR Journal of Humanities and
       Social Science (IOSR-JHSS). vol. 24 (02), pp. 44-50.


Kiptum. C.K. (2016). Correlation between Teachers Related Factors and Students’ Academic Achievement
       in Public Secondary Schools in Baringo County, Kenya. (Unpublished PhD thesis). Moi University,
       Kenya.


Komba, S. C & Mwandanji, D. (2015). Reflections on the implementation of competence-based curriculum
       in Tanzanian Secondary Schools. Journal of Education and Learning, 4 (2): 73-79.


Komba, S. C., & Kira, E. S. (2013). The effectiveness of teaching practice in improving student teachers’
       teaching skills in Tanzania. Journal of Education and Practice, 4(1), 157-163.


Lewin, K. (1951), Change Management Model, Human Relations, 1, 5-41.


Makunja, G. (2016). Adopting Competency-Based Curriculum to Improve Quality of Secondary Education in
       Tanzania: “Is it a Dream or Reality”? International Journal of Education and Research Vol. 3 No. 11,
       pp.175-188.


Matambo, O. K. (2013). 2013 Budget speech Gaborone: Government Printers.


Mosha, H. J. (2012). Common core skills for lifelong learning and sustainable development in Africa: A case
       study of learning materials used to deliver knowledge and skills-or competency-based curricula in
       Tanzania. A paper presented at the Triennale on education and training in Africa (Ouagadougou,
       Burkina Faso, February, 12-17, 2012).


Schein, E. H., & Bennis, W. (1965). Personal and organizational change via group methods. New York: John
       Wiley.
Sellar, S., & Lingard, B. (2013). Looking East: Shanghai, PISA 2009 and the reconstitution of reference
       societies in the global education policy field. Comparative Education, 49(4), 464-485.


            International Journal for Innovation Education and Research Vol. 10 No. 10 (2022), pg. 14

Influence of Schools’ Management Financial Preparedness on the Implementation of Competence Based
Curriculum in Public Primary Schools in Kirinyaga West Sub- County, Kirinyaga County, Kenya



Sullivan, N. & Burce, A. (2014). Teaching and learning in competency-based education. The Fifth
       International Conference on e-Learning (eLearning-2014), 22-23 September 2014, Belgrade, Serbia.


Taasisi ya Elimu. (2013). Maboresho na Mabadiliko ya Mitaala toka 1961 had 2010 [Curriculum Reviews
       and Changes From 1961 to 2010]. Dar es Salaam: Tanzania Institute of Education.


Tan, C. & Reyes, V. (2016). Curriculum reform and education policy borrowing in China: Towards a hybrid
       model of teaching. In Chou, C.P. & Spangler, J. (Eds.), Chinese Education Models in a Global Age:
       Transforming Practice into Theory (pp. 37-50). Singapore: Springer.


Tilya, F. N. & Mafumiko, F. M. S. (2010). The Compatibility between Teaching methods and Competency-
       Based Curriculum in Tanzania. Papers in Education and Development, 29, 37-56.


UNESCO (2015a). Repositioning and Re-conceptualizing the Curriculum for the Effective Realization of
       SDG4, for Holistic Development and Sustainable Ways of Living. Geneva, Switzerland, IBE-
       UNESCO.


UNESCO (2015b). What Makes a Good Quality Curriculum? In-Progress Reflections No 2. Geneva,
       Switzerland, IBE-UNESCO.


Wanyama, M. (2013). School Based Factors Influencing Students’ Performance at Kenya Certificate of
       Secondary Education in Narok – North District, Kenya. Unpublished MA Thesis, University of
       Nairobi.


Yichun, W., Rodney, A.C. & Lance, W. R. (2012). School Resources & Academic Achievement of Canadian
       students. Alberta Journal of Educational Research, Vol.57, No. 4.




            International Journal for Innovation Education and Research Vol. 10 No. 10 (2022), pg. 15