PPSDP International Journal of Education
Volume 4 (2) 2025, 530-537
E-ISSN 2829-5196, P-ISSN 2830-3229


                    School Management as a School Mover
                   in Realizing Educational Transformation

                   Ananda Luthfillah1, Tri Widayatsih1, Mahasir1
               1Universitas PGRI Palembang, South Sumatra, Indonesia



               Corresponding author e-mail: widayatsihtri@yahoo.com

   Article History: Received on 17 November 2024, Revised on 23 December 2024,
                            Published on 25 March 2025

Abstract: This study focuses on the management of school mover in realizing
educational transformation (case study at SD Az-Zahrah Palembang), which aims to
determine the planning, organization, implementation, and supervisory framework
of school mover in realizing educational transformation. This study uses a qualitative
approach with the case study method. School mover are catalysts for realizing the
vision of Indonesian education, namely realizing a sovereign, independent, and
personality-based advanced Indonesia through the creation of Pancasila students.
School mover focus on developing student learning outcomes holistically by realizing
the profile of Pancasila students that includes competencies and characters that begin
with superior human resources (principals and teachers).

Keywords: Educational Transformation, Elementary School, School Management

A. Introduction

Indonesian national education, as per Law No. 20 of 2003, aims to actualize human
potential and develop well-rounded individuals. The goal of education is for humans
to become people who believe in and are devoted to God Almighty, have noble
morals, are healthy and intelligent, have feelings, have a will, and are able to work;
are able to fulfill various needs in life in a reasonable manner; are able to control their
lusts; have personality; have noble morals; and are cultured (Muid & Mustofa, 2023).
The implication is that education must function to realize (develop) various potentials
that exist in humans in the context of the dimensions of diversity, morality,
individuality/personality, sociality, and culture in a comprehensive and integrated
manner. In other words, education functions to humanize humans. Educational
institutions are institutions that are oriented towards quality and are focused on two
customers, namely internal and external customers.

Internal customers are principals, teachers, and employees who provide services to
students or students who directly receive services (internal), while external customers
are students, parents, the community, governors, or student sponsors who have direct
interests individually or in groups and parties who have important roles, such as the
government and the community (Sallis, 2019). Internal customers in the institution are

                                                                                       530

PPSDP International Journal of Education
Volume 4 (2) 2025, 530-537
E-ISSN 2829-5196, P-ISSN 2830-3229


people who are involved in the learning process, which will ultimately determine the
quality of the school (Hwang & Choi, 2019). To realize the meaning of an education,
government efforts have always rolled from time to time, which strive to realize better
education.

However, to create Pancasila Students who are critical thinkers, faithful, devoted to
God Almighty, and have noble morals work together and are globally diverse; all of
these programs must begin with creating superior human resources (principals and
teachers) (Arifin et al., 2024). The most important part of education is also the basic
foundation on which to stand or where an action begins. In making a building, the
foundation is a very important part so that the building can stand upright and sturdy
and strong. In a building, pillars, tiles, glass, and so on will not be able to stand and
stick without the foundation. National education requires a strong foundation in its
implementation. Pancasila is the basis of the national system in order to educate the
life of the nation, as stated in the Preamble to the 1945 Constitution and Pancasila, so
that Indonesian national education is Pancasila education. Through the national
education system, it is hoped that every Indonesian citizen will maintain his life,
develop himself, and together build his society.

In the era of Industrial Revolution 5.0, education must guide and foster students while
maintaining fundamental educational values. This ensures that students develop
noble character and adapt to societal progress that is in accordance with the progress
and development of the era (Taj & Zaman, 2022). To realize these ideals, there needs
to be a change, especially in the education system. Becoming a great and quality nation
must certainly have competent and quality human resources, and in achieving these
ideals, of course, changes are needed from the aspect of education in Indonesia. One
of them is by implementing the Merdeka curriculum with the school mover program.
The goal is that education and learning in Indonesia are able to produce a generation
that has a character in accordance with the values of Pancasila. The curriculum is a set
of plans and guidelines that regulate what will be taught in educational institutions,
including educational objectives, learning materials, teaching methods, and
assessment of learning outcomes (Simanjuntak et al., 2022). The curriculum aims to
provide a clear direction for the learning process and development of students (Su &
Zhong, 2022). The curriculum can be considered a basic guide for education in an
institution. The curriculum, according to Law No. 20 of 2003, means a set of plans and
regulations regarding the objectives, content, and learning materials as well as the
methods used as guidelines for organizing learning activities to achieve certain
educational goals.

Then, the curriculum has a very important role in the education system. This is the
main guide that shapes how education is carried out, what is taught, and how students
develop themselves. With the development and renewal of the curriculum, it is a
strategy to improve the quality of education. However, changes in the curriculum that
occur will certainly give rise to obstacles in its implementation. Then in its

                                                                                     531

PPSDP International Journal of Education
Volume 4 (2) 2025, 530-537
E-ISSN 2829-5196, P-ISSN 2830-3229


implementation there are various highlights from several parties, especially teachers.
It is inevitable that teachers are parties who have mutual roles in the process of
implementing the curriculum. The advancement of digital technology will be very
disruptive for anyone who is not prepared (Bongomin et al., 2020). Educational
transformation is a process of developing, renewing, and adjusting educational
paradigms to the demands of the times (García-Morales et al., 2021). Superior,
creative, and innovative educational human resources (educators and education
personnel) cannot be underestimated. Superior education human resources are those
who are able to create an inspiring and competitive learning environment (Alfawaire
& Atan, 2021). Creative educators and education personnel must be able to develop
and implement interesting and challenging learning methods for students so that the
learning process becomes fun and effective (Zulkifli et al., 2022). In addition,
innovative educators and education personnel must be able to create new solutions
and face educational challenges in smart and different ways.

B. Methods

The research was conducted at SD Az Zahrah Palembang, South Sumatra Province,
from July to September 2024. This research uses a qualitative approach with a case
study method. Data was collected through interviews, observations, and document
analysis.

C. Results and Discussion

The Ministry of Education, Culture, Research and Technology through the Directorate
of Early Childhood Education, Elementary Education and Secondary Education
decided on the Determination of Educational Units implementing the Batch 2 driving
school program and one of them is SD Islam Az-Zahrah with NPSN 10603943. The
plan carried out by the school to realize the educational transformation is to
implement In House Training (IHT) because the focus of the driving school is the
development of student learning outcomes holistically by realizing the profile of
Pancasila students which includes competencies and characters that begin with
superior human resources (Parwati & Suastra, 2024; Rumino, 2022). So, by focusing
on IHT which will provide understanding to human resources (teachers), the
objectives of this transformation will be realized according to the government’s
expectations. The initial step in the Planning strategy is that the school follows the
direction and guidance provided by the Ministry of Education, Culture, Research and
Technology where the principal is asked to appoint 2 teachers as a learning committee,
then the principal and 2 teachers as a learning committee follow the guidance
provided by the Ministry of Education, Culture, Research and Technology through a
facilitator for the Driving School Program (PSP). Then after we receive all the
assistance, the school is obliged to disseminate it to all school residents, especially
teachers, so that the transformation of education at SD Islam Az-Zahrah Palembang
can be realized.

                                                                                   532

PPSDP International Journal of Education
Volume 4 (2) 2025, 530-537
E-ISSN 2829-5196, P-ISSN 2830-3229


The methods used in the early stages of implementing the school mover program are;
1) Organizing in-house training in each education unit related to learning with a new
paradigm for teachers in the education unit; 2) Facilitating regular meetings for the
learning planning process for teachers. Analyzing teacher learning needs; and 3)
Analyzing teacher learning needs and mobilizing the community of practitioners in
the education unit; 4) Providing supervision, assistance and evaluation. The
supervision method used is as a follow-up to the control of the implementation of the
school mover program so that if there is an obstacle or obstacle that exists, it can be
immediately overcome and can be consulted with the facilitator so that this
supervision of assistance is very much needed.

The school mover program consists of five interventions, one of which is: consultative
and asymmetric assistance where the Ministry of Education and Culture through the
technical implementing unit (UPT) in each province will provide assistance to the
provincial and district or city governments in planning the School Mover Program.
The UPT of the Ministry of Education and Culture in each province will provide
assistance to the local government during the implementation of the program.
Including facilitating the local government in conducting socialization to related
parties and finding solutions if there are obstacles in the field. The planning assistance
was greatly felt by SD Islam Az-Zahrah as a school appointed as the second batch of
School Movers located in the city of Palembang. The findings of the organization can
be seen from the results of the interview that the role of the principal, who is entrusted
with implementing the school mover program, is certainly very important because the
school mover program must also target improving the competence of the principal.

The principal organizes school management that is in favor of learning, as well as one
of the characteristics of a school mover, including having a principal who understands
the student learning process and is able to develop teachers. So, the role of the
principal in the implementation of this PSP is certainly very urgent and the movement
of this school mover program will be realized in educational units, one of which is the
role of the principal. In the division of roles to implement the school mover program,
the school is still focused on the learning committee which is indeed obliged to
disseminate, provide assistance and evaluate the implementation. The learning
committee is a team consisting of a supervisor, a principal and two teachers who are
directly appointed by the principal to make the learning committee a success.
Together with the learning committee, they attended the workshop held by the South
Sumatra Teachers’ Movement Center for the implementation of the school movement
program in educational units. The role of the learning committee in implementing the
independent learning curriculum through the school movement program is training
in implementing learning with a new paradigm (Yunaini et al., 2022). The learning
committee receives training and assistance related to self-development and school
development, use of digital platforms. Only then is the school learning committee
obliged to convey to the IHT so that all school residents understand the planned new
paradigm.

                                                                                      533

PPSDP International Journal of Education
Volume 4 (2) 2025, 530-537
E-ISSN 2829-5196, P-ISSN 2830-3229


The role needs to be shared so that it can be implemented properly according to
expectations. The most important role in the school driving program is all those
involved in making this program a success, including the Ministry of Education,
Culture, Research and Technology, Regional Government, School Supervisors,
Facilitators, School Principals, Learning Committees, all teachers and education
personnel and also all students and support from both parents. In the implementation
carried out in the driving school, it is trying to realize the objectives of the school
driving program; a) improving competence and character in accordance with the
profile of Pancasila students; b) ensuring equal distribution of education quality
through a program to increase the capacity of school principals who are able to lead
education units in achieving quality learning; c) building a stronger education
ecosystem that focuses on improving quality; and d) creating a collaborative climate
for stakeholders in the field of education both in the scope of schools, local
governments, and the government. The guidelines that serve as implementation
guidelines are the guidelines that have been issued by the Ministry of Education,
Culture, Research and Technology so that the implementation of the program at SD
Islam Az-Zahrah Palembang is carried out properly.

Competency improvement activities and HR collaboration. The driving school
program is a vision of Indonesian Education, namely to realize an advanced Indonesia
that is sovereign, independent, and has personality through the creation of Pancasila
students. The driving school is a catalyst for realizing the vision of Indonesian
Education. So, the driving school is a school that focuses on developing student
learning outcomes holistically by realizing the profile of Pancasila students which
includes competencies and characters that begin with superior human resources
(Zulaikha et al., 2024). The driving school program will accelerate schools to move 1-
2 stages more advanced within 3 academic years. The presence of school mover is also
expected to accelerate the recovery of education conditions in Indonesia which have
been greatly affected by the Covid-19 pandemic.

The expected achievements for educational units include; a) Improving the quality of
education within 3 academic years; b) Increasing the Competence of Principals and
Teachers; c) Accelerating the achievement of the Pancasila student profile; d)
Accelerating the Digitalization of schools; e) Opportunity to become a Catalyst for
change for other educational units; f) Getting intensive assistance for the
Transformation of educational units. If there are findings in the field in the
implementation of school mover, the principal will evaluate and follow up on
improvements. The follow-up carried out is to adjust the needs of the findings that
occur, such as if the understanding of differentiated learning is not yet understood by
the teacher, then we will carry out training or strengthening activities related to these
findings.

Factors that support the implementation of the driving school program: a) The
existence of assistance and guidance in the implementation of the driving school

                                                                                     534

PPSDP International Journal of Education
Volume 4 (2) 2025, 530-537
E-ISSN 2829-5196, P-ISSN 2830-3229


program; b) Motivational encouragement from the principal; c) Collaboration of the
learning committee and the entire board of teachers; d) Enthusiasm of all students and
the participation of parents. Factors that hinder the implementation of the school
driving program: a) Readiness of human resources (HR) in implementing the school
driving program; b) Understanding of the school driving program that needs a
process; c) Awareness of change with a new paradigm. As feedback from teachers in
the third year as a school driving school, the implementation of the school driving
program has been carried out well. One of them is learning activities that are in favor
of students and the increasing activeness of human resources in utilizing the Merdeka
Belajar Platform. Regarding the management of the school driving school at SD Islam
Az Zahrah Palembang, it has been good. For example, from the division of roles,
which is currently not only focused on the learning committee, each teacher is given
the same opportunity to develop themselves and is even given the opportunity and
space to share, such as becoming a resource person, and so on.

D. Conclusions

In the planning management function, in-house training has been carried out related
to learning with a new paradigm for teachers, facilitating regular meetings for the
learning planning process for teachers, and analyzing teacher learning needs and
mobilizing the community of practitioners. The school has followed the direction and
assistance provided by the Ministry of Research, Technology and Education in
appointing two teachers as the learning committee. In the organizing management
function, planning assistance has been carried out, the learning committee provides
assistance and evaluates the implementation of the learning committee. In
implementation, the driving school is a catalyst for realizing the vision of Indonesian
Education. School mover are expected to accelerate the recovery of education
conditions in Indonesia, improve the quality of education within 3 academic years,
increase the competence of principals and teachers, accelerate the achievement of the
Pancasila student profile d. Acceleration of school digitalization, Opportunity to
become a catalyst for change for other educational units and, Get intensive assistance
for the Transformation of Education units.

E. Acknowledgement

Thank you to principal and stakeholders of SD Islam Az Zahrah Palembang, and team
of PPSDP International Journal of Education.

References

Alfawaire, F., & Atan, T. (2021). The Effect of Strategic Human Resource and
    Knowledge Management on Sustainable Competitive Advantages at Jordanian
    Universities: The Mediating Role of Organizational Innovation. Sustainability,
    13(15), 8445. https://doi.org/10.3390/su13158445

                                                                                   535

PPSDP International Journal of Education
Volume 4 (2) 2025, 530-537
E-ISSN 2829-5196, P-ISSN 2830-3229


Arifin, Mas, S. R., Bafadal, I., & Gaib, M. (2024). Strengthening the Pancasila Student
     Profile in the Implementation of Freedom to Learn in Elementary Schools. Jurnal
     Pedagogi dan Pembelajaran, 7(1), 166–174. https://doi.org/10.23887/jp2.v7i1.63674
Bongomin, O., Gilibrays Ocen, G., Oyondi Nganyi, E., Musinguzi, A., & Omara, T.
     (2020). Exponential Disruptive Technologies and the Required Skills of Industry
     4.0. Journal of Engineering, 2020, 1–17. https://doi.org/10.1155/2020/4280156
García-Morales, V. J., Garrido-Moreno, A., & Martín-Rojas, R. (2021). The
     Transformation of Higher Education After the COVID Disruption: Emerging
     Challenges in an Online Learning Scenario. Frontiers in Psychology, 12.
     https://doi.org/10.3389/fpsyg.2021.616059
Hwang, Y.-S., & Choi, Y. K. (2019). Higher Education Service Quality and Student
     Satisfaction, Institutional Image, and Behavioral Intention. Social Behavior and
     Personality:         An         International       Journal,       47(2),         1–12.
     https://doi.org/10.2224/sbp.7622
Muid, A., & Mustofa, A. M. Z. (2023). Religious Education as a Basic Component in
     the Formation of Quality Human Beings. Indonesian Journal of Islamic Education
     and Local Culture, 1(1), 37–46. https://doi.org/10.22437/ijielc.v1i1.28096
Parwati, N. P. Y., & Suastra, I. W. (2024). Critical Study of Educational Philosophy:
     Implementation of Character Education in the Pancasila Student Profile.
     Indonesian Journal of Educational Development (IJED), 4(4), 492–499.
     https://doi.org/10.59672/ijed.v4i4.3397
Rumino, R. (2022). Improving Teacher Ability in Preparing HOTS Questions through
     In-House Training (IHT) at Ngaliyan State Elementary School, Samigaluh, Kulon
     Progo Regency for the 2021/2022 Academic Year. IJCER (International Journal of
     Chemistry                  Education                Research),                147–152.
     https://doi.org/10.20885/ijcer.vol6.iss2.art13
Sallis, E. (2019). Total Quality Management in Education. London: Logan Page.
Simanjuntak, M. B., Suseno, M., Setiadi, S., Lustyantie, N., & Barus, I. R. G. R. G. (2022).
     Integration of Curricula (Curriculum 2013 and Cambridge Curriculum for Junior
     High School Level in Three Subjects) in Pandemic Situation. Ideas: Jurnal
     Pendidikan, Sosial, Dan Budaya, 8(1), 77. https://doi.org/10.32884/ideas.v8i1.615
Su, J., & Zhong, Y. (2022). Artificial Intelligence (AI) in Early Childhood Education:
     Curriculum Design and Future Directions. Computers and Education: Artificial
     Intelligence, 3, 100072. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.caeai.2022.100072
Taj, I., & Zaman, N. (2022). Towards Industrial Revolution 5.0 and Explainable
     Artificial Intelligence: Challenges and Opportunities. International Journal of
     Computing            and         Digital       Systems,        12(1),         285–310.
     https://doi.org/10.12785/ijcds/120124
Yunaini, N., Rukiyati, R., Prabowo, M., Hassan, N. M., & Hermansyah, A. K. (2022).
     The Concept of the Independent Learning Curriculum (Merdeka Belajar) in
     Elementary Schools in View Progressivism Educational Philosophy. JIP Jurnal
     Ilmiah PGMI, 8(2), 95–105. https://doi.org/10.19109/jip.v8i2.14962
Zulaikha, S., Matin, M., & Qoiriyah, S. (2024). Project-Based Learning Management
     Strengthening Pancasila Student Profiles Driving School Program (pp. 35–45).

                                                                                        536

PPSDP International Journal of Education
Volume 4 (2) 2025, 530-537
E-ISSN 2829-5196, P-ISSN 2830-3229


    https://doi.org/10.2991/978-2-38476-240-8_4
Zulkifli, H., Tamuri, A. H., & Azman, N. A. (2022). Understanding Creative Teaching
    in Twenty-First Century Learning among Islamic Education Teachers during the
    COVID-19           Pandemic.       Frontiers       in      Psychology,       13.
    https://doi.org/10.3389/fpsyg.2022.920859




                                                                                537