INTERNATIONAL JOURNAL OF MULTIDISCIPLINARY RESEARCH AND ANALYSIS
ISSN(print): 2643-9840, ISSN(online): 2643-9875
Volume 08 Issue 06 June 2025
DOI: 10.47191/ijmra/v8-i06-70, Impact Factor: 8.266
Page No. 3630-3640

Epic Leadership Theory: Basis for School Management in the Higher Education
Institutions (HEIs)
Leovigildo Lito D. Mallillin, PhD1, Ma. Angelica Lei G. Bautista2, Yolanda S. Lira3
1
 Head-Research Accreditation and Publication, Philippine College of Criminology,Manila, Philippines
2
 President-Philippine College of Criminology, Manila, Philippines
3
 Vice President for Academic Affairs, Philippine College of Criminology, Manila, Philippines

ABSTRACT: The study aims to identify the description of EPIC leadership theory in the success management of the Higher
Education Institutions in the area of excellence leadership, passion leadership, integrity leadership, and consistency leadership.
         Descriptive quantitative research design is utilized in the study where purposive sampling is employed in the selection of
the population size of the respondents. The study comprised thirty (30) respondents only.
         Results show that excellence empowers leaders through trust and autonomy role, responsibility, professional
development, new knowledge, skills, and collaboration to foster leadership function, show that passion inspires and motivates
leadership to foster shared responsibility and purpose for effective management success in the school system, show that integrity
fosters positive culture, trust, and enhances well-being of the employee in the school organization success and process, and show
that compassion influences trust, communication, and collaboration on conflict resolution, decision-making, instructional
leadership, communication, strategic vision, and emotional intelligence necessary for team cohesion.
         Findings show that there is a significant correlation on the description of EPIC leadership theory in the success
management of the Higher Education Institutions as observed by the respondents.
KEYWORDS: EPIC leadership theory, excellence leadership, passion leadership, integrity leadership, and consistency leadership

INTRODUCTION
          Leadership is necessary in any organization; it involves guiding people especially in the school setting to achieve
educational goals. It integrates literacy competency in leadership (Mallillin, 2023). Effective school leaders shape and mold the
school mission, vision, goals, values, and cultures. It builds a strong collaborative environment to foster better relationships in the
organization. It engages necessary understanding and building reciprocal relationships. It encompasses the different functions and
roles in the formal position of leadership (Mallillin, et al. 2024). It focuses on the success of creating an optimistic and supportive
environment in fostering success of the learners and improvement of quality leadership. It influences and explores the
performance of the perceived organization in the school setting. It focuses on the mediating role for job satisfaction (Mallillin,
2021, pp. 17-28). It focuses on the organizational culture and motivation of employees. It serves as a tool to improve strategic
tools for the organizational performance which is crucial management success (Jeffrey, 2025, pp. 1-7). On the other hand,
leadership theory focuses on excellence, passion, integrity, and consistency which are needed in the educational system and
setting. It results in better success and management of the school leaders and subordinates. It is based on self-esteem, self-
efficacy, and inclusive leadership (Mallillin, 2024). It explores the relationships of every employee which affect job performance
in achieving the goals, mission, vision, and core values. It enhances the impact of inclusive Excellence, Passion, Integrity, and
Consistency (EPIC) leadership and potentials. It is designed for the educational setting and system implementation and
management success. It influences the role of every leader in the organization through the process of EPIC and self-efficacy
respectively. It explains further the process improvement of the leadership process in the school organization (Huang, et al. 2025).
          Furthermore, the objective of EPIC leadership is to provide key aspects of school leadership with a clear vision for effective
development to align with the policies, school activities, and mission. It also focuses on instructional leadership influences on the
improved teaching and learning for effective instructions (Mallillin, 2024, pp. 120-132). It also influences the improved focus in
creating better practice and effective instructions. It manages organizational leadership on policies, school resources, and

IJMRA, Volume 8 Issue 06 June 2025                              www.ijmra.in                                              Page 3630

Epic Leadership Theory: Basis for School Management in the Higher Education Institutions (HEIs)
processes to support effective operation among stakeholders. It fosters and develops family and community engagement to play
a key role in broadening better partnership in the organization. It involves collaboration and communication for effective
leadership benefits of everyone in the educational setting and system (Andenoro, & Skendall, 2020, pp. 33-38). Moreover, it
evaluates the role of leadership in the organization including formal processes such as administrative position, departments,
coordinators, and heads. It also includes instructional leaderships who have the expertise in the influences and instructions that
can be exercised among leaders and coaches. It is a shared distributed leadership that recognizes different influences in the school-
based expertise. It demonstrates leadership initiative in supporting change from good, better, and best (Don, et al. 2015, pp. 615-
625). Similarly, it analyzes the importance of school leadership in creating crucial effective leadership to support achievement of
the goals in a positive environment. It develops heads in their professional development and improvement of the school
organization (Mallillin, & Laurel, 2022). It also shapes school culture in exploring behaviors, beliefs, and values in leadership. It
builds and engages community and society to the fullest. It processes the multifaceted school organization and setting in
supporting, guiding, and influencing the success and shared vision (Karadağ, & Sertel, 2025).

EPIC Leadership Theory
        The EPIC Leadership Theory discusses the meaning as to (E) for Excellence, (P) for Passion, (I) for Integrity, and (C) for
Consistency which is illustrated below:




Excellence Leadership Theory
         Excellence Leadership Theory determines the qualification of education leaders in a sustainable rapid transformation of
the school system through comprehensive planning to ensure high performing leaders (Adams, et al. 2020, pp. 425-439). It is
focused on the following details:
    1. It prepares effective leaders for high performing functions to establish leadership practice, roles, and functions in the
         school setting.
    2. It provides strong outcomes and evidence based on the mission, vision, and core values of the school standards.
    3. It designs various approaches for competency standard output development leadership skills and attributes to fulfill
         aspiration in the educational system.
    4. It explores potential school leaders and influences high performance management success in the educational system.
    5. It establishes a shared mission, vision, core values, and goals translated to guide daily decision making and transparency.
    6. It empowers leaders through trust and autonomy, responsibility, professional development, new knowledge, skills, and
         collaboration to foster leadership function.
    7. It fosters inclusive and positive culture supported with respect and belonging, equity, diversity, inclusion, and positive
         relationship in the educational system.

IJMRA, Volume 8 Issue 06 June 2025                            www.ijmra.in                                              Page 3631

Epic Leadership Theory: Basis for School Management in the Higher Education Institutions (HEIs)
    8.  It prioritizes well-being of employees in the organization through a supportive safe environment, success, and potential.
    9.  It analyzes and evaluates adaptable and strategic leadership decision-making data driven, change management, and
        strategic planning.
    10. It builds a strong foundation of effective leaders in focusing the function and role impact of the school success essential
        world of the educational system.

Passion Leadership Theory
         Passion Leadership Theory enhances professional development of effective leaders in the educational system. It guides
leadership models to explore and foster efficient leadership, retention, growth, and development (Cook, 2025). It is focused on
the following details:
         1. It describes professional effective leadership engagement, preventing burnout, and individual well-being.
         2. It fosters strategies to support the needs of individual employees in the organization to enhance self-care,
             engagement strategies, and psychological support.
         3. It emphasizes support on professional needs and development of a leader to improve satisfaction and success of the
             school organization.
         4. It lessens burnout, improves individual satisfaction in aiming the vision, mission, and core values of the school in a
             sustainable development process.
         5. It exhibits commitment and involvement leadership in the school setting creative engagement and positive
             environment educational system.
         6. It leads to clear vision commitment in effective communication transparency in the school system.
         7. It inspires and motivates leadership to foster shared responsibility and purpose for effective management success in
             the school system.
         8. It creates a positive culture engagement environment for a safe and supportive working system in promoting
             collaboration and culture respect among individuals.
         9. It recognizes the contribution and achievement of individuals in the organization to motivate better success and
             progress in the school organization.
         10. It focuses on building strong relationships to maintain rapport in fostering a sense of belonging in organizational
             success and development.

Integrity Leadership Theory
         Integrity Leadership Theory identifies sustainable context in education, management, quality, and styles. It enhances
transformational leadership style to demonstrate positive outcome from good, better, and best in enhancing organizational school
culture and conducive environment (Sugiyanto, 2025, pp. 351-359). It is focused on the following details:
         1. It influences the integration of innovative approaches to leadership competency in the educational system or school
             setting.
         2. It platforms improved leadership effectiveness to prevent various issues in the school setting for both employees
             and administrators.
         3. It enhances support, decision-making, information, and resource efficiency of sustainable management and integrity
             leadership style achievement of innovation, adaptability, and inclusivity.
         4. It contributes to supporting sustainable design leadership strategy and achievement insights in addressing the
             globalized challenges in the educational system.
         5. It demonstrates school leadership integrity, interaction, decision, moral responsibility, fairness, and honesty.
         6. It fosters positive culture, trust, and enhances the well-being of the employee in the school organization's success
             and process.
         7. It exhibits building of trust as fundamental support in the school system and collaboration to achieve a better working
             environment.
         8. It fosters positive culture that leads to fairness, value, respect, and honesty in the overall performance of leadership
             effectiveness.
         9. It helps in effective decision-making based on the needs of the school and employees in prioritizing the best interest
             and challenges situations.
         10. It promotes accountability requirements for integrity, decision and action to foster a sense of responsibility in the
             school organization.


IJMRA, Volume 8 Issue 06 June 2025                            www.ijmra.in                                             Page 3632

Epic Leadership Theory: Basis for School Management in the Higher Education Institutions (HEIs)
Consistency Leadership Theory
         Consistency Leadership Theory is playing a pivotal role in molding and shaping the quality of leadership in the school
system. It embraces the landscape of the educational system through a distributed leadership and collaboration model for
effective team management, instructional support, strategic vision, and emotional intelligence (Kurbanov, 2025, pp. 232-240). It
is focused on the following details:
         1. It cultivates and identifies significant leadership coherent to competency and framework school development.
         2. It analyzes team management and key leadership competency and effectiveness of the educational system.
         3. It influences trust, communication, and collaboration on conflict resolution, decision-making, instructional
             leadership, communication, strategic vision, and emotional intelligence necessary for team cohesion.
         4. It emerges on professional development trust to reinforce leadership impact in offering innovation insights and
             measurable outcomes.
         5. It underscores competency-based needs of leadership support and evaluation for professional development in the
             educational system.
         6. It reinforces the school improvement, imperative strategy in leading the school organization, leadership
             development, policy, and practice.
         7. It adheres to clear instructions and expectations in maintaining a predictable working environment, application of
             rules and policies to foster respect and trust, unity, and understanding.
         8. It embodies predictable consistency to align reliable action, beliefs, and values stability for an effective working
             environment.
         9. It improves individual behavior and expectation to understand consistency in action leading to orderly productive
             school setting and system.
         10. It enhances individual models and strong school culture for consistency framework to improve morale and boost
             overall effectiveness.

Statement of the Problem
    1. What is the description of EPIC leadership theory in the success management of the Higher Education Institutions in the
       area of
                 1.1 epic leadership,
                 1.2 passion leadership,
                 1.3 integrity leadership, and
                 1.4 consistency leadership?
    2. Is there a significant correlation on the description of EPIC leadership theory in the success management of the Higher
       Education Institutions as observed by the respondents?

Hypothesis
        There is a significant correlation on the description of EPIC leadership theory in the success management of the Higher
Education Institutions as observed by the respondents.

RESEARCH DESIGN
         The study employs the descriptive quantitative research design in measuring the EPIC leadership theory as a description
in the success management of the Higher Education Institutions in the area of excellence leadership, passion leadership, integrity
leadership, and consistency leadership. It also quantifies the significant correlation on the description of EPIC leadership theory in
the success management of the Higher Education Institutions as observed by the respondents. Indeed, descriptive quantitative
research design is an empirical and systematic approach in understanding the cornerstone of scientific approach in the complex
various disciplines and phenomena particularly in EPIC leadership theory school system and setting. It describes the condition and
characteristics of the data analysis in various variables as to excellence, passion, integrity, and consistency (Cao, et al. 2024, pp.
54-68).

Respondents of the Study
           The subjects of the study are the professional leaders in the various Higher Education Institutions (HEIs) in both public
and private sectors. The respondents are topped based on the predefined criteria set by the researchers. The respondents must
be head, coordinators, leaders, and managers in the educational system. They are employed for at least one year and above to
critically evaluate the variables of the study as to the EPIC leadership theory of excellence, passion, integrity, and consistency. It


IJMRA, Volume 8 Issue 06 June 2025                             www.ijmra.in                                              Page 3633

Epic Leadership Theory: Basis for School Management in the Higher Education Institutions (HEIs)
aims to identify the function of a leader in the school setting. It develops strategy and designs management data collection to
ensure reliability and validity of the study under investigation (Bussola, et al. 2024, pp. 31-42). The study comprised thirty (30)
respondents only.

Sampling Techniques
          Purposive sampling is employed in the selection of the sample population of the study. It is non-probability and
convenient in the process of selecting the sample and population size. This is to provide enough evidence and concrete analysis
of the study. It is focused on data analysis through statistical treatment. It is defined to gather intentional selection of specific unit
relevance to the question to be analyzed in the study. It engages insights and deep knowledge criteria for the process of sampling
techniques phenomena. It offers advantage to the ability of the target sample size, flexibility, and cost efficiency. It explores
concepts in the non-probability sampling process framework and application (Ahmad, & Wilkins, 2024, pp. 1-19).

RESULTS
 1. What is the description of EPIC leadership theory in the success management of the Higher Education Institutions in the
     area of epic leadership, passion leadership, integrity leadership, and consistency leadership among the respondents?
Table 1. Excellence Leadership Theory Among the Respondents
        Indicators                                                                                 WM    I       R
          1. It prepares effective leaders for high performing functions to establish leadership 3.38    MA      9.5
              practice, roles, and functions in the school setting.
          2. It provides strong outcomes and evidence based on the mission, vision, and core 4.10        A       5.5
              values of the school standards.
          3. It designs various approaches for competency standard output development 4.20               SA      3
              leadership skills and attributes to fulfill aspiration in the educational system.
          4. It explores potential school leaders and influences high performance 4.00                   A       7
              management success in the educational system.
          5. It establishes a shared mission, vision, core values, and goals translated to guide 3.38    MA      9.5
              daily decision making and transparency.
          6. It empowers leaders through trust and autonomy, responsibility, professional 4.23           SA      1.5
              development, new knowledge, skills, and collaboration to foster leadership
              function.
          7. It fosters inclusive and positive culture supported with respect and belonging, 4.18        A       4
              equity, diversity, inclusion, and positive relationship in the educational system.
          8. It prioritizes well-being of employees in the organization through a supportive 4.10        A       5.5
              safe environment, success, and potentials.
          9. It analyzes and evaluates adaptable and strategic leadership decision-making 3.91           A       8
              data driven, change management, and strategic planning.
          10. It builds a strong foundation of effective leaders in focusing the function and role 4.23  SA      1.5
              impact of the school success essential world of the educational system.
        Average Weighted Mean                                                                      3.971 A
        Standard Deviation                                                                         0.327

         It shows that rank 1 is shared by the two indicators which are “It empowers leaders through trust and autonomy role,
responsibility, professional development, new knowledge, skills, and collaboration to foster leadership function” and “It builds
strong foundation of effective leader in focusing the function and role impact of the school success essential world of educational
system”, with a weighted mean of 4.23 or Strongly Agree which means that Excellence Leadership Theory is highly observed among
the respondents. Rank 2 is “It designs various approaches for competency standard output development leadership skills and
attributes to fulfill aspiration in the educational system”, with a weighted mean of 4.20 or Strongly Agree which means that
Excellence Leadership Theory is highly observed among the respondents. Rank 3 is “It fosters inclusive and positive culture
supported with respect and belonging, equity, diversity, inclusion, and positive relationship in the educational system”, with a
weighted mean of 4.18 or Agree which means that Excellence Leadership Theory is observed among the respondents. The least in
rank is shared by the two indicators which are “It prepares effective leader for high performing function to establish leadership
practice, roles, and functions in the school setting” and “It establishes a shared mission, vision, core values, and goals translated

IJMRA, Volume 8 Issue 06 June 2025                               www.ijmra.in                                               Page 3634

Epic Leadership Theory: Basis for School Management in the Higher Education Institutions (HEIs)
to guide daily decision making and transparency”, with a weighted mean of 3.38 or Moderately Agree which means that Excellence
Leadership Theory is limited among the respondents. The overall average weighted mean is 3.971 (SD=0.327) or Agree in the area
of Excellence Leadership Theory as observed among the respondents.

Table 2. Passion Leadership Theory Among the Respondents
        Indicators                                                                                 WM      I      R
       1. It describes professional effective leadership engagement, preventing burnout, and       4.16    A      3.5
            individual well-being.
       2. It fosters strategies to support the needs of individual employees in the                3.92    A      6.5
            organization to enhance self-care, engagement strategies, and psychological
            support.
       3. It emphasizes support on professional needs and development of a leader to               3.37    A      9.5
            improve satisfaction and success of the school organization.
       4. It lessens burnout, improves individual satisfaction in aiming the vision, mission,      4.00    A      5
            and core values of the school in a sustainable development process.
       5. It exhibits commitment and involvement leadership in the school setting creative         3.87    A      8
            engagement and positive environment educational system.
       6. It leads to clear vision commitment in effective communication transparency in the       4.16    A      3.5
            school system.
       7. It inspires and motivates leadership to foster shared responsibility and purpose for     4.21    SA     1.5
            effective management success in the school system.
       8. It creates a positive culture engagement environment for a safe and supportive           3.92    A      6.5
            working system in promoting collaboration and culture respect among individuals.
       9. It recognizes the contribution and achievement of individuals in the organization        3.37    MA     9.5
            to motivate better success and progress in the school organization.
       10. It focuses on building strong relationships to maintain rapport in fostering sense of   4.21    SA     1.5
            belonging in the organizational success and development.
        Average Weighted Mean                                                                      3.919   A
        Standard Deviation                                                                         0.315

         It shows that rank 1 is shared by the two indicators which are “It inspires and motivates leadership to foster shared
responsibility and purpose for effective management success in the school system” and “It focuses on building strong relationship
to maintain rapport in fostering sense of belonging in the organizational success and development”, with a weighted mean of 4.21
or Strongly Agree which means that Passion Leadership Theory is highly observed among the respondents. Rank 2 is also shared
by the two indicators which are “It describes professional effective leadership engagement, preventing burnout, and individual
well-being” and “It leads to clear vision commitment in effective communication transparency in the school system”, with a
weighted mean of 4.16 or Agree which means that Passion Leadership Theory is observed among the respondents. Rank 3 is “It
lessens burnout, improves individual satisfaction in aiming the vision, mission, and core values of the school in a sustainable
development process”, with a weighted mean of 4.00 or Agree which means that Passion Leadership Theory is observed among
the respondents. The least in rank is shared by the two indicators which are “It emphasizes support on professional needs and
development of a leader to improve satisfaction and success of the school organization” and “It recognizes the contribution and
achievement of individuals in the organization to motivate better success and progress in the school organization”, with a
weighted mean of 3.37 or Moderately Agree which means that Passion Leadership Theory is limited among the respondents. The
overall average weighted mean is 3.919 (SD=0.315) or Agree in the area of Passion Leadership Theory as observed among the
respondents.

Table 3. Integrity Leadership Theory Among the Respondents
        Indicators                                                                                 WM      I      R
          1. It influences the integration of innovative approaches to leadership competency       4.05    A      4
              in the educational system or school setting.



IJMRA, Volume 8 Issue 06 June 2025                           www.ijmra.in                                             Page 3635

Epic Leadership Theory: Basis for School Management in the Higher Education Institutions (HEIs)
         2.  It platforms improved leadership effectiveness to prevent various issues in the        3.83     A        8
             school setting for both employees and administrators.
         3. It enhances support, decision-making, information, and resource efficiency of           4.00     A        5
             sustainable management and integrity leadership style achievement of
             innovation, adaptability, and inclusivity.
         4. It contributes to supporting sustainable design leadership strategy and                 3.91     A        7
             achievement insights in addressing the globalized challenges in the educational
             system.
         5. It demonstrates school leadership integrity, interaction, decision, moral               3.38     MA       9.5
             responsibility, fairness, and honesty.
         6. It fosters positive culture, trust, and enhances the well-being of the employee in      4.20     SA       1.5
             the school organization success and process.
         7. It exhibits building of trust as fundamental support in the school system and           3.38     MA       9.5
             collaboration to achieve a better working environment.
         8. It enhances strong relationships that lead to fairness, value, respect, and honesty     4.20     SA       1.5
             in the overall performance of leadership effectiveness.
         9. It helps in effective decision-making based on the needs of the school and              3.96     A        6
             employees in prioritizing the best interest and challenges situations.
         10. It promotes accountability requirements for integrity, decision and action to          4.11     A        3
             foster a sense of responsibility in the school organization.
        Average Weighted Mean                                                                       3.902    A
        Standard Deviation                                                                          0.299

          It shows that rank 1 is shared by the two indicators which are “It fosters positive culture, trust, and enhances well-being
of the employee in the school organization success and process” and “It enhances strong relationships that lead to fairness, value,
respect, and honesty in the overall performance of leadership effectiveness”, with a weighted mean of 4.20 or Strongly Agree
which means that Integrity Leadership Theory is highly observed among the respondents. Rank 2 is “It promotes accountability
requirements for integrity decision and action to foster a sense of responsibility in the school organization”, with a weighted mean
of 4.11 or Agree which means that Integrity Leadership Theory is observed among the respondents. Rank 3 is “It influences the
integration of innovative approaches to leadership competency in the educational system or school setting”, with a weighted
mean of 4.05 or Agree which means that Integrity Leadership Theory is observed among the respondents. The least in rank is
shared by the two indicators which are “It demonstrates school leadership integrity interaction, decision, moral responsibility,
fairness, and honesty” and “It exhibits building of trust as fundamental support in the school system and collaboration to achieve
better working environment”, with a weighted mean of 3.38 or Moderately Agree which means that Integrity Leadership Theory
is limited among the respondents. The overall average weighted mean is 3.902 (SD=0.299) or Agree in the area of Integrity
Leadership Theory as observed among the respondents.

Table 4. Consistency Leadership Theory Among the Respondents
        Indicators                                                                                  WM       I        R
       1. It cultivates and identifies significant leadership coherent to competency and            4.00     A        4.5
            framework school development.
       2. It analyzes team management and key leadership competency and effectiveness of            3.37     MA       9.5
            the educational system.
       3. It influences trust, communication, and collaboration on conflict resolution,             4.21     SA       1.5
            decision-making, instructional leadership, communication, strategic vision, and
            emotional intelligence necessary for team cohesion.
       4. It emerges on professional development trust to reinforce leadership impact in            3.81     A        6
            offering innovation insights and measurable outcomes.
       5. It underscores competency-based needs of leadership support and evaluation for            3.76     A        7
            professional development in the educational system.



IJMRA, Volume 8 Issue 06 June 2025                            www.ijmra.in                                                Page 3636

Epic Leadership Theory: Basis for School Management in the Higher Education Institutions (HEIs)
       6.  It reinforces the school improvement, imperative strategy in leading the school          3.68      A        8
           organization, leadership development, policy, and practice.
       7. It adheres to clear instructions and expectations in maintaining a predictable            4.21      SA       1.5
           working environment, application of rules and policies to foster respect and trust,
           unity, and understanding.
       8. It embodies predictable consistency to align reliable action, beliefs, and values         4.00      A        4.5
           stability for an effective working environment.
       9. It improves individual behavior and expectation to understand consistency in              3.37      MA       9.5
           action leading to orderly productive school setting and system.
       10. It enhances individual models and strong school culture for consistency framework        4.12      A        3
           to improve moral and boost overall effectiveness process.
       Average Weighted Mean                                                                        3.853     A
       Standard Deviation                                                                           0.312

         It shows that rank 1 is shared by the two indicators which are “It influences trust, communication, and collaboration on
conflict resolution, decision-making, instructional leadership, communication, strategic vision, and emotional intelligence
necessary for team cohesion” and “It adheres to clear instructions and expectations in maintaining predictable working
environment, application of rules and policies to foster respect and trust, unity, and understanding”, with a weighted mean of
4.21 or Strongly Agree which means that Consistency Leadership Theory is highly observed among the respondents. Rank 2 is “It
enhances individual model and strong school culture for consistency framework to improve morale and boost overall effectiveness
process”, with a weighted mean of 4.12 or Agree which means that Consistency Leadership Theory is observed among the
respondents. Rank 3 is also shared by the two indicators which are “It cultivates and identifies significant leadership coherent to
competency and framework school development” and “It embodies predictable consistency to align reliable action, beliefs, and
values stability for effective working environment”, with a weighted mean of 4.00 or Agree which means that Consistency
Leadership Theory is observed among the respondents. The least in rank is shared by the two indicators which are “It analyzes
team management and key leadership competency and effectiveness of the educational system” and “It improves individual
behavior and expectation to understand consistency in action leading to orderly productive school setting and system”, with a
weighted mean of 3.37 or Moderately Agree which means that Consistency Leadership Theory is limited among the respondents.
The overall average weighted mean is 3.853 (SD=0.312) or Agree in the area of Consistency Leadership Theory as observed among
the respondents.

2.   Is there a significant correlation on the description of EPIC leadership theory in the success management of the Higher
     Education Institutions as observed by the respondents?
Table 5. Test on the significant correlation on the description of EPIC leadership theory in the success management of the Higher
Education Institutions as observed by the respondents
         Test of Variables              Computed z value              Result                      Decision
             ● Excellence               38.03528179                   significant                 Rejects the HO
             ● Passion                  38.24552386                   significant                 Rejects the HO
             ● Integrity                39.08519637                   significant                 Rejects the HO
             ● Consistency              37.78177343                   significant                 Rejects the HO
         Two tailed test with a z critical value of ± 1.96 at 0.05 level of significant

         Table 5 presents the test of significant correlation on the description of EPIC leadership theory in the success
management of the Higher Education Institutions as observed by the respondents.
         It shows that the computed z values are higher than the z critical value of ± 1.96 at 0.05 level of significant. Therefore,
the correlation significantly rejects the hypothesis of the description of EPIC leadership theory in the success management of the
Higher Education Institutions as observed by the respondents.

DISCUSSION
       It shows that excellence empowers leaders through trust and autonomy, responsibility, professional development, new
knowledge, skills, and collaboration to foster leadership function. It builds a strong foundation of effective leaders in focusing the

IJMRA, Volume 8 Issue 06 June 2025                             www.ijmra.in                                                Page 3637

Epic Leadership Theory: Basis for School Management in the Higher Education Institutions (HEIs)
function and role impact of the school success on the essential world of the educational system (Mallillin, 2023, pp. 1-17). It
designs various approaches for competency standard output development leadership skills and attributes to fulfill aspiration in
the educational system. It explores to evaluate, try-out, and develop individual employees toward excellence in the educational
system. It develops components for the best practices in the school setting model and techniques to obtain excellence output and
performance of every individual worker. It includes leadership for academic excellence, empowerment, strategic planning, human
resource management for change (Mallillin, 2017, pp. 58-74). It serves as a fundamental cornerstone in cultivating people for
quality of life and fulfilling awareness programs and development in the educational system (Tiwong, et al. 2025, pp. 36-46). On
the other hand, excellence leadership fosters inclusive and positive culture supported with respect and belonging, equity,
diversity, and positive relationships in the educational system. It prepares effective leaders for high performing functions to
establish leadership practices, roles, and functions. It establishes a shared mission, vision, core values, and goals translated to
guide daily decision making and transparency. It pursues a well-established excellence in leadership that constrains resources and
inadequate leadership systems. It is a challenge for effective leadership in obtaining the best school system. It influences
transformational leadership school system engagement. It collaborates leadership strength, promotion, and capacity best
practices in the organization (Obadahun, 2025, pp. 111-119).
           Accordingly, passion in leadership inspires and motivates individuals to foster shared responsibility and purpose for
effective management success. It focuses on building strong relationships to maintain rapport in fostering a sense of belonging in
organizational success and development (Mallillin, & Lopez, 2024, pp. 97-108). It describes professional effective leadership
engagement, preventing burnout, and individual well-being. It deliberates to cultivate the skills and development of every leader.
It typifies the process and ingredients of leadership and imagination. It provides resilience to passion leadership function though
experiencing ups and downs. The behaviors and characteristics are necessary that need to be observed for ethics and values. It is
being a leader by demonstration and example. It provides multifaceted capability of leadership process in the school organization.
It is necessary to solve issues with passion and a privilege to create change and transformation in the organization (Gutmann, et
al. 2025). Similarly, passion in leadership provides clear vision commitment in effective communication transparency. It lessens
burnout, improves individual satisfaction in aiming the vision, mission, and core values of the school in a sustainable development
process. It emphasizes support on professional needs and development of a leader to improve satisfaction and success of the
school organization. It recognizes contribution and achievement of individuals to motivate better success and progress (Paraiso,
& Mallillin, 2025). It determines challenges in the school organization where passion for leadership is needed. It is a challenge to
passionate leadership. It guides the school system to articulate processes and plans that will respond to passion leadership through
demonstration and best examples (Alagasi, & Baguio, 2025, pp. 355-364).
           Certainly, integrity in leadership fosters positive culture, trust, and enhances the well-being of the employee's success
and process. It enhances strong relationships that lead to fairness, value, respect, and honesty in the overall performance of
leadership effectiveness. It promotes accountability requirements for integrity, decision and action to foster a sense of
responsibility. It signifies influences and fundamental principles of leadership and integrity in the educational setting and process
(Mallillin, & Paraiso, 2022). It examines the integrity process of the organization in enhancing positive outcome, ethical behavior,
and fostering trust. It cultivates the integrity of cultural collaboration. It addresses the challenges in promoting integrity and
diverse perspectives. Strategies and methods of leadership are enhanced through dialogues, ethics, and integration (Odoh, et al.
2025). Indeed, integration of leadership influences innovative approach competency in the educational system or school setting.
It demonstrates school leadership integrity, interaction, decision, moral responsibility, fairness, and honesty. It exhibits building
of trust as fundamental support in the school system and collaboration to achieve a better working environment. It offers standing
perception to provide necessary impact and decision making best practice in the school organization. It guides to assist proper
observation of integrity, performance and outcome of every leader. It empowers to create positive integrity development in the
school culture. It explores to appreciate strength, support, and educational framework initiative. It highlights positive transition
and effect in the focus of work, capacity, knowledge, and ability development integrity (Vogt, & Stoesz, 2025, pp. 1-14).
           Notably, compassion in leadership influences trust, communication, and collaboration on conflict resolution, decision-
making, instructional leadership, communication, strategic vision, and emotional intelligence necessary for team cohesion. It
adheres to clear instructions and expectations in maintaining a predictable working environment, application of rules and policies
to foster respect and trust, unity, and understanding. It enhances individual models and strong school culture for consistency
framework to improve morale and boost overall effectiveness. It responds to tough decisions in the organization for conflict
resolution and the likes. It stresses battles and transitions for a compassionate leader to assist with example and best practices
for the organization to make everybody happy and exciting. Compassion leadership is not an easy task because you cannot please
everybody in the organization. Set a good example, demonstrate the process and you will reap the reward of better leadership
(Marcel, & Kamalanabhan, 2025, pp. 257-288). Lastly, compassion in leadership cultivates and identifies significant coherent

IJMRA, Volume 8 Issue 06 June 2025                            www.ijmra.in                                              Page 3638

Epic Leadership Theory: Basis for School Management in the Higher Education Institutions (HEIs)
competency and framework school development. It embodies predictable consistency to align reliable action, beliefs, and values
stability for an effective working environment. It analyzes team management and key leadership competency and effectiveness
of the educational system. It improves individual behavior and expectation to understand consistency in action leading to orderly
productive school setting and system. It is a multi-disciplinary approach in the work services that supports individuals in the
organization. It connects with positive leadership, compassion and principles. It is a promising approach to pedagogy of positive
leadership. It describes incorporating compassion, leadership and opportunity intended outcome in the educational setting. It
sustains, promotes, and nurtures to engage for compassionate leadership and practices (Giroux, 2025, pp. 1-44).

CONCLUSION
          It shows that excellence empowers leaders through trust and autonomy, responsibility, professional development, new
knowledge, skills, and collaboration to foster leadership function. It also builds a strong foundation for effective leaders in focusing
the function and role impact of the school success essential world of the educational system where it designs various approaches
for competency standard output development leadership skills and attributes to fulfill aspiration in the educational system. This
includes fostering inclusive and positive culture supported with respect and belonging, equity, and diversity in the educational
system.
          It shows that passion inspires and motivates leadership to foster shared responsibility and purpose for effective
management success. It also focuses on building strong relationships to maintain rapport in fostering a sense of belonging in the
organizational success and development where it describes professional effective leadership engagement, preventing burnout,
and individual well-being that leads to clear vision commitment in effective communication transparency. This includes to lessen
burnout, improve individual satisfaction in aiming the vision, mission, and core values of the school in a sustainable development
process.
          It shows that integrity fosters positive culture, trust, and enhances the well-being of the employee in the school
organization's success and process. It enhances strong relationships that lead to fairness, value, respect, and honesty in the overall
performance of leadership effectiveness where it promotes accountability requirements for integrity, decision and action to foster
a sense of responsibility. This includes the influence of the integration of innovative approaches to leadership competency in the
educational system or school setting.
          It shows that compassion influences trust, communication, and collaboration on conflict resolution, decision-making,
instructional leadership, communication, strategic vision, and emotional intelligence necessary for team cohesion. It adheres to
clear instructions and expectations in maintaining a predictable working environment, application of rules and policies to foster
respect and trust, unity, and understanding where it enhances individual model and strong school culture for consistency
framework to improve morale and boost overall effectiveness. This includes to cultivate and identify significant leadership
coherent to competency and framework school development.

REFERENCES
    1) Adams, D., Yoon Mooi, A. N., & Muniandy, V. (2020). Principal leadership preparation towards high-performing school
       leadership in Malaysia. Asian Education and Development Studies, 9(4), 425-439.
    2) Ahmad, M., & Wilkins, S. (2024). Purposive sampling in qualitative research: A framework for the entire journey. Quality
       & Quantity, 1-19.
    3) Alagasi, D. D., & Baguio, J. B. (2025). Academically Challenging Environment and Passionate Leadership Qualities of
       Teachers in Public Elementary Schools. Asian Journal of Education and Social Studies, 51(1), 355-364.
    4) Andenoro, A. C., & Skendall, K. C. (2020). The national leadership education research agenda 2020–2025: Advancing the
       state of leadership education scholarship. Journal of Leadership Studies, 14(3), 33-38.
    5) Bussola, M., Cecconi, N., Donati, E., & Porciani, L. (2024). Respondents and non respondents to population and housing
       census: some strategies for data collection design in the era of low response rate and high response burden. An
       application of a decision tree model. Rivista Italiana di Economia Demografia e Statistica, 31-42.
    6) Cao, L., Shamsudin, M. F., & Hassim, A. A. (2024). Understanding the Key Types of Quantitative Research and Their
       Impact. Journal of Postgraduate Current Business Research, 9(1), 54-68.
    7) Cook, B. R. (2025). Exploring the Role of Professional Development in Reviving the Passion of Teaching: A Case Study.
    8) Don, Y., Raman, A., Daud, Y., Kasim, K., & Omar Fauzee, M. S. (2015). Educational leadership competencies and Malaysia
       education development plan 2013-2025. Humanities and Social Sciences Review, 4(3), 615-625.
    9) Giroux, S. (2025). Nurturing Positive Education Spaces Through Compassionate Systems Leadership. In Cultivating
       Flourishing Practices and Environments by Embracing Positive Education (pp. 1-44). IGI Global Scientific Publishing.

IJMRA, Volume 8 Issue 06 June 2025                              www.ijmra.in                                              Page 3639

Epic Leadership Theory: Basis for School Management in the Higher Education Institutions (HEIs)
   10) Gutmann, M., Kessler, O., & Seltmann, C. M. (2025). Dr Stephen Naicken and Fred Swaniker—“You must have
       imagination. You must have passion. You must have good values”—management and leadership education in the African
       context: Lessons from the African Leadership University. Management in Education, 08920206251335425.
   11) Jeffrey, R. K. (2025). How employee motivation, organizational culture, and leadership influence perceived organizational
       performance through job satisfaction. The American Journal of Management and Economics Innovations, 7(03), 1-7.
   12) Karadağ, E., & Sertel, G. (2025). The effect of educational leadership on students’ achievement: Cross-cultural meta-
       analysis research on studies between 2006 and 2024. Educational Management Administration & Leadership,
       17411432251327645.
   13) Kurbanov, M. U. (2025). School Leadership Competencies As A Foundation for Effective Team Management. Central Asian
       Journal of Social Sciences and History, 6(3), 232-240.
   14) Huang, H., Zhang, X., Tu, L., Peng, W., Wang, D., Chong, H., ... & Chen, H. (2025). Inclusive leadership, self-efficacy,
       organization-based self-esteem, and intensive care nurses’ job performance: A cross-sectional study using structural
       equation modeling. Intensive and Critical Care Nursing, 87, 103880.
   15) Mallillin, L. L. D. (2023). Educational system theory, concept, and framework. Asian J. Soc. Sci. Leg. Stud, 5(1), 1-17.
   16) Mallillin, L. L. D. (2017). Human resource management in selected higher education institutions (HEI): Towards enhancing
       employees’ work. International Journal of Advanced Research in Management and Social Sciences, 6(1), 58-74.
   17) Mallillin, L. L. D. (2023). Integrating Literacy Strategy in Uplifting Competency of Students: A Guide for Comprehensive
       Learning. The International Journal of Social Sciences and Humanities Invention, 10(07).
   18) Mallillin, L. L. D. (2024). Instructional teaching theory: Basis for effective teaching device in learning. Eureka: Journal of
       Educational Research, 2(2), 120-132.
   19) Mallillin, L. L. D. (2024). MALLILLIN MODEL THEORY OF LEARNING. European Journal of Education Studies, 11(12).
   20) Mallillin, L. L. D., Caday, A. T., & Canda, E. G. (2024). Integration of Leadership in an Organizational Context: A Perspective
       Tool for Management System. International Journal of Advanced Multidisciplinary Research and Studies, 4(3).
   21) Mallillin, L. L. D., & Laurel, R. D. (2022). Professional development system theory for quality education. European Journal
       of Education Studies, 9(8).
   22) Mallillin, L. L. D., & Lopez, W. H. (2024). Faculty Professional Development on Instructional Practices: Basis for Teaching
       Pedagogy. Guild of Educators in TESOL International Research Journal, 2(3), 97-108.
   23) Mallillin, L. L. D., & Lito & Mallillin, D. (2021). Job Satisfaction and Favorable Outcome on Teachers’ Work Performance:
       The Noblest Profession. Asian Journal of Education and Social Studies, 21(1), 17-28.
   24) Mallillin, L. L. D., & Paraiso, L. O. C. (2022). Suppressed Disciplinary Action for Faculties in the Academic Performance of
       Students. European Journal of Education Studies, 9(12).
   25) Obadahun, O. S. (2025). The Imperatives of Leadership and Academic Excellence in Nigerian University System. FUDMA
       Journal of Humanities, Social Science and Creative Arts, 1(AHBSI), 111-119.
   26) Odoh, J. N., Nwokwu, B. N., & Ogbuanya, P. C. (2025). THE ROLE OF INTEGRITY IN TEACHER EDUCATION PROGRAMS:
       PREPARING FUTURE EDUCATORS FOR ETHICAL CHALLENGES. UNIZIK JOURNAL OF EDUCATIONAL LAWS AND LEADERSHIP
       STUDIES, 1(2).
   27) Paraiso, L. O. C., & Mallillin, L. L. D. (2025). INFLUENCE OF STUDENT ORGANIZATION TOWARD MANAGEMENT
       DECISION. European Journal of Education Studies, 12(2).
   28) Richard Marcel, I., & Kamalanabhan, T. J. (2025). Leading with compassion: an inquiry into compassionate leadership of
       school principals that impact teacher attitudes and job performance. Management and Labour Studies, 50(2), 257-288.
   29) Sugiyanto, H. (2025). Leadership Styles, Quality of Education, and Educational Institution Management: A Systematic
       Review in the Perspective of Sustainable Education. Journal Corner of Education, Linguistics, and Literature, 4(3), 351-359.
   30) Tiwong, P., Wannapairo, S., & Werathummo, A. (2025). Development of Education Administration Model towards
       Excellence in the 21st Century for Thailand's Primary Schools. International Education Studies, 18(2), 36-46.
   31) Vogt, L., & Stoesz, B. M. (2025). Building on Strengths: Nurturing Cultures of Academic Integrity in Vocational and
       Polytechnic Education. In Academic Integrity in Vocational and Polytechnic Education (pp. 1-14). Springer, Cham.


                                    There is an Open Access article, distributed under the term of the Creative Commons
                                    Attribution – Non Commercial 4.0 International (CC BY-NC 4.0)
                                    (https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc/4.0/), which permits remixing, adapting and
                                    building upon the work for non-commercial use, provided the original work is properly cited.

IJMRA, Volume 8 Issue 06 June 2025                            www.ijmra.in                                              Page 3640