A SYSTEMATIC REVIEW OF PRINCIPALS LEADERSHIP
                          IDENTITY FROM 1993 TO 2019

                          Journal: Educational Management Administration & Leadership

                    Manuscript ID EMAL-2019-141.R2

               Manuscript Type: Original Article

                         Keyword: principal, identity, Leadership, systematic review

                                   There is growing interest in the role that principals play as school
                                   leaders. Exploring how principals build their professional leadership
                                   identity is crucial to understanding their influence on school
                                   performance. A systematic review was conducted to examine how
                                   educational leaders build their professional identity. Our objectives were:
                                   i) to identify the factors that determine how educational leaders build
                                   their professional identity; ii) to identify shared traits of educational
                                   leadership identity; and iii) to describe the implications that the results
                         Abstract: obtained may have for research and professional practice. A literature
                                   search on WOS, SCOPUS and ERIC yielded a total of 38 articles
                                   published in international journals. Thematic analysis was conducted
                                   using the Nvivo software package. Emerging topics include: leadership
                                   identity of school principals as the key to educational success; influence
                                   of politics and context on the construction of principals’ professional
                                   identity; race and gender-based barriers to the development of
                                   leadership identity; and the influence of experience, training, and
                                   transition on the construction of a professional leadership identity.




El copyright pertenece en exclusiva al editor.

Citación del artículo:

Cruz-González, C., Lucena, C., & Domingo, J. (2021). A systematic review of principals’ leadership identity from 1993 to 2019.
Educational Management Administration & Leadership, 49(1), 31-53. https://doi.org/10.1177/1741143219896053


This is an accepted version of an article published in Educational Management Administration & Leadership.

The final published version is available online at: https://doi.org/10.1177/1741143219896053

A SYSTEMATIC REVIEW OF PRINCIPALS LEADERSHIP IDENTITY FROM

                                      1993 TO 2019


Abstract


There is growing interest in the role that principals play as school leaders. Exploring how

principals build their professional leadership identity is crucial to understanding their

influence on school performance. A systematic review was conducted to examine how

educational leaders build their professional identity. Our objectives were: i) to identify

the factors that determine how educational leaders build their professional identity; ii) to

identify shared traits of educational leadership identity; and iii) to describe the

implications that the results obtained may have for research and professional practice. A

literature search on WOS, SCOPUS and ERIC yielded a total of 38 articles published in

international journals. Thematic analysis was conducted using the Nvivo software

package. Emerging topics include: leadership identity of school principals as the key to

educational success; influence of politics and context on the construction of principals’

professional identity; race and gender-based barriers to the development of leadership

identity; and the influence of experience, training, and transition on the construction of a

professional leadership identity.


Key words: principal, identity, leadership, systematic review.

Introduction


Research in the field of education has demonstrated that school leadership is crucial to

school and academic improvement (Day, Sammons, Leithwood, Hopkins, Gu, Brown and

Ahtaridou, 2011; Hallinger and Heck, 2010; Leithwood and Jantzi, 2008; Muijs and

Harris, 2006). Based on this finding, leadership in schools has become a priority in

education policies worldwide (CEPPE; Hartley, 2009; OECD, 2013; Pont, Nusche, and

Moorman, 2008; UNESCO-IIPE- IWGE, 2012).


International studies and reports identify differences in achievements based on the context

and environment. This effect demonstrates that school leadership is not approached from

a standard perspective, and that leadership is exercised differently by school leaders. Even

in similar contexts, different achievements are obtained, based on the way in which

leadership is approached. This phenomenon suggests that there are other personal,

cultural, and identity factors at stake in the exercise of school leadership.


In this regard, a number of studies have been conducted to better understand the concept

of "professional identity", including its construction and development and the factors that

either hinder or help the transition towards school leadership (Akkerman and Meijer,

2011; Dubar, 2002). The results of these studies may shed light on how school leaders

build a professional identity that drives them to exercise school leadership.


A third strand has emerged on the identification of personal qualities and professional

competencies generic to effective school leaders of the International Successful School

Principalship Project (ISSPP) coordinated by Christopher Day. This project has

encouraged a series of research studies focused on the building of professional leadership

identity in successful school leaders (Aas and Vavick, 2015; Crow, Day and Møller, 2017;

Ritacco and Bolívar, 2018; Robertson, 2017; Sinha and Hanuscin, 2017).

This emerging topic encouraged us to conduct a systematic literature review (SLR) on

professional leadership identity in school leaders at international level. Our objective was

to identify relevant findings that answer the following research questions:


       What are the characteristics of studies on leadership identity in school leaders?

       What are the primary factors that determine the building of a leadership identity

       in school leaders?

       What implications may the findings have for professional practice?


This review adopted a systematic approach to include international literature on

professional identity and leadership in principals (Hallinger, 2013). The process of

searching and selecting thematically relevant studies resulted in the review of 38 articles

indexed in three databases (WOS, Scopus, and ERIC), between 1993 and 2019. By

outlining the international perspective, this study provides relevant points of interest and

future lines of research that have emerged on the basis of our included studies.



To facilitate the understanding of the findings, we have structured the results into two

blocks with their corresponding subsections: general description of the studies and

emerging topics. Subsequently, a discussion was advanced using the findings from

relevant research on this subject. Finally, we end with some concluding observations.

Theoretical framework


Numerous studies have emphasized the association between school leadership and school

improvement (Hallinger and Heck, 2010; Thoonen, Sleegers, Oort and Peetsma, 2012;

Muijs and Harris, 2006; Bush, 2009). Several international reports (OECD, 2013,

UNESCO-IIPE- IWGE, 2012) support the idea that educational quality stems from

transformational processes where school leaders are assigned a major role. The evidence

demonstrates that scant attention is paid to professional leadership in some countries –as

documented by Rhodes and Brundrett (2007). Based on current evidence, on-going

educational reforms are focused on the building of professional leadership identity, which

is considered to be a determinant of successful teaching practices (Leithwood and Jantzi,

2008; Soini, Pietarinen and Pyhalto, 2016; Scribner and Bradley-Levine, 2010; Brezicha,

Bergmark and Mitra, 2015).


With regard to school leadership, school leaders have been observed to play a critical role

due to their organizational (Schleicher, 2012) and political involvement (Crow, Day and

Møller, 2016). High expectations have emerged regarding the role of school principals,

who are considered key to school improvement (Cowie and Crawford, 2008). Evidence

has been provided of the ability of principals to gain the commitment of school members

to a shared vision for their school (Urick and Bowers, 2014). This idea is supported by

Botha (2006), who identified some of the abilities required for the exercise of school

leadership, namely: "to convince, inspire, bind and direct followers to realize common

ideals"(p. 342).


This is why being a principal and exercising school leadership is a complex task that

involves the development of professional pedagogy skills. Consequently, these

competences are influenced by factors of both an external and internal origin that make

management work even more difficult. It is also relevant to refer to “cross-cultural

leadership” (Dickson et al. 2012) because the expectations of the management role vary

according to the existing school culture in each territory. Each context and culture

incorporates important nuances in the conceptualization of school management. Thuse,

these are named differently according to the country (i.e. head teacher, headmaster,

principal), emphasizing roles of "head", "responsible", "first authority", "chief" or

"leader."

In addition, it is key to mention the evolution, in the last decade, of the term "Educational

Administration" towards the concept of "Educational Management, Administration and

Leadership" in various countries, such as the United Kingdom and some parts of Europe.

This evolution has provided a greater vision of leadership in the school organization,

rebuilding the professional identity of the school principal (Bush, 2019).

Some barriers to the development of a professional leadership identity include the burden

of paperwork that is imposed on principals, which diverts them from pursuing

pedagogical goals (Ritacco and Bolivar, 2018; OECD, 2013; Bush, 2018). This limitation

is closely related to the growing culture of accountability, which is gaining ground in

European education policies (Connolly, Milton, Davies and Barrance, 2018). Other

influential factors include gender (Rusch and Marshall, 2006; Coleman, 2000; Pont et al.,

2008; Crow, Day and Møller, 2016), experience (Mpungose, 2010; Cardno and Youngs,

2013) or the lack of support and commitment of school members (Galdames, Montecinos,

Campos, Ahumada and Leiva, 2018; Rhodes, Brundrett and Nevill, 2009).


School performance improves when leadership is successfully exercised by the principal

(Cowie and Crawford, 2008). Yet, as Thomson (2009) observed, school leadership is

more than simply a way to do things, it is also a way to be and understand the world" (p.

1). In this regard, investigations into leadership require the collection of data on

principals, understanding what they think, feel, and believe beyond their actions, which

involves studying leadership identity (Sugrue, 2015). In brief, there are major reasons

for deepening our understanding of the self in school leadership (Robertson, 2017). These

studies resulted in the emergence of the term leadership identity (Sinha and Hanuscin,

2017; Aas and Vavick, 2015).


The “self” is ambiguous and is composed of a constant flow of multiple identities (Møller,

2012; Scribner and Crow, 2012). According to Ricoeur (1992), "selfhood" can be

understood as a narration containing all the components of story telling. It is difficult to

conceptualize 'identity', as it is not an objective reality and is developed based on self-

perception, which is in turn based on values, impulses, beliefs, traits, and experiences

with others (Ibarra, 1999; Slay and Smith, 2011).


The scientific literature includes different types of identity. For instance, Burke & Stets

(2009) categorize this into social identity, personal identity, and role. Other approaches

criticize this static conception, focusing on the interaction between these dimensions

(Thoits and Virshup, 1997). Identity represents a concept that is of a changing and

unstable nature. Therefore, it is in constant negotiation, since the contexts that involve the

individual are varied.

In the present article our focus will primarily be centred on the issue of professional

identity. In relation to this concept, Crow, Day and Møller (2017) associate this with

professional and personal aspects. According to Dubar (2000), identity can be defined as

the result of personal interactions along with the social, cultural, and organizational

context. This means that identity cannot be separated from personal relations and the

environment, which are always subject to the influence of historical and cultural factors

(Baumeister, 1986; Trede, Macklin and Bridges, 2012; Wenger, 1998). In this sense, "the

development of identity involves a dual process: identity for oneself and identity for

others" (Dubar, 2000; Ricoeur, 1996), and it takes a long time to construct and develop

an identity. Therefore, professional identity is not static, but is instead constantly

changing and transient (Day, Elliot, and Kington, 2005; Reay andBall, 2000).

Professional identity is in a continual state of development. Individuals are constantly

reflecting on the changes that occur around them, and these reflections drive them to

develop an identity based on the way they interpret their autobiographic story (Ricoeur,

1996). In this regard, the professional identity of principals is in constant evolution as

they adapt to the different barriers, challenges, and experiences they face. These barriers

may include political, social and cultural changes, their race, gender or their personal

experiences. But professional identity can also be consciously changed, as stated by

Robertson (2017) "... as a result of learning processes and reflections about oneself."

Thus, all subjects have the ability to improve their personal and professional

competence". Guskey and Yoon (2009) observed that professional development requires

the successful implementation of new practices in the classroom. Successful practice —

which is made possible thanks to transient identity — is where the lessons learned are

integrated into professional identity, and where individuals learn to adopt positive

thinking and are able to control emotions.




Methods


This study is a systematic literature review (Petticrew and Roberts, 2006; Gough, 2007;

Hallinger, 2013, 2014). Our primary purpose is to construct a qualitative synthesis of

research hotspots in the field of leadership identity in school principals. To this end, we

conducted an exploratory review of the literature to identify the objectives, context, and

design of studies within this field (Hallinger and Bryant, 2013). We also explored

emerging topics and avenues for future research and practice (De Vries, Bekkers and

Tummers 2015; Voorberg, Bekkers and Tummers 2015).


         Inclusion and Exclusion Criteria


The key criteria for identifying the selected studies were based on those used in other

systematic reviews (i.e. Castillo and Hallinger, 2017), including: thematic adequacy,

time period, and type of source. A set of inclusion and exclusion criteria were used in

our literature search on Web of Science (WOS), SCOPUS and ERIC as follows:



Table 1. Inclusion and Exclusion Criteria


 Inclusion criteria

 Studies published in the WOS, SCOPUS and ERIC databases resulting from the pre-

 established search equations.

 Studies that were published in either a review or article format

 Relevant topic that may answer our research questions and goals

 School-centred studies

 Studies addressing the role of school principals.

 Scientific studies on the following areas and research domains:

     -    In SCOPUS: studies labelled within the research domain "Social Sciences".

     -    In WOS: studies labelled in the field of research “Education, Educational Research”

 Exclusion criteria

 Not meeting inclusion criteria




         Search strategy

A literature search was conducted using WOS, SCOPUS and ERIC to identify articles

relevant to our SLR. In order to provide rigour to our search process, we proceeded to

establish keywords extracted from the ERIC thesaurus (Hertzberg and Rudner, 1999).

The keywords used in our search equation were: professional identity AND leadership

AND principal OR head teacher1. Table 2 provides data on our search strategy


Table 2. Strategy used in our literature search


    Data base            Key words used                                         Articles         Articles

    searched                                                                    identified       included

                                                                                after the

                                                                                application of

                                                                                selection

                                                                                criteria

    Web of Science       TS= ((“professional identity”) AND (principal OR              46            16

    (WOS)                head teacher) AND (leadership))




    ERIC                 (“Professional identity”) AND (principal OR head              50            13

                         teacher) AND (leadership)

    Scopus               TITLE-ABS-KEY("professional identity") AND                    27            9

                         TITLE-ABSKEY(

                         Principal OR head teacher) AND TITLE-ABS-

                         KEY(leadership)

    Total                                                                             123            38




Below are the stages of the literature search of our systematic review.



1    This key word was added because it is used in various countries to refer to the principal

Figure 1. Flow chart of stages of literature search


       Data extraction and quality assessment


The process of including the studies in our SLR was carried out through peer review

(Sarthou 2016). We proceeded to read the articles returned by our search to identify only

those that were relevant to our research questions and goals. Of the 42 articles returned,

we selected 38. In this phase, the reason for exclusion of these studies was thematic

inadequacy in relation to our issue of study.


Thematic analysis of the selected studies was carried out by the qualitative analysis

software Nvivo, to identify the "topical focus" of the included literature. The emerging

thematic categories were shared and agreed upon by three researchers, in order to ensure

the coherence of this codification.




Results


This section begins with a synthesis of the research purposes and the contexts and studies

included in our systematic review. An overview of the temporal evolution of scientific

production in the selected databases is also provided. Subsequently, we present an

analysis of the “emerging topics” found in the review. A general overview of the 38

articles included revealed the emerging hotspots of research on principal professional

identity and school leadership.




   General description of the studies

   Objectives and research questions


The studies included had a variety of objectives, which can be synthesized into two core

objectives:


Firstly, the general objective of many studies was to understand the process of developing,

negotiating and construction of professional leadership identity (Boris-Schacter and

Merrifield, 2000; Connolly, Milton, Davies and Barrance, 2018; Crow, Day and Møller,

2016; Miller, Potter, Bennett, Carter, Hylton-Fraser, WilliamsonTeape and Nelson-

Mayne, 2015; Johnson, 2017; Rayner, 2018; Ritacco and Bolivar, 2018; Robertson, 2017;

Spies and Heystek, 2015). The prevailing theme of these articles was to address gender

and race-based barriers to the development of leadership identity in school leaders

(Amstrong and Mitchell, 2017; Arar and Shapira, 2016; Hernández and Murakami, 2016;

Jones, 2017; Lya, Faraj and Wubbels, 2002; Mendez-Morse, Murakami, Byrne-Jiménez

and Hernández, 2015; Murakami and Tornsen, 2017; Nickens and Washington, 2017;

Watts, 1998). Other authors such as Bredeson (1993), Mpungose (2010), Notman (2017),

Stamopoulos (2012) or St-Pierre (2005), also examined the factors that determine the

development of leadership identity and practice.


Secondly, a shared objective was to evaluate the ability of school leaders to influence the

school community (Carpenter, Bukoski, Berry and Mitchell, 2017; Mifsud, 2015; Payne

and Smith, 2018; Rigby, 2015; Toure and Dorsey, 2018; Montecinos, 2018). These

studies were aimed at examining the influence that school principals may exert on pupils

and teachers and how the way in which they exercise leadership may support or prevent

discriminatory actions and perpetuate stereotypes in school. For them, all of these studies

pointed to the need for a leadership identity.

Other studies focused on the issues of professional development and training to achieve

a professional leadership identity (Maguire & Braun, 2019; Greer, Searby and Thoma,

2015; Rhodes, Brundrett and Nevill, 2009). Furthermore, studies such as Montecinos,

Bush and Aravena (2018) examined how professional experiences influenced the

development of professional identity. Literature included in this review (Browne-

Ferrigno, 2003; Connolly, Milton, Davies and Barrance, 2018; Rhodes & Brundrett,

2006; Simon, Dole & Farragher, 2019; Wallace, 1996). analyzed key factors in the

transition to principalship.


Notably, all studies highlighted the need to comprehend the professional identity of

school leaders in order to understand their leadership practices.


       Context and study designs


In relation to the geographical distribution of studies, twelve studies had been conducted

in the USA and nine in the UK. This means that studies in this field are largely conducted

in Anglo-saxon countries. Other countries included: Canada, Spain, Sweden, Israel,

Malta, South Africa, Australia, Jamaica, Chile and Lebanon.


Study participants were mainly school principals, whilst other stakeholders such as

teachers, families, pupils, and others participated in some studies.


Most studies were qualitative, of which only three employed a mixed design (Lya, Faraj

and Wubbels, 2002; Montecinos, Bush and Aravena, 2018; Rhodes, Brundrett and Nevill,

2009), and only one study was quantitative (Greer, Searby and Thoma, 2015). Ten studies

were case studies, of which eighteen (Arar and Shapira, 2016; Bahous, Busher and

Nabhani, 2016; Boris-Schacter and Merrifield, 2000; Bredeson, 1993; Browne-Ferrigno,

2003; Carpenter, Bukoski, Berry and Mitchell, 2017; Maguire and Braun, 2019; Mendez-

Morse, Murakami, Byrne-Jiménez and Hernández, 2015; Mifsud, 2015; Miller et al.

2015; Notman, 2017; Rayner, 2018; Rhodes and Brundrett, 2006; Rigby, 2015; Ritacco

and Bolivar, 2018; Riveros, Verret and Wei, 2016; Simon, Dole and Farragher, 2019; St-

Pierre ,2005; Toure and Dorsey, 2018; Wallace, 1996; Watts, 1998) were based on semi-

structured interviews with school principals and other school members. In some studies,

data collection was also based on participant observation (Rigby, 2015; Toure and

Dorsey, 2018), focus groups (Nickens and Washington, 2017) or documentary analysis

(Mifsud, 2015; Riveros, Verret and Wei, 2016). Four studies used the method based on

"life stories" (Johnson, 2017; Mpungose, 2010; Spies and Heystek, 2015; Hernández and

Murakami, 2016)


        Growth Trajectory of the Literature on leadership identity in principals


We found that a total of 38 articles on professional leadership identity in leaders had

accumulated in recent decades. Table 3 shows the growth trajectory of the included

literature, which began with the publication of an article in 1993. From that date until

2015 there is no significant growth. After that year, the number of publications

increases steadily, reaching its maximum in 2017. However, it must be noted that this

data does not represent all the knowledge published on leadership identity in principals.

Only articles published in journals indexed in the WOS, ERIC and Scopus databases

were taken into consideration in this review.

Table 3. Growth Trajectory of the literature search

 1993   Bredeson (1993)

 1994   -

 1995   -

 1996   Wallace (1996)

1997   -

1998   Watts (1998)

1999   -

2000   Boris-Schacter and Merrifield (2000)

2001   -

2002   Lya, Faraj and Wubbels (2002)

2003   Browne-Ferrigno (2003).

2004   -

2005   St-Pierre (2005)

2006   Rhodes and Brundrett (2006)

2007   -

2008   -

2009   Rhodes, Brundrett and Nevill (2009)

2010   Mpungose (2010)

2011   -

2012   Stamopoulos (2012)

2013   -

2014   -

2015   Greer, Searby and Thoma (2015); Mendez-Morse, Murakami, Byrne-Jiménez andHernández (2015);

       Mifsud (2015); Miller et al. (2015); Rigby (2015); Spies and Heystek (2015)

2016   Arar and Shapira (2016); Bahous, Busher and Nabhani (2016); Crow, Day and Møller (2016);

       Hernández and Murakami (2016); Riveros, Verret and Wei (2016)

2017   Amstrong and Mitchell (2017); Carpenter, Bukoski, Berry and Mitchell (2017); Johnson (2017);

       Jones (2017); Notman (2017); Murakami and Tornsen (2017); Nickens and Washington (2017):

       Notman (2017); Robertson (2017)

2018   Connolly, Milton, Davies and Barrance (2018); Montecinos, Bush & Aravena (2018); Montecinos,

       Bush and Aravena (2018); Payne and Smith (2018); Rayner (2018); Ritacco and Bolivar (2018);

       Toure and Dorsey (2018)

2019   Maguire and Braun (2019); Simon, Dole and Farragher (2019)

        Emerging topics


After identifying the purposes of the included studies, the research contexts, and the trends over

time, we turn to an analysis of the "topical focus" found in this review. In Annex 1 the central

theoretical terms of the studies included in our review are shown in order to explain how the

authors place their research focus on the professional identity of leaders. From this, we classify

the articles into four central categories. The first category focused on the relationship between

leadership identity in principals and school success. The second category evaluates the political-

contextual influence on the construction of the principals’ identity. Influence of race and gender

in the development of leadership identity were grouped into the third category, whilst in the

fourth category, the central themes were experience, training, and transition.


        Leadership identity of school principals as the key to school success


In this review, several studies examine how leaders conceptualize their leadership

identity. The development of a leadership identity in school principals was identified in

several studies as being crucial to educational success. According to Ritacco and Bolivar,

successful leadership largely depends on leadership identities (Ritacco and Bolivar,

2018). In a similar vein, Crow, Day and Møller (2016) found that the sense of identity of

principals as educators with strong moral purposes is a critical antecedent and co-requisite

of their capacity for effective practices". Mpungose (2010) describe professional identity

as "the principals' source of influence".


Identity, as the researchers claim (Johnson; 2017; Robertson, 2017) is constructed not

only in an individual way, but also in such a way that society plays a decisive role in this

construction. This identity is subjective and social, implying a dual process: identity of

oneself and identity of others. So “No one can build their identity independently of the

identifications that others build about such identity” (Ritacco and Bolivar, 2018). A

successful leadership identity consists of multiple components, is subjectively (re) built

to adapt to the political and social context and results from interactions with others (Crow,

Day and Møller, 2016; Mpungose, 2010; Rigby, 2015; Ritacco and Bolivar, 2018).

Leadership identity is also determined by personal beliefs, values, and feelings (Boris-

Schacter & Merrifield, 2000; Crow, Day and Møller, 2016). Other authors such as St-

Pierre (2005), Lya, Faraj and Wubbels (2002) or Mpungose (2010) identified influential

factors in the development of leadership identity such as social dimension, and the

perceptions held by colleagues, the internal dimension (values and beliefs), individual

expectations about principalship, and professional experiences.

There is a consistent body of evidence to support the idea that leadership has a social

dimension. In this regard, relationships with the community have an influence on their

professional identity (Mpungose, 2010). How others perceive you plays a crucial role in

identity. Yet, this aspect has rarely been addressed directly in the literature. In some

studies, the perception of others was tackled briefly (Bahous, Busher and Nabhani, 2016;

Johnson, 2017; Mifsud, 2015; Miller et al., 2015; Rayner, 2018). The feedback that

principals receive when they interact with others (or when they visit other professional

contexts) is also an important contributory factor in their professional development

(Miller et al., 2015).


Certain studies incluided focus on the role expected of school leaders. A principal has to

feel that he/she identifies with principalship duties and functions. When a principal has a

weak leadership identity, others may not recognize their leadership, which could hinder

school achievement. In contrast, when principals have a strong professional leadership

identity and their leadership is widely recognized by the school staff, school performance

improves (Ritacco and Bolivar, 2018). According to these authors, principals with a

strong leadership identity create team spirit, gain staff commitment, and build a shared

vision for the school.

Another key aspect examined in our studies was to consider how their practices contribute

to school improvement. Notman (2017) aimed to gain knowledge regarding the

professional identity factors that are present in the role of the school leader and how to

use them to make a change throughout the school. These factors are both individual and

social, involving other educational agents such as the family, teachers, or department

heads. Thus, it is argued that, "the professional identity of each of the principals was

proven by a different set of cultural circumstances, where both principals had to establish

an identity of the" reliable leader "in the eyes of their new staff (Notman, 2017, p. 768).

For this reason, the studies highlight the need for a leadership identity in principals,

highlighting the importance of both the personal and professional dimensions, as well as

the influence of the educational community on the construction of such identity.



   a) Influence of politics and context in construction of principals professional identity


The evidence has consistently shown that political and contextual factors influence

leadership practices and are a source of concern among principals.


At the international level, a series of guidelines have been established on what is expected

of principals. In this regard, providing school principals with the tools to exercise

successful leadership is a common thread that runs through the different studies analysed

(Carpenter, Bukoski, Berry and Mitchell, 2017; Connolly, Milton, Davies and Barrance,

2018; Rayner, 2018; Riveros, Verret and Wei, 2016; Rhodes, Brundrett and Nevill, 2009).

Rayner (2018) identified some barriers to the successful exercise of educational

leadership, including accountability and meeting standards, which create an instable

environment. According to Riveros, Verret and Wei (2016), standards can be useful for

the evaluation and promotion of principals, but they are of no value for daily practice, as

they are a restriction to the exercise of their agency. In this vein, Spies and Heystek (2015)

observed a tendency to approach the education system from a mercantilist viewpoint,

where principals are overloaded with paperwork. These authors argue that the authorities

conceive principals as professionals who must meet a series of objectives and

requirements, being accountable for everything that frames their work and thus leaving

less space for their leadership role, and more for management tasks. “The principal is

bound in this process by the education authorities' objectives, and is held responsible for

ensuring that these goals are achieved in the core activities of the school” (p.443)

Connolly, Milton, Davies and Barrance (2018) concluded that the duties of principals

should be reorientated towards aspects related to professional practice. This would help

principals to exercise their agency and achieve professional development.


Mifsud (2015) and Maguire and Braun (2019) documented that educational leadership is

challenged by a number of factors that make some school actors invisible, thereby giving

principals "hidden" power.


When the educational context is ambiguous, principals find it difficult to adapt to their

environment. For these reasons, building a strong, assertive leadership identity is crucial

for improving performance in both teachers and students (Bahous, Busher and Nabhani,

2016). Rayner (2018) documented that creating a supportive, collaborative climate within

the school community is key to the adoption of transient identities that enable principals

to exercise school leadership. This view is supported by Notman (2017), who emphasized

that adopting an adaptive leadership style based on values, and building a strong

professional identity are crucial to the development of a leadership identity.


Therefore, the school context is an important determinant (Johnson, 2017; Bredeson,

1993), a notion that is supported by the evidence found in our review. Spies and Heystek

(2015) concluded that principals respond in unique ways to the peculiarities of their

school and the climate of support they find. Mpungose (2010) identified two determinants

in the development of leadership identity: an internal dimension and a social dimension.

The latter embraces other factors such as the professional culture of the school and

expectations about the role of the principal. These studies indicate that organizational

culture is key to successful leadership (Bahous, Busher and Nabhani, 2016).


Thus, the social and cultural context that surrounds the educational centre, the

characteristics of the educational team, and the ideals of the centre, are decisive in the

development of leadership that could result in improvement. In addition, the included

studies point to mercantilism, accountability and educational standards as relevant factors

— and in some cases duress — in building a strong professional identity in school

principals.

   b) Race- and gender-based barriers in the development of leadership identity


Principals often find race and gender-based barriers to the exercise of leadership, with

most authors being concerned about the difficulties encountered by female principals

when exercising leadership. Indeed, interest in gender-based difficulties in leadership has

grown in recent years (Amstrong and Mitchell, 2017; Jones, 2017; Murakami and

Tornsen, 2017; Nickens and Washington, 2017).


In this section, studies consider race and gender as influential factors in leadership

professional identity. To this end, authors relate these factors to the way in which diverse

leaders conceptualize their own identities. The literature shows that many female

principals have to renegotiate or rebuild their professional identity to adapt to a male-

dominated social and cultural environment (Amstrong and Mitchell, 2017). When

leadership positions are primarily held by men, female principals may feel forced to

change their leadership practices, agency, and professional identity. Female principals

"may inhabit several contradictory identities revealing qualities, characteristics and

leadership styles which diverge from socially prescribed gender-appropriate behaviours"

(Jones, 2017). Thus, according to Jones (2017), the professional identity of female leaders

may be socially pre-established beyond individual views.


On the other hand, some studies focused on how diverse leaders conceptualize their own

professional identities. Murakami and Tornsen (2017) found that female principals often

feel they are evaluated negatively even when they improve school performance.

According to these authors, this phenomenon is related to "the way in which female

principals are recruited, hired, and weighed when appraised". Further, these authors state

that a gender-based bias persists in the way female principals are perceived in the school

community, despite governmental efforts to create an egalitarian culture. These

difficulties are the result of the power of normalization of the patriarchy, which has hidden

administration and leadership policies aimed at marginalizing and excluding different

identities to control and hinder certain educational practices.


In addition to these evidently gender-based barriers, cultural and racial barriers are also

encountered. Gender and race-based discrimination has been addressed by numerous

authors (Amstrong and Mitchell, 2017; Arar and Shapira, 2016; Hernández and

Murakami, 2016; Mendez-Morse, Murakami, Byrne-Jiménez and Hernández, 2015;

Nickens and Washington, 2017), which often judge from a "racial lens" (Amstrong and

Mitchell, 2017).


Nickens and Washington (2017) investigated whether Afro-American principals can keep

their leadership identity and maintain their position. The authors found evidence that

Afro-American principals change their personality, manners or beliefs to pave their way

to principalship. These principals often feel socially and professionally isolated due to

gender and race-based barriers.


Finally, Payne and Smith (2018) Toure and Dorsey (2018) and Watts (1998) pointed out

the necessity of raising awareness about racial, gender, and sexual orientation-based

barriers in teacher and leadership training programs. In fact, School principals themselves

perpetuate stereotypes and discriminatory practices unconsciously, influencing

educational opportunities for students of color and for teacher (Toure and Dorsey, 2018).


The literature included addresses gender and race barriers, describing how female

principals must face challenging situations by rebuilding their identity and changing their

leadership and agency practices. This is due to socio-cultural factors that cause an

imbalance of power when they try to assume a leadership role in school management.

   c) Influence of experience, training and transition in the construction of a

       professional leadership identity


Some studies suggest that professional experience is a determinant in the development of

a leadership identity. Thus, Johnson (2017) demonstrated that critical professional

experiences drive principals to rebuild their social and professional identity, thereby

resulting in the development of a leadership identity


Montecinos, Bush and Aravena (2018) analysed potential differences between senior and

novice principals. The authors observed that novice principals found managing up (school

management aspects) more challenging, while senior principals found managing down

(aspects related to interaction with school staff) more difficult.


Rigby (2015) documented that previous experience and context are an advantage when

establishing a rapport and obtaining feedback from school members. In accordance with

Robertson (2017), "even longer-serving principals continue to transform their

professional identities as they manage emotions, make decisions, access professional

learning and interact with others." Therefore, experience is considered an "added value"

in the attainment of successful leadership practices (Mendez-Morse, Murakami, Byrne-

Jiménez and Hernández, 2015)


In their transition to principalship, principals transform and renegotiate their professional

identity. Connolly, Milton, Davies and Barrance (2018) warned about the difficulties

found in recruiting and retaining school principals. As a result, providing training to

school principals must be a priority. The study conducted by Murakami and Tornsen

(2017) demonstrates that this situation is the result of the way principals "are recruited,

hired, and weighed when appraised" (p. 808).


A number of studies have focused on educational leadership training and the professional

profile of school leaders (Greer, Searby and Thoma, 2015; Rhodes, Brundrett and Nevill,

2009), whilst other studies were centred mainly on “beginning principals” (Simon, Dole

& Farragher, 2019; Rhodes & Brundrett, 2006; Browne- Ferrigno, 2003; Wallace, 1996).

Greer, Searby and Thoma (2015) reported that training in the resolution of moral

problems should be improved. Future leaders generally prefer standard structured models

for the resolution of complex situations, thereby ignoring higher-level considerations

(post-conventional moral thought). Rhodes, Brundrett and Nevill (2009) and Simon, Dole

and Farragher (2019) described the positive influence of these training programs on

successful leadership. The authors also highlighted the necessity of creating professional

networks for school improvement (Rhodes and Brundrett, 2006). In this connection,

Rayner (2018) argues that principals with a strong professional identity create a trustful

and supportive climate in the school community by the adoption of identities based on

pedagogical leadership to achieve educational improvement. Improving school

performance does not only require changes at local level, but also at a national level based

on support from national entities and external organizations (Stamopoulos, 2012).

Becoming a principal entails a professional and identity transition. The studies included

in our review refer to the importance of a principal's education and training based on

educational leadership, along with the “professional experience” factor being decisive in

the consolidation of a “leader” identity.

Discussion


International research indicates that educational leadership is a key factor for educational

improvement in schools. For this reason, in recent decades, the knowledge production on

the professional identity of leadership has increased (Castillo and Hallinger, 2018; Crow,

Day and Moller, 2017; Cruz- González, Domingo and Lucena, 2019). The purpose of this

review was to analyse the scientific literature regarding the leadership identity of school

principals, in order to delve deeper into the characteristics presented in the selected

scientific output and the main themes of the included studies. In addition, we present the

implications of the findings of these studies for both professional practice and the

development of future lines of research.

       Interpretation of the findings


Firstly, the results of our SLR revealed that there has been a notable increase in scientific

production on this subject in the last decade. This is in agreement with other investigations

such as those of Hursh (2005), Leithwood and Jantzi (2000) or Gumus, Bellibas and

Gumus (2018), which indicate a prominent trend in these studies due to factors such as

globalization or accountability for educational improvement and therefore, the greater

value of leadership for achieving successful educational outcomes. Secondly, our findings

are also in accord with the current interest in the development of the professional identity

of teachers (Schutz, Hong, and Francis, 2018).

The results of our study have revealed a predominant scientific output from the United

States and the United Kingdom. In spite of this, in our review we can see how in recent

years, geographical diversity has increased with respect to this literature. This data

accords with the findings of studies such as that of Hallinger (2018), which argues that in

the last two decades, the literature on leadership and educational management has

expanded its borders outside the “traditional Anglo-American literature”.

Further, a description is provided of the relevant findings that were yielded by our SLR.

It is worth mentioning some of the methodological and theoretical aspects addressed in

the studies analysed.


One of our objectives was to identify determinants of leadership identity in school

principals. This aim led us to analyse the interplay among the complex components of

leadership identity. As previously mentioned, leadership identity is dynamic and

multidimensional, and therefore it should be approached from a holistic, hermeneutic

perspective.


This is the reason why most of the studies were qualitative, and only a few were

quantitative. The quantitative design is not suitable for understanding and interpreting the

experiences and symbolic elements that compose leadership identity, which has a

humanistic and social dimension that cannot be measured quantitatively. In contrast,

qualitative analysis is more appropriate for investigating leadership identity.


Some mixed-design studies focused on influential factors such as training and experience

(Rhodes, Brundrett and Nevill, 2009; Montecinos, Bush and Aravena, 2018). These

studies examined personal, professional, contextual and demographic variables such as

gender, ethnicity, and years of experience. In their quantitative study, Greer, Searby and

Thoma (2015) also used these variables to gather relevant information on decision-

making and problem-solving skills in candidates for principalship. Authors chose these

variables, since the literature has shown that these factors shape leadership identity in

principals.


Training for future principals is fundamental to the development of leadership identity.

(Payne and Smith, 2018; Simon, Dole and Farragher, 2019). It is necessary to train future

principals in their professional development and provide them with personal values

compatible with the professional standards and expectations projected in this role. In

general, only a few studies were found to focus on the education and training received by

future principals, which is a promising avenue for future research. Standard international

training programs do not meet the contextual and adaptive nature of educational

leadership, which should be addressed in the future.


Further, the perceptions and opinions of other school members also shape the professional

identity of principals. Yet, this aspect is not appropriately examined in the literature.

Further studies are needed in the future to address these aspects.


There is abundant evidence identifying educational leadership as key to student

performance. The role of students should also be examined in future studies in this field

of research. Numerous studies included teachers, deputy head teachers and student

families in their samples.


A large proportion of studies were based on interviews with key school actors

(principals). Interviews addressed aspects such as the impact of socio-political factors on

the professional identity of principals, which fits with the methodology proposed.

However, it is worth mentioning that some biases were identified resulting from the self-

report study design. As interviews were based on self-reports, data cannot be extrapolated

to other contexts, as they were provided in very specific contexts.

However, self-report interviews are very useful ways of gathering organizational and

sociological data in the area of education. The hermeneutic nature of this type of interview

facilitates the understanding and interpretation of professional and social experiences.


Evidence supports the strong impact of educational policies on the exercise of

principalship and in the development of a professional identity in principals.

Accountability has become an increasingly important feature of education policies in both

the USA and the United Kingdom, which is demonstrated by the evidence provided in

studies conducted in these countries. This approach is gaining popularity among

educational authorities, which limits the agency of school principals. Therefore, further

studies are needed to investigate whether accountability is a threat to the exercise of

successful leadership.


The results of our review are consistent with those of international reports (OECD, 2013,

2014) that identify educational leadership as key to student performance and

organizational culture. An example of this could be the study of Bahous, Busher &

Nabhani (2016). Their findings suggest that the organizational culture of the school plays

a decisive role in school improvement. In this way, assertive principals can create a strong

sense of community that promotes the development of positive identities and

improvement of student performance and motivation. Next, we analyse the

recommendations and guidelines provided by different authors in order to identify the

main lines of action proposed.


       Implications for educational authorities and professional practice


Evidence consistently shows that the development of professional identity is critical if

leadership is to be exercised successfully. A growing number of studies have been

published in recent years on professional identity in teachers (Notman, 2017). However,

the issue of leadership and professional identity in principals is now gathering interest.

This is supported by the McKinsey report on educational systems (Barber and Mourshed,

2007), which established an association between school leadership and school

performance. Despite the growing number of studies published on school leadership in

recent years, authors consistently claim that there is a need for studies that clearly identify

successful leadership practices (Orr et al., 2008). Further research, changes in educational

policy reforms and, new laws forcing structural changes are all needed to improve school

performance.


Another important theme drawn from our findings has been the barriers of gender and

race in the development of a leadership identity in principals. The studies analysed

identify barriers encountered by principals when building their leadership identity.

Female principals find it more difficult to gain school leadership. Principals are

predominantly male, which generates a male-dominated context. This is consistent with

the conclusions drawn from the TALIS 2013 (OECD, 2014) study, which revealed that

although teachers are primarily female, the position of principal is generally held by men.

Therefore, further studies should be conducted to examine female identities and to better

understand gender-based barriers to principalship. Schein (2001) explained that

management has historically been associated with men, whilst certain stereotypes persist

in relation to female managers. Jones (2017) concluded that educational policies should

be aware of stereotypes and fight against them for a more egalitarian society (Murakami

and Tornsen, 2017). Arar and Shapira (2016) recommended that we gain gain insight into

the development of professional identity in female leaders. Thus, society would become

aware of the on-going social changes, which would help to overcome gender-based

barriers. Murakami and Tornsen (2017) denounced the lack of support for the integration

of female principals and recommend that further research is conducted to better

understand "the specific expectations of each country". These studies would help raise

awareness among future generations.


Race-based barriers were also identified in the literature. Thus, culture and race are

influential factors in the development of identity. Some authors have coined the term

"democratic racism" (Henry, Rees and Tator, 2010). This term makes reference to the

perpetuation of race-based discriminatory patterns, despite governmental efforts to

promote equality. Future research should seek to assist in the development of racial

literacy in the educational context and the formulation of a theory on social justice (Toure

and Dorsey, 2018). It is necessary to place the focus on gender and race-based

"microaggressions" (Hernández and Murakami, 2016), which occur in school and pose a

threat to the successful exercise of leadership. To this end, principals should receive

suitable training adapted to the social context. This training should have a moral

component (Bebeau and Monson, 2008), where principals develop critical self-reflective

abilities (Notman, 2017). Payne and Smith (2018) added that the concepts of

heteronormativity and heterosexism should also be addressed in leadership training

programs.


In sum, efforts should be directed towards improving principal training programs and

adapting them to the demands of equality and social justice. Further studies are needed

on different aspects related to educational leadership from "multiple lenses" such as those

proposed by Foucault. Training program designers should be aware that educational

policies and local forces influence the development of a leadership identity.


Final Conclusions


The relevance of educational school leadership is widely recognized. This study focused

on principal leadership, and demonstrates that understanding and improving leadership in

school principals requires gaining insight into their identities. To understand how

principals exercise leadership, we need to be aware of how professional identity is

developed.


The development of professional identity is a complex and multifaceted process (Lumby

and English, 2009). Professional identity is influenced by numerous factors, which shape

the way of "being" and "doing" of each professional. Improving leadership — and

therefore school performance — requires the identification of the determinants of

professional identity.


The professional identity of principals is even more complex, since it is a two-fold identity

that involves high professional responsibility (Sackney and Walker, 2006; Duchauffour,

2013; Pelletier, 2017). As evidenced in the literature, the complexity of the role of

principal makes this position somewhat unattractive to teachers. Educational

policymakers should adopt measures that facilitate transition to principalship. In addition,

the quality of their initial training should be improved and adapted to the context.


Some authors have identified certain barriers that hinder the exercise of principalship.

These barriers — described above — should also be addressed in the training that

principals receive. Awareness on the so-called "glass ceiling" and "racial literacy" should

be gained.


It is therefore of vital importance to continue research on the construction of the

leadership identity in school principals, focusing on the barriers and crises they encounter,

in order to address this issue internationally and thus improve the quality of schools by

nurturing leaders with strong professional identities without losing sight of the influence

of politics and context.

   This is an emerging field of study that requires further knowledge and more in-depth

   analysis. We thus advocate an increase in case studies located in schools, as well as

   biographical-narrative investigations that deal with how leadership identity is constructed

   and to understand how identity is generated in contrast with how others perceive it and

   how they form such an identity.

   Similarly, systematic reviews of the literature are encouraged to identify the past, present,

   and the one that awaits us in order to improve the quality of education.




   References


Aas M and Vavik M (2015) Group coaching: a new way of constructing leadership identity?.

       School      Leadership      and   Management        35       (3):   251-265.    DOI:    10.

       1080/13632434.2014.962497


Akkerman SF and Meijer PC (2011) A dialogical approach to conceptualizing teacher

       identity.    Teaching    and      teacher      education     27     (2):   308-319.    DOI:

       10.1016/j.tate.2010.08.013


Amstrong D and Mitchell C (2017) Shifting identities. Negotiating intersections of race and

       gender      in   Canadian     administrative     contexts.     Educational     Management

       Administration and Leadership 45 (5): 825-841. DOI: 10.1177/1741143217712721


Arar K and Shapira T (2016) Hijab and principalship: the interplay between belief systems,

       educational management and gender among Arab Muslim women in Israel. Gender

       and Education 28 (7): 851-866. DOI: 10.1080/09540253.2015.1124070

Bahous R, Busher H and Nabhani M (2016) Teachers’ views of professional learning and

      collaboration in four urban Lebanese primary schools. Teacher Development 20 (2):

      197-212. DOI: 10.1080/13664530.2015.1124137


Barber M and Mourshed M (2007) How the World’s Best-Performing School Systems Come

      Out On Top. McKinsey and Company: Social Sector Office. Available in:

      http://www.mckinsey.com/clientservice/socialsector/resources/pdf/Worlds_School_

      Systems_Final.pdf


Baumeister RF (1986) Identity: Cultural Change and the Struggle for Self. New York:

      Oxford University Press.


Bebeau MJ and Monson VE (2008) Guided by theory, grounded in evidence: A way

      forward   for professional ethics education. In LP Nucci and D Narvaez (Eds.)

      Handbook of moral and character education (557–582). New York: Routledge.


Boris-Schacter S and Merrifield S (2000) Why “Particularly Good” Principals Don’t Quit.

      Journal of School Leadership 10(1): 84–98. DOI: 10.1177/105268460001000106


Botha N (2006) Leadership in school-based management: a case study in selected schools.

      South African Journal of Education 26 (3): 341-353.


Bredeson PV (1993) Letting Go of Outlived Professional Identities: A Study of Role

      Transition and Role Strain for Principals in Restructured Schools. Educational

      Administration Quarterly 29(1): 34–68. DOI: 10.1177/0013161x93029001004


Brezicha K, Bergmark U and Mitra DL (2015) One size does not fit all: Differentiating

      leadership to support teachers in school reform. Educational Administration

      Quarterly 51 (1): 96-132. DOI: 10.1177/0013161X14521632

Browne-Ferrigno T (2003). Becoming a Principal: Role Conception, Initial Socialization,

       Role-Identity Transformation, Purposeful Engagement. Educational Administration

       Quarterly 39(4): 468–503. DOI: 10.1177/0013161X03255561


Burke P J and Stets J E (2009). Identity theory. New York, NY: Oxford University Press


Bush T (2009) Leadership development and school improvement: Contemporary issues in

       leadership   development.     Educational    review    61    (4):   375-389.   DOI:

       10.1080/00131910903403956


Bush T (2018) Preparation and induction for school principals: Global perspectives.

       Management in Education 32 (2): 66-71.


Bush T (2019). Distinguishing between educational leadership and management: Compatible

       or incompatible constructs? Educational Management Administration & Leadership

       47(4): 501–503. DOI: 10.1177/1741143219839262


Cardno C and Youngs H (2013) Leadership development for experienced New Zealand

       principals: Perceptions of effectiveness. Educational Management Administration

       and Leadership 41 (3): 256-271. DOI: 10.1177/1741143212474808


Carpenter BW, Bukoski BE, Berry M and Mitchell AM (2015) Examining the Social Justice

       Identity of Assistant Principals in Persistently Low- Achieving Schools. Urban

       Education 52 (3): 287-315. DOI: 10.1177/0042085915574529


Castillo F A and Hallinger P (2018). Systematic review of research on educational leadership

       and management in Latin America, 1991–2017. Educational Management

       Administration & Leadership 46(2): 207–225. DOI: 10.1177/1741143217745882

CEPPE (2013). Learning standards, teaching standards and standards for school principals:

       A comparative study. OECD Education Working Papers, 99. Paris: OECD

       Publishing. DOI: 10.1787/5k3tsjqtp90v-en


Coleman M (2000) The female secondary headteacher in England and Wales: leadership and

       management         styles.   Educational   Research      42    (1):    13-27.    DOI:

       10.1080/001318800363881


Connolly M, Milton E, Davies AJ and Barrance R (2018) Turning heads: The impact of

       political reform on the professional role, identity and recruitment of head teachers in

       Wales.   British     Educational   Research    Journal   44    (4):   608-625.   DOI:

       10.1002/berj.3450


Cowie M and Crawford M (2008) Being” a new principal in Scotland. Journal of Educational

       Administration 46 (6): 676-689 DOI: 101108/09578230810908271


Crow G, Day C and Møller J (2017) Framing research on school principals' identities.

       International Journal of Leadership in Education 20 (3): 265-277 DOI:

       101080/1360312420151123299


Cruz C Domingo J and Lucena C (2019) School principals and leadership identity: A

       thematic exploration of the literature. Educational Research 61 (3): 1-18. DOI:

       10.1080/00131881.2019.1633941


Day C, Elliot B and Kington A (2005) Reform standards and teacher identity: Challenges of

       sustaining commitment. Teaching and Teacher Education 21 (5): 563–577 DOI:

       101016/jtate200503001

Day C, Sammons P, Leithwood K, Hopkins D, Gu Q, Brown E and Ahtaridou E (2011)

       Successful School Leadership: linking with learning and achievement. Maidenhead

       GBR: Open University Press/McGraw Hill


De Vries H, Bekkers V and Tummers L (2016) Innovation in the public sector: A systematic

       review and future research agenda. Public Administration 94 (1): 146-166. DOI:

       101111/padm12209


Dickson M W, Castaño N, Magomaeva A and Den Hartog D N (2012).Conceptualizing

       leadership across cultures. Journal of world business 47 (4) DOI: 483-492. DOI:

       10.1016/j.jwb.2012.01.002


Dubar Cl (2000) La Crise des Identités L’Interprétation d’une Mutation. Paris: Presses

       Universitaires de France.


Duchauffour H (2013) Transition identitaire des directeurs d’école primaire Trouble et crise

       de recrutement conséquences d’une formation défaillante? Recherche et formation

       3(74) : 87-100


Galdames S, Montecinos C, Campos F, Ahumada L and Leiva MV (2018) Novice principals

       in Chile mobilizing change for the first time: Challenges and opportunities associated

       with a school’s readiness for change. Educational Management Administration and

       Leadership 46(2): 318-338. DOI: 101177/1741143217707520


Gough D (2007) Weight of evidence: A framework for the appraisal of the quality and

       relevance of evidence. Research Papers in Education 22(2): 213–228. DOI:

       101080/02671520701296189

Greer J L, Searby L J and Thoma S J (2014) Arrested Development? Comparing Educational

       Leadership Students With National Norms on Moral Reasoning. Educational

       Administration Quarterly 51(4): 511-542. DOI: 101177/0013161X14539807


Gumus S, Bellibas M S, Esen M and Gumus E (2018). A systematic review of studies on

       leadership models in educational research from 1980 to 2014. Educational

       Management Administration & Leadership 46(1): 25–48


Guskey T and Yoon KS (2009) What works in professional development? Phi Delta Kappan

       90 (7): 495–500. DOI: 101177/003172170909000709


Hallinger P (2013) A conceptual framework for reviews of research in educational leadership

       and management. Journal of Educational Administration 51(2): 126–149 DOI:

       10.1108/09578231311304670


Hallinger P (2013) A conceptual framework for reviews of research in educational leadership

       and management. Journal of Educational Administration 51(2): 126–149.


Hallinger P (2014) Reviewing reviews of research in educational leadership: An empirical

       analysis.   Educational    Administration    Quarterly    50(4):   539–576    DOI:

       101177/0013161X13506594


Hallinger P (2018). Surfacing a hidden literature: A systematic review of research on

       educational leadership and management in Africa. Educational Management

       Administration & Leadership, 46(3): 362–384. DOI: 10.1177/1741143217694895


Hallinger P and Bryant D (2013) Mapping the terrain of educational leadership and

       management in East Asia. Journal of Educational Administration 51(5): 618-637.

       DOI: 101108/JEA-05-2012-0066

Hallinger P and Heck RH (2010) Collaborative leadership and school improvement:

       understanding the impact on school capacity and student learning. School Leadership

       and Management 30(2): 95–110. DOI: 101080/13632431003663214


Hartley D (2009) Education policy distributed leadership and socio-cultural theory.

       Educational Review 61(2): 139–50. DOI: 101080/00131910902844721


Henry F, Rees T and Tator C (2010) The colour of democracy: Racism in Canadian society:

       Nelson Education


Hernandez F and Murakami E (2016) Counter stories about leadership: A Latina school

       principal’s experience from a less documented view in an urban school context.

       Education Sciences 6(1): 6. DOI: 103390/educsci6010006


Hertzberg S and L Rudner (1999). Quality of Researchers’ Searches of the ERIC Database.

       Education Policy Analysis Archives 7: 25. DOI:10.14507/epaa.v7n25.1999.


Hursh D (2005) The growth of high-stakes testing in the USA: Accountability, markets and

       the decline in educational equality. British Educational Research Journal 31(5): 605–

       622.


Ibarra H (1999) Provisional selves: Experimenting with image and identity in professional

       adaptation. Administrative Science Quarterly 44(4): 764-791. DOI: 102307/2667055


Johnson L (2017) The lives and identities of UK Black and South Asian head teachers

       Metaphors of leadership. Educational Management Administration and Leadership

       45(5): 842-862. DOI: 101177/1741143217717279

Jones D (2017) Constructing identities: Female head teachers’ perceptions and experiences

       in the primary sector. Educational Management Administration and Leadershi, 45(6):

       907-928. DOI: 101177/1741143216653973


Leithwood K and Jantzi D (2000) Principal and teacher leadership effects: A replication.

       School Leadership & Management 20(4): 415–434.


Leithwood K and Jantzi D (2008) Linking leadership to student learning: The contributions

       of leader efficacy. Educational Administration Quarterly 44(4): 496-528. DOI:

       101177/0013161X08321501


Lumby J and English F (2009) From simplicism to complexity in leadership identity and

       preparation: Exploring the lineage and dark secrets International Journal of

       Leadership in Education 12(2): 95-114. DOI: 10.1080/13603120802449678


Lya K H, Faraj H and Wubbels T (2002) Burn-Out among Israeli Arab School Principals as

       a Function of Professional Identity and Interpersonal Relationships with Teachers

       International.   Journal   of   Leadership   in   Education   5(2):   149-62.   DOI:

       10.1080/13603120110057091


Maguire M and Braun A (2019) Headship as policy narration: Generating metaphors of

       leading in the english primary school. Journal of Educational Administration and

       History 51(2): 103-116. DOI:10.1080/00220620.2018.1563531


Méndez-Morse S, Murakami E T, Byrne-Jiménez M and Hernandez F (2015) Mujeres in the

       principal’s office: Latina school leaders. Journal of Latinos and Education 14 (3):

       171-187. DOI: 10.1080/15348431.2014.973566


Mifsud D (2015) Circulating Power and In/Visibility: Layers of Educational Leadership.

       Journal of Workplace Learning 27 (1): 51-67. DOI: 10.1108/JWL-09-2013-0065

Miller P, Potter I, Bennett K, Carter T S, Hylton-Fraser K, Williamson Teape K and Nelson-

       Mayne S (2015) Crossing the Border: Reconstructing and Re-Aligning Teacher and

       Principal Identities through a Study Tour. Journal of Adult and Continuing Education

       21 (1): 31–47. DOI: 10 7227/JACE2114


   Miller P, Potter I, Bennett K, Carter T S, Hylton-Fraser K, WilliamsonTeape K, and

          Nelson-Mayne S (2015) Crossing the Border: Reconstructing and Re-Aligning

          Teacher and Principal Identities through a Study Tour. Journal of Adult and

          Continuing Education 21(1): 31–47. DOI: 10 7227/JACE2114


   Møller J (2012) The construction of a public face as a school principal. International

          Journal of Educational Management 26: 452–460 DOI: 101108/C


   Montecinos C, Bush T and Aravena F (2018) Moving the school forward: Problems

          reported by novice and experienced principals during a succession process in

          Chile. International Journal of Educational Development 62: 201-208. DOI:

          101016/jijedudev201804004


   Mpungose J (2010) Constructing principals’ professional identities through life stories:

          an exploration. South African Journal of Education 30: 527-537


   Muijs D and Harris A (2006) Teacher led school improvement: Teacher leadership in the

          UK. Teaching and Teacher Education 22: 961–972 DOI: 10 1016/jtate200604010


   Murakami ET and Tornsen M (2017) Female secondary school principals Equity in the

          development of professional identities. Educational Management Administration

          and Leadership 45 (5): 806-824 DOI: 101177/1741143217717273


   Nickens R and Washington C (2016) Authenticity and the Female African American

          School Leader In Terri N Watson Anthony “Tony” H Normore (ed) Racially and

       Ethnically Diverse Women Leading Education: A Worldview (Advances in

       Educational Administration Volume 25) Emerald Group Publishing Limited: 235

       – 254


Notman R (2017) Professional identity adaptation and the self Cases of New Zealand

       school principals during a time of change. Educational Management

       Administration     and    Leadership   45     (5):   759    –    773.    DOI:

       101177/1741143216670650


OECD (2013) Leadership for 21st Century Learning Educational Research and

       Innovation: OECD Publishing


OECD (2014) TALIS 2013 Results: An International Perspective on Teaching and

       Learning: OECD Publishing


Orr M T, Berg B, Shore R and Meier E (2008) Putting the Pieces Together. Education

       and Urban Society 40(6): 670–693. DOI: 101177/0013124508324018


Payne EC and Smith MJ (2018) Refusing Relevance: School Administrator Resistance to

       Offering Professional Development Addressing LGBTQ Issues in Schools.

       Educational      Administration   Quarterly    54    (2):   183-215.     DOI:

       101177/0013161X17723426


Pelletier KL (2010) Leader toxicity: An empirical investigation of toxic behavior and

       rhetoric. Leadership 6 (4): 373–389


Petticrew M and H Roberts (2006) Systematic Reviews in the Social Sciences. Oxford:

       Blackwell

Pont B Nusche D and Moorman H (2008) Improving School Leadership: Vol 1 Policy

       and Practice OECD publishing


Rayner SM (2018) Leaders and leadership in a climate of uncertainty: A case study of

       structural change in England. Educational Management Administration and

       Leadership 46(5): 749-763


Reay D and Ball S (2000) Essentials of female management. British Educational

       Leadership Management and Administration Society (BELMAS) 28 (2): 145–159


Rhodes C and Brundrett M (2006) The identification development succession and

       retention of leadership talent in contextually different primary schools: A case

       study located within the English West Midlands. School Leadership and

       Management 26(3): 269-287. DOI: 101080/13632430600737124


Rhodes C Brundrett M and Nevill A (2009) Just the ticket? The National Professional

       Qualification and the transition to headship in the East Midlands of England.

       Educational Review 61 (4): 449-468. DOI: 101080/00131910903404012


Rhodes CP and Brundrett M (2007) The identification development succession and

       retention of leadership talent in contextually different primary schools: A case

       study located within the English West Midlands. School Leadership and

       Management 26 (3): 269–287. DOI: 101080/13632430600737124


Ricoeur P (1992) La identidad narrative. Diálogo filosófico 24: 315- 324


Ricoeur P (1996) Sí mismo como otro. Siglo XXI: Madrid España


Rigby JG (2015) Principals’ sensemaking and enactment of teacher evaluation. Journal

       of Educational Administration 53 (3): 374-392. DOI: 10 1108/JEA-04-2014-0051

   Ritacco M and Bolívar A (2018) School principals in Spain: an unstable identity.

          International Journal of Educational Leadership and Managment 6 (1): 18-39.

          DOI: 1017853/ijelm20182110


   Riveros A, Verret C and Wei W (2016) The translation of leadership standards into

          leadership practices: A qualitative analysis of the adoption of the Ontario

          Leadership Framework in urban schools. Journal of Educational Administration

          54 (5): 593-608. DOI: 101108/JEA-09-2015-0084


   Robertson S (2017) Transformation of professional identity in an experienced primary

          school principal A New Zealand case study. Educational Management

          Administration     and     Leadership      45    (5):    774-      789.   DOI:

          101177/1741143217707519


   Rusch EA and Marshall C (2006) Gender filters and leadership: Plotting a course to

          equity. International journal of Leadership in Education 9 (3): 229-250. DOI:

          101080/13603120600741862


   Sackney L and Walker K (2006) Canadian perspectives on beginning principals: their

          role in building capacity for learning communities. Journal of educational

          administration 44 (4): 341-358. DOI: 101108/09578230610676578


Sarthou N F (2016). Key Points of Discussion in Scientific Research Evaluation: Peer

       Review, Bibliometrics and Relevance. Revista De Estudios Sociales 58: 76–86.

       DOI:10.7440/res58.2016.06.


Sarthou N F 2016. Key Points of Discussion in Scientific Research Evaluation: Peer Review,

       Bibliometrics and Relevance. Revista de Estudios Sociales 58: 76-86

Schein V E (2001) A Global Look at Psychological Barriers to Women’s Progress in

       Management. Journal of Social Issues 57 (4): 675–688. DOI: 101111/0022-

       453700235


Schleicher A (2012) Preparing Teachers and Developing School Leaders for the 21st

       Century Lessons from around the world. Paris: OECD


Schutz P A, Hong J and Francis D C (Eds.). (2018). Research on teacher identity:

       mapping challenges and innovations. Springer.


Scribner S and Crow G (2012) Employing professional identities: case study of a high

       school principal in a reform setting. Leadership and Policy in Schools 11 (3): 243–

       274. DOI: 101080/157007632012654885


Scribner S M P and Bradley-Levine J (2010) The meaning (s) of teacher leadership in an

       urban high school reform. Educational Administration Quarterly 46: 491-522.

       DOI: 101177/0013161X10383831


Simon S, Dole S and Farragher Y (2019) Custom-designed and safe-space coaching:

       Australian beginning principals supported by experienced peers form pipeline of

       confident future leaders. School Leadership and Management 39 (2): 145-174.

       DOI: 101080/1363243420181470502


Sinha S and Hanuscin D L (2017) Development of teacher leadership identity: A multiple

       case   study.   Teaching    and    Teacher    Education    63:   356-371.    DOI:

       101016/jtate201701004


Slay HS and Smith DA (2011) Professional identity construction: using narrative to

       understand the negotiation of professional and stigmatized cultural identities.

       Human Relations 61 (1): 85–107. DOI: 101177/0018726710384290

   Soini T, Pietarinen J and Pyhältö K (2016) Leading a school through change – principals’

          hands-on leadership strategies in school reform. School Leadership and

          Management. DOI: 101080/1363243420161209179


   Spies J and Heystek J (2015) Principals' educational practices in the field of rural villages.

          Tydskrif vir Geesteswetenskappe 55 (3): 437-451. DOI: 1017159/2224-

          7912/2015/V55N3A8


   Stamopoulos E (2012) Reframing early childhood leadership. Australasian Journal of

          Early Childhood 37 (2): 42


   St-Pierre M (2005) Decisional Partnerships in Education and Their Effects on

          Harmonizing the Professional Identity of School Principals. Education et

          Francophonie 33(1): 111-132.


   Sugrue C (2015) Unmasking School Leadership: A Longitudinal Life History of School

          Leaders Dordrecht the Netherlands: Springer


Thoits P and Virshup L (1997). Me’s and we’s: Forms and functions of social identities. In

       R. Ashmore & L. Jussim (Eds.), Self and identity: Fundamental issues (pp. 106–133).

       New York, NY: Oxford University Press.


   Thomson P (2009) School Leadership: Heads on the Block? London and New York:

          Routledge


   Thoonen EEJ, Sleegers PJC, Oort FJ and Peetsma TTD (2012) Building school-wide

          capacity for improvement: the roleofleadership school organizational conditions

          and teacher factors School Effectiveness and School Improvement 23 (4): 441-460.

          DOI: 101080/092434532012678867

Toure J and Dorsey DT (2018) Stereotypes Images and Inclination to Discriminatory

       Action: The White Racial Frame in the Practice of School Leadership. Teachers

       College Record 120 (2): 37-49.


Trede F, Macklin R and Bridges D (2012) Professional identity development: a review of

       the Higher Education literature. Studies in Higher Education 37: 365-384.


UNESCO-IIPE- IWGE (2012) From schooling to learning Paris: UNESCO/ International

       Institute     for      Educational      Planning.         http://unesdoc       unesco

       org/images/0021/002192/219289e pdf


Urick A and Bowers AJ (2014) What are the different types of principals across the

       United States? A latent class analysis of principal perception of leadership.

       Educational     Administration       Quarterly      50      (1):     96-134.    DOI:

       101177/0013161X13489019


Voorberg W H, Bekkers V J and Tummers L G (2015) A systematic review of co-creation

       and co-production: Embarking on the social innovation journey. Public

       Management Review 17 (9): 1333-1357. DOI: 101080/147190372014930505


Wallace M (1996) A crisis of identity: school merger and cultural transition. British

       Educational         Research     Journal     22          (4):      459-473.     DOI:

       10.1080/0141192960220406


Watts R (1998) From Lady Teacher to Professional: a case study of some of the first

       headteachers of girls' secondary schools in England. Educational Management

       and Administration 26(4): 339-351.DOI: 101177/0263211X98264001


Wenger E (1998) Communities of Practice: Learning Meaning and Identity, Cambridge:

       Cambridge University Press

Annex 1. Central theoretical terms of the studies included in our systematic review


  Author/year                         Central theoretical terms


  Amstrong and Mitchell (2017)        Barriers of race and gender in the construction of the identity

                                      of “female principals”

  Arar and Shapira (2016)             Negotiation of the personal and professional identity of the

                                      female school principals in a “traditional cultural context”




  Bahous, Busher and Nabhani (2016)   Influence of the professional identity of the principal in the

                                      professional development of the teaching staff of the centre.




  Boris-Schacter S and Merrifield S   “Principals as lifelong learners”

  (2000)

  Bredeson PV (1993)                  “Role transition and role strain for principals’ professional

                                      identity in restructured schools”

  Browne-Ferrigno T (2003).           Transition of identity from teacher-principal




  Carpenter, Bukoski, Berry and       “Social Justice Identity of Principals in a difficult school

  Mitchell (2017)                     context”

  Connolly, Milton, Davies and        Influence of education policy on the professional identity of

  Barrance (2018)                     school head teachers.


  Crow, Day and Møller (2016)         The importance of principals’ leadership identity for school

                                      improvement

  Greer, Searby and Thoma (2015)      The impact of moral reasoning on the identity of future

                                      school leaders

  Hernández and Murakami (2016)       Barriers of race and gender in the construction of the identity

                                      of “female principals”

Johnson (2017)                   Critical life experiences and their influence on the

                                 construction of a leadership identity in head teachers




Jones (2017)                     “Complex negotiation” of head teachers assuming leadership

                                 positions in schools




Lya K H Faraj H and Wubbels T    Burnout among school principals as a function of

(2002)                           professional identity and interpersonal relationships with

                                 teachers

Maguire M and Braun A (2019)     Head teacher professional identity as a form of policy

                                 narration

Mendez-Morse, Murakami, Byrne-

Jiménez and Hernández (2015)     Race-gender intersection in the construction of professional

                                 identity of Latina principals




Mifsud (2015)                    Professional identity of the "principals" and visible and

                                 invisible power of educational leadership.




Miller et al. (2015)             Personal and professional growth of principals and teachers

                                 through experiential activities




Montecinos, Bush and Aravena     Influence of experience on the professional identity of

(2018)                           principals and implications for future professional

                                 development programs.

Mpungose (2010)                  Complex interplay of structure-agency in principals’

                                 professional identity

Murakami and Tornsen (2017)      Gender barriers in the professional identity of school

                                 “principals”

Nickens and Washington (2017)    Race-gender intersection in the construction of the

                                 professional identity of female African American principals

Notman (2017)                         Conceptualisation and interplay of principals identity

                                      formation with adaptive and contingent forms of educational

                                      leadership

Payne and Smith (2018)                Positioning of school principals towards teacher training

                                      programs on LGBTQ themes




Rayner (2018)                         Professional identity of principals and leadership in the

                                      context of change




Rhodes C and Brundrett M (2006)       Head teacher professional identity in the face of the

                                      recruitment and retention crisis of leaders




Rhodes, Brundrett and Nevill (2009)   Influence of professional qualification programs on aspiring

                                      future head teachers




Rigby (2015)                          Construction of identity of First-year principals based on the

                                      commitment to teacher evaluation




Ritacco and Bolivar (2018)            Principals professional identity in Spanish school contexts

Riveros, Verret and Wei (2016)        Influence of educational leadership standards on the

                                      construction of the professional identity of principals




Robertson (2017)                      Professional leadership identity in principals and their impact

                                      on management for educational change




Simon , Dole and Farragher (2019)     Training for the identity transition of “beginner principals”

Spies and Heystek (2015)   Influence of the rural context on the professional identity of

                           school principals




Stamopoulos (2012)         Impact of Australian educational policies and assessments on

                           the professional identity of early childhood leaders




St-Pierre M (2005)         Changes in the school management model and their effects

                           on the professional identity of school principals




Toure and Dorsey (2018)    Influence of racial ideology on the development of a

                           leadership identity in principal principals




Wallace M (1996)           Impact of the professional identity of the head teacher on the

                           creation of a corporate and unified professional culture.




Watts R (1998)             Professional identity and leadership styles of the head teacher

                           in the 19th century

Figure 1. Flow chart of stages of literature search