e-ISSN: 2582-5208
International Research Journal of Modernization in Engineering Technology and Science
              ( Peer-Reviewed, Open Access, Fully Refereed International Journal )
Volume:05/Issue:09/September-2023 Impact Factor- 7.868                         www.irjmets.com

     EVALUATING THE ROLE OF WOMEN IN EDUCATIONAL LEADERSHIP
                     Thamer Salem Hamad Alahbabi*1, Tasfoura Dilawer*2
                       *1Ministry Of Interior Employee, Abu Dhabi Al Mushrif, UAE.

                                   *2Research Analyst, Karachi, Pakistan.

                          DOI : https://www.doi.org/10.56726/IRJMETS44523
                                                 ABSTRACT
This research aimed to evaluate the role of women in educational leadership. For the attainment of this goal,
the data was collected from 125 respondents including women school teachers and principals while using a
survey questionnaire as a data collection tool. For analysing the data, the researcher used the descriptive
analysis technique. The findings of the research disclosed that women play a positive role in educational
leadership by creating a positive environment for both teachers and students and providing necessary support
and resources for good performance. Women teachers reduce the stereotypes surrounding women's leadership
roles and enhance the chances of women reaching leadership positions. It is found that gender discrimination,
lack of developmental opportunities, lack of institutional support, and lack of work/life balance are some of the
key issues that women face while making efforts to reach leadership positions. Hence, it is recommended that
to reduce gender discrimination, institutions should develop transparent policies and an appropriate and
sophisticated performance evaluation system that can assure the hiring of people in leadership positions based
on merit. The teachers should also be developed for the leadership role so they can easily manage work-related
pressures.
Keywords: Educational Leadership, Barriers To Educational Leadership, Gender Discrimination.
                                            I.    INTRODUCTION
Women have the huge potential to make a significant contribution to the success of multiple organisations
including academia, the corporate sector, politics, healthcare, and organisations (UN Women, 2022; Stone et al.,
2019; ILO, 2020). The positive role of women in leadership positions is well documented, for example, Grissom
et al. (2021) found that women's leadership has a positive and staple effect on students’ learning outcomes
specifically in high-income countries. The United Nations Children’s Funds (UNICEF) report of 2022 found that
effective leaders tend to develop a good environment for students resulting in better outcomes in terms of
student learning. After classroom teachers, school leadership is the second most important factor that
contributes to good learning outcomes for students.
Women in educational leadership can play an important role in bringing positive learning outcomes, but it has
been realised that still, the ratio of women in education in leadership positions is low. It is found that women
are increasingly underrepresented in educational leadership (Educational Development Trust, 2022). The
underrepresentation of women in educational leadership has been a challenge for many countries in multiple
contexts. At the global level, seven out of ten primary schools have female teachers while five in seven
secondary schools have female teachers as well (Bergmann et al., 2022). Further, Keele University (2021) found
in their research that though the women workforce in education consists of a large amount of total educational
staff at the international level, underrepresentation is one of the major concerns in leadership positions.
According to the report of UNICEF (2022), the global community is paying significant attention to the education
and retention of girls, improving their learning and making efforts to support the holistic well-being of girls.
However, it has been realised that the research misses the gender gap issues and lacks a discussion of the
reasons for and benefits of having women in educational leadership positions. There is a noticeable absence of
women in leadership positions in the educational world. It is found that women are seriously underrepresented
in leadership roles in education. One of the major reasons that women are underrepresented in educational
leadership positions is the lack of awareness of the benefits and barriers preventing them from moving into
leadership roles (Brossard and Bergmann, 2022). Further, it is realised that though multiple studies have been
conducted on the benefits of women's leadership for organisations, the literature fails to define the challenges
and opportunities for women in leadership positions.

www.irjmets.com               @International Research Journal of Modernization in Engineering, Technology and Science
                                                     [2598]

                                                                                              e-ISSN: 2582-5208
International Research Journal of Modernization in Engineering Technology and Science
              ( Peer-Reviewed, Open Access, Fully Refereed International Journal )
Volume:05/Issue:09/September-2023    Impact Factor- 7.868                      www.irjmets.com
Considering the issue of women's underrepresentation in the educational world and the lack of awareness of
women's leadership benefits and opportunities and potential challenges or barriers that prevent women from
being a leader, the developed research aim is to evaluate the role of women in educational leadership. For the
attainment of these goals, the objective for the research are as follow: (1) to discuss the benefits of women's
leadership in the educational field. (2) To find out the challenges and barriers that women face while
attempting to reach leadership positions in the educational field. (3) To offer potential solutions to overcome
the issues and enhance women's representation in educational leadership.
                                        II.   LITERATURE REVIEW
Women play an immense role in many organisations, but a small portion of women have been involved in
managerial positions. Though women have a great potential to make a difference, particularly in the
educational world women are lacking a leadership position. However, there is still an issue that women
represent fewer leadership positions in the educational field.
Women's leadership is an interesting topic and gaining momentum in the educational sector. It has been
realised that women are taking the lead compared to men in getting higher educational degrees and developing
their skill and knowledge portfolio, but women's representation in leadership positions is still not equal to
men's. The number of women principals in the public sector with advanced educational degrees is increasing
and they are handling diversity in a better way. Educated women with advanced education degrees have more
expertise in educational leadership; hence, they can bring more positive outcomes to the educational setting
(Grissom, Egalite and Lindsay, 2021).
According to Potvin et al. (2018), diversity in leadership positions encourages diversity, Women feel alienated
inside conventional educational networks while striving for advancements. When given the opportunity, they
encourage their female colleagues by adhering to the equality declaration. The study found that more diverse
leadership results in increasing inclusivity and supportiveness to all members working under them. Diversity in
leadership positions may provide women with opportunities to be a part of the industry and women may feel
more included in the leadership positions. Further, the study found that women in positions of leadership try to
dispel unfavourable misconceptions about women in positions of leadership. As a result, the presence of
women in leadership positions stimulates the selection of more women for comparable positions (Potvin et al.,
2018).
Continuing with the benefits of women-led schools, Flaxman (2022) found that women-led independent
schools are on the rise, educating low-income pupils and assuring their knowledge of all subjects. Some certain
characteristics that are contributing to women's success in leadership roles include their willingness to adopt
new things and their capabilities of being adaptable. The study found that diversity in gender and racial domain
in a leadership role is one the major factors that contribute to the success of women leaders and help them
improve the mastery of students by creating effective policies based on the issues they face in schools. Diversity
in leadership roles results in increasing diversity at the teaching level which helps reduce language barriers
among teachers and students resulting in better educational outcomes. The studies conducted in other
industries do not support this outcome by stating that women face massive business closers compared to men,
specifically during COVID-19 because, in the male-dominating societies, they did not get the support in terms of
advanced technologies and bank accounts for receiving payments of their services (Mashek, 2021; Sahai, 2015).
Distinctively, Schor (2018) highlighted that women in educational leadership positions often focus on
educating and mentoring women. Women in educational leadership roles focus on improving the institutional
image and formulating strategies and policies, but this is not their primary emphasis; they lack in producing
money and developing strong governmental contacts. It has also been discovered that schools run by women
had a larger ratio of women in decanal positions than schools managed by males. On the contrary, Lumby
(2019) argued that women enhance diversity in leadership positions and give opportunities to their female
fellows to come to higher ranks because they feel more powerful in this way, these perceptions help reduce
discrimination in a male-dominated society and enhance equality at leadership positions. On the other hand,
Dean et al. (2019) discussed women's leadership at a broader level and found that women's presence in the
workforce is an essential component that helps nations' economic progress, which is another advantage of

www.irjmets.com               @International Research Journal of Modernization in Engineering, Technology and Science
                                                     [2599]

                                                                                              e-ISSN: 2582-5208
International Research Journal of Modernization in Engineering Technology and Science
              ( Peer-Reviewed, Open Access, Fully Refereed International Journal )
Volume:05/Issue:09/September-2023    Impact Factor- 7.868                      www.irjmets.com
women in leadership roles in the educational sector. For example, women in leadership positions encourage
other women to join the workforce and this practice to encourage women to join the workforce enhances their
contribution to the economy. The study also discourages the hypothesis that women are underperformed to
their counterparts and states that socioeconomic factors hinder the representation of women in the workforce.
Apart from benefits, it is also realised that women face issues in reaching leadership positions such as it is
found that Women are prevented from achieving leadership roles in educational institutions because of a lack
of social support, preconceptions, and a frigid educational climate. Gender discrimination issues in academia
exist despite women getting more doctoral degrees, and the ratio of women in leadership positions remains
unchanged. Gender stereotypes are one of the key reasons that prevent women from hiring and career
advancement to leadership positions. The study highlighted that some of the inequalities that cause women to
depart from academia include a lack of social and unsupportive environments, stereotypes and numeric
underrepresentation, and the chilly climate of academic institutions (Casad et al., 2020). Contrarily, Bian et al.
(2018) argued that because brilliance is perceived as important for success and is mostly associated with men,
men have more opportunities than women. Such perceptions of brilliance also hurt women's involvement in
higher positions. In alignment, Parker (2018) accepted that women have to face gender discrimination when
they try to enter leadership positions and discrimination is also common for women at work in lower-level
positions. On the other hand, Vo, Lavissiere and Lavissiere (2023) found that work/life balance is also a barrier
to women's rise to positions of leadership in academia. Reinforce the notion that work/life balance impacts
women's capacity to achieve leadership roles Ninaus, Diehl, and Terlutter (2021) stated that work/life balance
is a barrier that prevents women from taking on responsibilities and remaining in positions of leadership.
Work/life balance was also mentioned as a concern for employees at a general level. However, the author
stated that technological advancements can help overcome the difficulties and bring balance between work and
life by enhancing the work efficiency of women employees.
Presenting the solution to the problems, Botella et al. (2019) found that women's representation may be
improved by promoting and supporting them. Many women leave their employment due to a lack of
institutional support, therefore considering leadership roles is out of the question. Assisting can improve
women's representation. It has also been shown that the lack of visibility of women in positions of power is a
demotivating factor for them. Discussing a completely different issue, Berisha and Koldashi (2018) argued that
cultural obstacles keep women from advancing in their careers. Differences in emotional intelligence and
attitudes exist as a result of cultural barriers, which influence leadership. Hence, it is mandatory to resolve
these issues. Further, Yousuf and Schmiede (2017) found that the environment is not always the reason to
restrict women from leadership positions, some times, women do not strive to thrive in their occupations;
rather, they work minimally to keep their jobs, which is one of the key reasons they are not in positions of
leadership at the level they should be.
It is found that women-led schools ensure that students master their subjects and this is not that men-led
schools are not doing good, men-led schools also help students, but this is because more women-led schools are
working for poor students who are unable to afford education and in this effort women led schools give their
bets that all enrolled students get mastery in their subjects (Mashek, 2021; Sahai, 2015). It is realised that
work/life balance is an issue that prevents women from leadership positions. Educational institutions can
introduce information and communication technologies (ICT) and train women to make their own efficient use.
The use of these technologies can help women reduce their work-related burnout and enhance work/life
balance while they enjoy leadership positions (Ninaus, Diehl and Terlutter, 2021). It is found that teachers
believe that women-led schools are better compared to men-led in terms of delivering positive learning
outcomes. The positive learning outcomes mean women leaders provide a positive environment for students
and teachers and encourage instructors to help students out with their problems, resulting in enhancing the
educational performance of students. The positive learning outcomes of students are the evidence of effective
performance of teachers that enhance their potential to reach educational leadership (Mashek, 2021).
                                          III.    METHODOLOGY
The research was an attempt to identify the role of women in educational leadership considering the issue of
women's under-representation in leadership positions in the academic field. For the attainment of this goal, a
www.irjmets.com               @International Research Journal of Modernization in Engineering, Technology and Science
                                                     [2600]

                                                                                              e-ISSN: 2582-5208
International Research Journal of Modernization in Engineering Technology and Science
              ( Peer-Reviewed, Open Access, Fully Refereed International Journal )
Volume:05/Issue:09/September-2023    Impact Factor- 7.868                      www.irjmets.com
survey was conducted that included a sample size of 125 respondents including women teachers and leaders
with an experience of a minimum of six years in the educational field. The reason for selecting this target
population for the research was their relevancy to the research topic and their knowledge. The survey was a
combination of closed-ended questions and open-ended questions. The open-ended questions were
transformed into numbers and descriptive analysis was performed to get the results. For example, in open-
ended questions, respondents provided suggestions on strategies that should be adopted to enhance women's
representation in leadership roles. The total number of suggestions was transformed into statistics and used for
descriptive analysis.
The collected data was saved in a password-protected Excel file so that privacy and confidentiality could be
maintained. A descriptive analysis was performed on the collected data. For performing descriptive analysis,
data was properly arranged and put into the Excel sheet against each question and then separate analysis was
performed for each question to check how many respondents agreed with what option. The survey
questionnaire also included demographic information and included teachers from both primary and secondary
schools.
                                  IV.     FINDS AND DATA ANALYSIS
Age of Respondents
As a part of demographics, the respondents were asked to tell their age and the following data mentioned in
Figure 1 was obtained. It can be realised that the age of 10% of respondents was between 25 to 30, 36% were
from the age of 30 to 35, 20% were from the age of 35 to 40, and 18% were from the age 40 to 45 while 16% of
respondents were between the age 45 to 50.

                                                      AGE
                                   45 to 50                       25 to 30
                                     16%                            10%



                   40 to 45
                     18%

                                                                                       30 to 35
                                                                                         36%




                                  35 to 40
                                    20%

                              Figure 1: Age of Respondents; Source: Data Analysis
Teaching Experience
The data was collected from both teachers and school leaders regarding their experience. The data obtained as
a consequence communicated that 29% of teachers had an experience of 0 to 5 years, 40% of teachers had an
experience of 6 to 10 years, and 21% of teachers had 11 to 15 years of experience in the field at similar
positions, while 5% of teachers had an experience of 16 to 20 years.




www.irjmets.com               @International Research Journal of Modernization in Engineering, Technology and Science
                                                     [2601]

                                                                                                  e-ISSN: 2582-5208
International Research Journal of Modernization in Engineering Technology and Science
              ( Peer-Reviewed, Open Access, Fully Refereed International Journal )
Volume:05/Issue:09/September-2023    Impact Factor- 7.868                      www.irjmets.com

                                         TEACHING EXPERIENCE
                                           21+ years
                                 16–20 years
                                              5%
                                     5%
                                                                                      0–5 years
                                                                                        29%
             11–15 years
                21%




                                                           6–10 years
                                                              40%

                                Figure 2: Teaching Experience; Source: Data Analysis
Leadership Experience
It was found that from the total of 125 respondents, 22 were leaders of which 45% had 0 to 5 years of
experience while 23% of leaders had 6 to 10 years of experience.

                                       LEADERSHIP EXPERIENCE

                                    16–20 years
                                       14%


                  11–15 years                                                           0–5 years
                     18%                                                                  45%




                                  6–10 years
                                     23%

                            Figure 3: Leadership Experience; Source: Data Analysis
Role of Women Leadership
After discussing the demographics the respondents were asked about their perception and experience of
benefits associated with women's leadership. In the hunt to realise the benefits of women's leadership, certain
questions were asked, from which the first statement was related to their perception of the impact of women's
leadership on learning outcomes. When women employees were asked if they find schools with women leaders
are better at delivering learning outcomes, 85% of women teachers and leaders agreed that schools with
women leaders tend to have better student learning outcomes, 5% strongly agreed, 4% were neutral, and 6%
disagreed while no one strongly disagreed.

www.irjmets.com                  @International Research Journal of Modernization in Engineering, Technology and Science
                                                        [2602]

                                                                                             e-ISSN: 2582-5208
International Research Journal of Modernization in Engineering Technology and Science
              ( Peer-Reviewed, Open Access, Fully Refereed International Journal )
Volume:05/Issue:09/September-2023    Impact Factor- 7.868                      www.irjmets.com

                     SCHOOLS WITH WOMEN LEADERS TEND TO
                        HAVE BETTER LEARNING OUTCOMES
                                                D         SD   SA
                                       N       6%         0%   5%
                                      4%




                                                                 A
                                                                85%

     Figure 4: Schools with women leaders tend to have better learning outcomes; Source: Data Analysis
When women respondents were asked about their perception of reducing discrimination in the presence of
women school leaders, 80% of women professionals in schools agreed that women school leaders tend to
reduce gender discrimination, 11% strongly agreed, 4% were neutral, 3% disagreed, while 2% strongly
disagreed.


                         2. WOMEN SCHOOL LEADERS TEND TO
                           REDUCE GENDER DISCRIMINATION
                                            N D SD                   SA
                                           4% 3% 2%                 11%




                                                     A
                                                    80%
     Figure 5: Schools with women leaders tend to have better learning outcomes; Source: Data Analysis
When women professionals were asked about the role of women leaders in creating a positive environment
and encouraging both staff and students, 70% of women respondents strongly agreed on the positive role of
women leadership in creating a teaching and learning environment and believe that women leaders are good at
encouraging not only staff but students as well. Similarly, 23% of women respondents agreed with the creation
of a positive learning and teaching environment in the presence of women leadership while 5% disagreed and
2% strongly disagreed.


www.irjmets.com              @International Research Journal of Modernization in Engineering, Technology and Science
                                                     [2603]

                                                                                             e-ISSN: 2582-5208
International Research Journal of Modernization in Engineering Technology and Science
              ( Peer-Reviewed, Open Access, Fully Refereed International Journal )
Volume:05/Issue:09/September-2023    Impact Factor- 7.868                      www.irjmets.com

                     3. WOMEN SCHOOL LEADERS DEVELOP A
                        POSITIVE LEARNING AND TEACHING
                     ENVIRONMENT THAT ENCOURAGES BOTH
                              STAFF AND STUDENTS
                                            N D     SD
                                           0% 5%    2%
                              A
                             23%




                                                                                SA
                                                                               70%




 Figure 6: Women school leaders develop a positive learning and teaching environment that encourages both
                                 staff and students; Source: Data Analysis
It is found that 57% of school teachers believe that women-led schools are better at delivering learning
outcomes, 8% strongly agreed, 18% were neutral, 7% disagreed and 10 strongly disagreed with the statement
or an idea that women led schools are more result oriented and ensure student’s mastery.

                      4. WOMEN-LED SCHOOLS COMPARED TO
                       MALE-LED SCHOOLS ENSURE THAT ALL
                            STUDENTS GET MASTERY
                                             SD               SA
                                            10%               8%
                                    D
                                   7%



                        N
                       18%

                                                                                 A
                                                                                57%




 Figure 7: Women school leaders develop a positive learning and teaching environment that encourages both
                                 staff and students; Source: Data Analysis
When women teachers were asked about the supportive behaviour of women leaders, 69% agreed that women
leaders are more supportive compared to men. 13% strongly agreed with the statement, 10% were neutral 2%
disagreed and 6% strongly disagreed.



www.irjmets.com              @International Research Journal of Modernization in Engineering, Technology and Science
                                                    [2604]

                                                                                            e-ISSN: 2582-5208
International Research Journal of Modernization in Engineering Technology and Science
              ( Peer-Reviewed, Open Access, Fully Refereed International Journal )
Volume:05/Issue:09/September-2023    Impact Factor- 7.868                      www.irjmets.com

                   5. WOMEN LEADERS ARE MORE SUPPORTIVE
                                      D      SD                       SA
                                     2%      6%                      13%
                            N
                           10%




                                                                A
                                                               69%

                    Figure 8: Women leaders are more supportive; Source: Data Analysis
It was found that women's employment results in economic development and when school teachers and
leaders were asked about the perception, 62% of respondents agreed with the statement that women's
leadership results in economic development, 33% agreed and 5% were neutral.

                          6. WOMEN LEADERSHIP RESULTS IN
                              ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT
                                               N     SD
                                                      D
                                              5%     0%



                    A
                   33%




                                                                                          SA
                                                                                         62%




                    Figure 9: Women leaders are more supportive; Source: Data Analysis
Challenges prevent women teachers from reaching leadership role
When women respondents were asked about gender discrimination as a barrier to their access to the school
leadership role, 72% agreed that they face gender discrimination, 16% strongly agreed, 5% were neutral, 5%
disagreed and 2% strongly agreed.



www.irjmets.com             @International Research Journal of Modernization in Engineering, Technology and Science
                                                   [2605]

                                                                                              e-ISSN: 2582-5208
International Research Journal of Modernization in Engineering Technology and Science
              ( Peer-Reviewed, Open Access, Fully Refereed International Journal )
Volume:05/Issue:09/September-2023    Impact Factor- 7.868                      www.irjmets.com

                     1. I FACED GENDER-BASED DISCRIMINATION
                     THAT PREVENTED ME TO BECOME A LEADER
                                               D    SD
                                        N                              SA
                                              5%    2%
                                       5%                             16%




                                                 A
                                                72%
   Figure 10: I faced gender-based discrimination that prevented me from becoming a leader; Source: Data
                                                  Analysis
When women professionals were asked about the experience of men having greater chances of skill
advancements and career development, 56% of school female staff strongly agreed with the fact that men have
greater chances of career development and they gain more opportunities to develop themselves compared to
females. Similarly, 41% of female staff agreed, while 3% were not sure about this being a reason to prevent
female staff from reaching leadership positions.

                       2. MEN HAVE GREATER CHANCES OF
                    ADVANCEMENT AND CAREER DEVELOPMENT
                                                    N SD
                                                       D
                                                   3% 0%



                   A
                  41%


                                                                                             SA
                                                                                            56%




     Figure 11: Men have greater chances of advancement and career development; Source: Data Analysis
When the work/life balance was discussed, 73% of school female staff strongly agreed with work/life balance
as a major issue that contributes as a barrier to their leadership positions. 23% of staff agreed with work/life
balance as an issue, while 4% disagreed with this concept.


www.irjmets.com               @International Research Journal of Modernization in Engineering, Technology and Science
                                                      [2606]

                                                                                             e-ISSN: 2582-5208
International Research Journal of Modernization in Engineering Technology and Science
              ( Peer-Reviewed, Open Access, Fully Refereed International Journal )
Volume:05/Issue:09/September-2023    Impact Factor- 7.868                      www.irjmets.com

                      3. WORK/FAMILY BALANCE IS ONE OF THE
                      MAJOR ISSUES THAT BECOME A BARRIER
                       IN THE WAYS OF GETTING A LEADERSHIP
                                    POSITION.
                                                N D SD
                                               0%4% 0%
                                  A
                                 23%




                                                                             SA
                                                                            73%



   Figure 12: Work/Family Balance is one of the major issues that become a barrier in the ways of getting a
                               leadership position; Source: Data Analysis
The research outcomes disclosed that 86% of female staff strongly agreed that lack of encouragement is one of
the biggest reasons to prevent them from leadership positions while 14% agreed and no one denied the fact.

                     4. LACK OF ENCOURAGEMENT WAS ONE OF
                    THE BIGGEST REASONS TO PREVENT WOMEN
                              FROM BEING A LEADER.
                                          A           SD
                                                       N
                                                       D
                                         14%          0%




                                                                       SA
                                                                      86%

  Figure 13: Lack of encouragement was one of the biggest reasons preventing women from being a leader;
                                         Source: Data Analysis
To reach a leadership position there are some requirements from which the one is to have a master’s degree.
58% of female staff agreed that lack of finances to study further to achieve a master’s degree is one of the
biggest reasons preventing women from reaching leadership roles. Similarly, 9% strongly agreed with the
comment, while 29% disagreed.




www.irjmets.com              @International Research Journal of Modernization in Engineering, Technology and Science
                                                    [2607]

                                                                                              e-ISSN: 2582-5208
International Research Journal of Modernization in Engineering Technology and Science
              ( Peer-Reviewed, Open Access, Fully Refereed International Journal )
Volume:05/Issue:09/September-2023    Impact Factor- 7.868                      www.irjmets.com

                       5. FINANCIAL BARRIERS TO ACHIEVING A
                                 MASTER’S DEGREE
                                                       SD       SA
                                                       0%       9%
                                   D
                                  29%




                              N
                             4%
                                                                               A
                                                                              58%



              Figure 14: Financial barriers to achieving a Master’s degree; Source: Data Analysis
77% of school women staff agreed that cultural barriers are one of the key reasons to prevent females from
being good leaders. 5% strongly agreed, 7% were neutral, 6% disagreed and 5% strongly disagreed.

                                      6. CULTURAL BARRIERS
                                                SD             SA
                                     D          5%             5%
                                    6%
                         N
                        7%




                                                                              A
                                                                             77%


                              Figure 15: Cultural barriers; Source: Data Analysis
81% of women staff believe that lack of institutional support is one of the major reasons preventing them from
being a leader such as maternity leaves. 3% strongly agreed, 3% were neutral and 13% disagreed.




www.irjmets.com               @International Research Journal of Modernization in Engineering, Technology and Science
                                                     [2608]

                                                                                                     e-ISSN: 2582-5208
International Research Journal of Modernization in Engineering Technology and Science
              ( Peer-Reviewed, Open Access, Fully Refereed International Journal )
Volume:05/Issue:09/September-2023    Impact Factor- 7.868                      www.irjmets.com

                           7. A LACK OF INSTITUTIONAL SUPPORT
                          FOR FAMILY NEEDS SUCH AS MATERNITY
                                          LEAVES
                                                  D           SD SA
                                                 13%          0% 3%
                                          N
                                         3%




                                                                               A
                                                                              81%
      Figure 16: A lack of institutional support for family needs such as maternity; Source: Data Analysis
Suggestions to improve women's leadership
When women staff were asked to provide suggestions for the improvement of the ratio of women in leadership
positions. From 125 women professionals 14 said that to enhance women's representation in leadership
positions, mentorship programs should be provided, another 14 said that women should be developed for
leadership skills, 30 employees suggested the development of effective policies, and 29 teachers said that
promotion of staff on the leadership position should be based on merit and should not include discrimination. 9
females suggested providing funds to teachers for their further education, and 18 respondents suggested that
there should be a transparent and sophisticated teachers’ evaluation system in place to enhance the ratio of
women in leadership positions. However, 11% of respondents said that training employees for ethnic and
gender diversity is key to increasing the ratio of women in leadership positions.

                 Please provide suggestions for improving
               women's representation in leadership roles in
                          the educational sector
                        Provide mentorship opportunities                            14

                      Develop women for leadership skills                           14

                                                                                                          30

                                                                                                         29

     Supporting teachers by funding them for their masters                9

                                                                                          18

        Training employees for ethnic and gender diversity                    11

                                                              0       5        10        15    20   25         30   35

                  Figure 17: Suggestions to improve women's leadership; Source: Data Analysis
                                                   V.        DISCUSSION
It is found that despite several efforts, women's representation in school leadership is not good, Women are
under-represented in school leadership, and hence, it became essential to evaluate the role of women in

www.irjmets.com                  @International Research Journal of Modernization in Engineering, Technology and Science
                                                             [2609]

                                                                                              e-ISSN: 2582-5208
International Research Journal of Modernization in Engineering Technology and Science
              ( Peer-Reviewed, Open Access, Fully Refereed International Journal )
Volume:05/Issue:09/September-2023    Impact Factor- 7.868                      www.irjmets.com
educational leadership to encourage policymakers to give their attention towards enhancing the women
representation at educational leadership positions. The research aimed to evaluate the role of women in
educational leadership for which the study developed three core objectives including the realisation of the role
of women in educational leadership, the second objective was, finding out the challenges and barriers women
face in reaching the position of leadership while the third objective was, to provide suggestions to improve
women representation at the school leadership position.
The research outcomes of this study disclosed that women's leadership plays an important role in enhancing
women's representation in educational leadership. For example, it is realised that women leaders tend to have
better learning outcomes that result in improving the image of women affect their performance positively and
enhance the chances of women reaching leadership positions. Women bring more positive outcomes to the
educational setting may be due to their better knowledge and educational specialities. These outcomes are
supported by (Grissom, Egalite and Lindsay, 2021), as they also highlighted that female principals hold more
advanced educational degrees resulting in more knowledge to handle leadership positions.
Gender discrimination is one of the biggest barriers in the way of reaching an educational leadership position
because discrimination contributes to a lack of resources and support for female and culturally diverse
teachers. When women are leaders, they make efforts to reduce gender discrimination which positively
influences the potential of women to reach the role of educational leadership. These outcomes are supported by
(Potvin et al., 2018), as they said that though women feel isolated within traditional educational networks while
making efforts to get promotions when they get a chance they support their female fellows by following the
statement of equality.
It is realised that women's leadership is beneficial for schools because women leaders tend to create an
environment of teaching and learning that positively encourages staff and students. For example, when women
leaders develop a positive learning and teaching environment, it directly enhances the learning outcomes that
positively influence the teachers’ performance evaluation which leads them towards the greater potential of
securing educational leadership. Women creating a positive environment for their female staff is an outcome
supported by (Potvin et al., 2018), as they found that women in leadership positions try to reduce the negative
stereotypes surrounding women's leadership positions. Hence, the representation of women in leadership roles
encourages the selection of other women for similar roles.
This is not the only role that women play in educational leadership, but the research outcomes also unveiled
that women-led schools are better compared to male-led schools in terms of educating students. Majority of the
female teachers believe that women's principles ensure that all students have mastery in their subjects and this
they ensure by encouraging teachers to give their complete support to students. To motivate female teachers to
give their best, women leaders provide resources to them that help deliver material to students more efficiently
and effectively. The outcomes can be supported by the study (Flaxman, 2022) where the author found that
women-led independent schools are increasing who are serving poor students and ensuring their mastery in
each subject.
It is found that women leaders are more supportive compared to males, they are good at supporting their
employees. Women leaders develop policies that positively influence the behaviour of their teachers. This is
because only women can understand the issues that other women face, hence they develop policies that
support their female employees and may contribute to their work/life balance. These outcomes are supported
by (Schor, 2018), as his findings disclosed that women in educational leadership positions tend to focus on
educating women and supporting them through mentoring. The focus of women in educational leadership
positions is to improve the institutional image, they also develop strategies and policies, but this is not their
major focus them, they lack in creating finances and developing grid governmental relationships. Even, it is
found that schools with women leaders have a higher percentage of women in decanal positions than those
schools that are men-led. Lumby (2019) also supported the outcomes by stating that women feel that
improving the presence of their gender in leadership positions enhances their power.
The increasing ratio of women at the leadership level supports economic development because women
represent a huge ratio of the population in every country and their contribution to economic activities such as
employment can make a significant difference in the economic development of countries. It is found that
www.irjmets.com               @International Research Journal of Modernization in Engineering, Technology and Science
                                                     [2610]

                                                                                               e-ISSN: 2582-5208
International Research Journal of Modernization in Engineering Technology and Science
              ( Peer-Reviewed, Open Access, Fully Refereed International Journal )
Volume:05/Issue:09/September-2023    Impact Factor- 7.868                      www.irjmets.com
women encouraging teachers to come into leadership roles motivates other women in societies to join the
workforce and contribute to the economic development of countries. These outcomes are supported by (Dean
et al., 2019) as they communicated the fact that women's representation in the workforce is an important factor
that contributes to the economic growth of countries, which is another benefit of women in leadership
positions in the educational sector.
Apart from the women's role in educational leadership, it was also necessary to highlight the problems they
faced while making efforts to reach power positions. Positions do not come in handy easily, there is a range of
issues that women face during the whole process. For example, one of the major issues that women face in the
way of reaching educational leadership is a lack of support from seniors in terms of career development. The
research outcomes unveiled that women do not get support from their seniors and management in terms of
maternity leaves, career development, training, and financial support. These are some of the major reasons to
prevent women from reaching leadership positions. Casad et al. (2020) supported the findings by stating that a
lack of social support, stereotypes, and a chilly educational environment prevent women from reaching
leadership positions in educational institutions.
It is realised that in a male-dominated society, men get more chances for skills advancement and career
development. Bian et al. (2018) supported these findings by stating that brilliance is perceived as important for
success and mostly associated with men due to which they gain more opportunities than women. Women's
participation in higher positions is also negatively influenced by such notions of brilliance. Women feel that
they do have not that level of intelligence and talent that they can reach leadership positions (Bian et al., 2018).
Funk and Parker (2018) also accepted the fact that women face gender discrimination more frequently in terms
of gaining the advantage of career development.
During the research, it is found that women have family responsibilities more than men and they face serious
issues in managing those responsibilities while working professionally. As it is already explored that women do
not get any support from educational institutions, managing work and personal life also becomes an issue for
them. Women find difficulty inequality in giving time to both office activities and their families. Hence,
managing work/life balance also serves as a barrier to women's career advancement to leadership positions in
the academic world. Work/life balance is a problem that deters women from taking responsibility and staying
in leadership positions. The finding that work/life balance influences women’s ability to reach leadership
positions is supported by (Vo, Lavissiere and Lavissiere, 2023; Ninaus, Diehl and Terlutter, 2021).
Lack of encouragement of women in leadership roles is also a major issue that discourages women from taking
part in leadership roles. There is a need for women to be encouraged for the work they do. Lack of diversity is
an issue in the academic world. Lack of encouragement is a factor that discourages women from performing
their duties an outcome which is supported by (Botella et al., 2019). Botella et al. (2019) stated that promoting
women and supporting them can enhance women's representation. Due to the lack of institutional support,
many women resign from their jobs so thinking of leadership positions is a far thing to think. Providing support
can enhance women's representation. It has been also realised that the lack of visibility of women in their
positions is also a discouraging factor for them.
Education is an important factor for leading women to leadership positions in schools, but it is also been
observed that financial problems become constraints to achieving a master’s degree. Women with inadequate
information and qualifications are not liable to take part in leadership positions. However, these outcomes are
not supported by the existing literature because it has been reported in existing studies that the ratio of women
with higher educational degrees is increasing. Hence, it is proven that the lower level of education is not the
reason preventing women from reaching the leadership position. Financial barriers to achieving a master’s
degree are not a concern, as many women are already doing a master's and their ratio of taking a higher degree
is increasing. Yousuf and Schmiede (2017) contradicted the findings by stating that women do not work to
excel in their jobs rather they work minimally to sustain their jobs, which is one of the major reasons that they
are not at leadership positions to the level they should have been.
The research outcomes disclosed that cultural barriers are also one of the major issues in reaching leadership
positions and this outcome is supported by (Berisha and Koldashi, 2018). Cultural barriers prevent women
from career advancements. Due to cultural barriers, differences between emotional intelligence and mindsets
www.irjmets.com                @International Research Journal of Modernization in Engineering, Technology and Science
                                                      [2611]

                                                                                              e-ISSN: 2582-5208
International Research Journal of Modernization in Engineering Technology and Science
              ( Peer-Reviewed, Open Access, Fully Refereed International Journal )
Volume:05/Issue:09/September-2023    Impact Factor- 7.868                      www.irjmets.com
exist that impact leadership. It has been found that in many societies, it is believed that women are for handling
home affairs, and men are for the corporate world and this myth exists that only men can handle difficult
situations. This cultural thinking influences the representation of women in leadership positions. Though
women represent many leadership positions at the national level it is still identified that women are greatly
recognised for running domestic affairs and nurturing, caring and playing extended family roles (Morley and
Crossouard, 2015). The analysis of collected data disclosed that there is a need for improving the
representation of women in leadership roles for which effective policies must be designed, there should be an
effective, sophisticated and transparent evaluation system for teachers that can ensure the merit-based hiring
of teachers at leadership positions.
                                             VI.     CONCLUSION
The research aimed to evaluate the role of women in educational leadership, it is realised that women play an
important and positive role in educational leadership to enhance diversity, support students and their female
colleagues, and contribute significantly to the performance of students and teachers by providing them
necessary resources. Women in leadership positions tend to enhance the chances for women to be hired at
power positions. It is found that despite the higher ratio of getting educational degrees and good performance
in their role, women are under-represented in leadership positions due to certain barriers that include financial
barriers to getting a master's degree, discrimination, lack of institutional support, poor work/life balance, lack
of developmental opportunities and career growth options, and cultural barriers. However, the research
disclosed that these barriers can be overcome by developing appropriate policies. To enhance the
representation of women in leadership positions, a proper process should be developed that ensures the hiring
of people at leadership positions based on merit. For the attainment of this goal, a sophisticated and
transparent evaluation system should be designed and implemented in schools.
                                            VII.     REFERENCES
[1]     Bergmann, J., Alban Conto, C. and Brossard, M. 2022. Increasing Women’s Representation in School
        Leadership: A promising path towards improving learning. UNICEF Office of Research – Innocenti,
        Florence, 2022
[2]     Berisha, A. and Koldashi, K., 2018. Structural and Cultural Barriers for Women to Leadership: Case of
        Albania. European Journal of Social Sciences, 1(2), pp.47-53.
[3]     Bian, L., Leslie, S.J., Murphy, M.C. and Cimpian, A., 2018. Messages about brilliance undermine women's
        interest in educational and professional opportunities. Journal of Experimental Social Psychology, 76,
        pp.404-420.
[4]     Botella, C., Rueda, S., López-Iñesta, E. and Marzal, P., 2019. Gender diversity in STEM disciplines: A
        multiple factor problem. Entropy, 21(1), p.30.
[5]     Brossard, M. and Bergmann. J. (2022). Can more women in school leadership improve learning
        outcomes?. Available at:
        https://www.unicef-irc.org/evidence-for-action/can-more-women-in-learning-leadership-improve-
        education-outcomes [accessed on 1st May 2023]
[6]     Casad, B.J., Franks, J.E., Garasky, C.E., Kittleman, M.M., Roesler, A.C., Hall, D.Y. and Petzel, Z.W., 2021.
        Gender inequality in academia: Problems and solutions for women faculty in STEM. Journal of
        neuroscience research, 99(1), pp.13-23.
[7]     Educational Development Trust., 2022. Women in education leadership. Available at:
        https://www.educationdevelopmenttrust.com/our-research-and-insights/commentary/women-in-
        education-leadership#:~:text=Women%20are%20severely%20underrepresented%20in,2022).
        [accessed on 1st May 2023]
[8]     Flaxman, J.R., 2022. Storying the Gap: Critical and Emergent Literacies in Women Leading Large, K-12
        Independent Schools (Doctoral dissertation, University of Pennsylvania).
[9]     Funk, C. and Parker, K., 2018. Women and men in STEM often at odds over workplace equity. Available
        at: https:// vtechworks.lib.vt.edu/handle/10919/92671 [accessed on 1st May 2023]
www.irjmets.com               @International Research Journal of Modernization in Engineering, Technology and Science
                                                      [2612]

                                                                                             e-ISSN: 2582-5208
International Research Journal of Modernization in Engineering Technology and Science
              ( Peer-Reviewed, Open Access, Fully Refereed International Journal )
Volume:05/Issue:09/September-2023    Impact Factor- 7.868                      www.irjmets.com
[10]   Grissom, J.A., Egalite, A.J. and Lindsay, C.A. 2021. How Principals Affect Students and Schools. Available
       at: https:// cahnfellowsprograms.org/wp-content/uploads/2021/11/How-Principals-Affect-Students-
       and-Schools.pdf
[11]   Grissom, Jason A., Anna J. Egalite. and Constance A. Lindsay. (2021). How Principals Affect Students and
       Schools: A Systematic Synthesis of Two Decades of Research.” New York: The Wallace Foundation.
       Available at: https:// www.wallacefoundation.org/principalsynthesis. [accessed on 1st May 2023]
[12]   ILO. (2020). Women in managerial and leadership positions in the G20 - Data availability and
       preliminary findings. International Labour Organisation.
       Availableat:https://www.ilo.org/global/about-the-ilo/how-the-ilo-works/multilateral-
       system/g20/reports/WCMS_762098/lang--en/index.htm [accessed on 1st May 2023]
[13]   Keele University. (2021). The Role Of Women In Education Leadership. Available at: https://
       online.keele.ac.uk/the-role-of-women-in-education-leadership/ [accessed on 1st May 2023]
[14]   Lumby, J., 2019. Distributed leadership and bureaucracy. Educational Management Administration &
       Leadership, 47(1), pp.5-19.
[15]   Mashek, A., 2021. A Summary Of Resiliency During Covid-19: Analyzing Women Business Owners In
       Botswana To Identify Supportive Policies That Protect Women Against Pandemics’negative Nutritional
       And Financial Effects. Available at: https:// ecommons.cornell.edu/handle/1813/111087 [accessed on
       1st May 2023]
[16]   Morley, L. and Crossouard, B., 2015. Women in higher education leadership in South Asia: Rejection,
       refusal, reluctance, revisioning. British Council report.
[17]   Ninaus, K., Diehl, S. and Terlutter, R., 2021. Employee perceptions of information and communication
       technologies in work life, perceived burnout, job satisfaction and the role of work-family
       balance. Journal of Business Research, 136, pp.652-666.
[18]   Potvin, D.A., Burdfield-Steel, E., Potvin, J.M. and Heap, S.M., 2018. Diversity begets diversity: A global
       perspective on gender equality in scientific society leadership. PloS one, 13(5), p.e0197280.
[19]   Sahai, E.T., 2015. Women, innovation, entrepreneurship: essays on designing and improving
       education (Doctoral dissertation, Massachusetts Institute of Technology).
[20]   Schor, N.F., 2018. The decanal divide: women in decanal roles at US medical schools. Academic
       Medicine, 93(2), pp.237-240.
[21]   Stone, T., Miller, B., Southerlan, E. and Raun, A. (2019). Women In Healthcare Leadership 2019.
       Availableat:https://www.oliverwyman.com/content/dam/oliverwyman/v2/publications/2019/Janua
       ry/WiHC/WiHCL-Report-Final.pdf [accessed on 1st May 2023]
[22]   UN Women. (2022). Evidence and lessons on types of UN Women support A META-SYNTHESIS OF UN
       WOMEN EVALUATIONS. Available at:
       https://www.unwomen.org/sites/default/files/2022-05/Evaluation-Meta-synthesis-of-UN-Women-
       evaluations-en.pdf [accessed on 1st May 2023]
[23]   Vo, L.C., Lavissiere, M.C. and Lavissiere, A., 2023. Retaining talent in the maritime sector by creating a
       work-family balance logic: implications from women managers navigating work and family.
       Internatissonal Journal of Physical Distribution & Logistics Management, 53(1), pp.133-155.
[24]   Yousaf, R. and Schmiede, R., 2017. Barriers to women’s representation in academic excellence and
       positions of power. Asian Journal of German and European Studies, 2, pp.1-13.




www.irjmets.com              @International Research Journal of Modernization in Engineering, Technology and Science
                                                    [2613]