Tafkir: Interdisciplinary Journal of Islamic Education
Vol 4, No. 3, September 2023, DOI: https://doi.org/10.31538/tijie.v4i3.598
E-ISSN 2527-8177 pp. 502-518


Salafi-Based Integrated Islamic Elementary School
Management
1Rudi Erwandi, 2Ahmad Gawdy Prananosa, 3M. Rusni Eka Putra, 4Armi Yuneti,
5Donni Pestalozi


1,2,3,4,5 Universitas PGRI Silampari;



                           Abstract
Keywords:                  The research aims at investigating the management of Salafi-based integrated
Integrated Islamic         Islamic schools. This research employed a qualitative approach with
Elementary School;         phenomenological methods. This research was conducted at Raudatul Jannah
Management;                Integrated Islamic Elementary School, Lubuklinggau City. The research
Salafi.                    subjects consisted of the principal, teacher council, and school staff. The data
                           were collected using interviews. The collected data were then analyzed by
                           adapting the technique from Miles & Huberman, namely the interactive
                           analysis model. The research results signified that the Salafi Integrated Islamic
                           Elementary School has carried out planning, organizing, implementing, and
                           evaluating for students, teachers, and educational staff, curriculum, facilities
                           and infrastructure, finance, and public relations appropriately, such as: 1) The
                           school has carried out planning activities, particularly for students, teachers,
                           and educational staff, curriculum, facilities and infrastructure, finance, and
                           community relations; 2) The school has implemented organizing activities for
                           students, in which male and female students are put into separate classes, and
                           male and female teachers or educational staff are also given separate rooms; 3)
                           The school implements the independent curriculum for grades 1 and 4, then
                           the curriculum from the Ministry of Religious Affairs and the Ministry of
                           National Education for grades 2, 3, 5, and 6; 4) In the implementation of
                           evaluations, the school creates self-prepared examinations, which are not from
                           the National Education Department.

                            Abstrak
Kata kunci:                 Penelitian ini bertujuan untuk mengetahui pengelolaan sekolah Islam terpadu
Manajemen;                  berbasis Salafi. Penelitian ini menggunakan pendekatan kualitatif dengan metode
Sekolah Dasar Islam         fenomenologis. Penelitian ini dilakukan di SD Islam Terpadu Raudatul Jannah Kota
Terpadu;                    Lubuklinggau. Subjek penelitian terdiri dari kepala sekolah, dewan guru, dan staf
Salafi                      sekolah. Pengumpulan data dilakukan dengan menggunakan wawancara. Data yang
                            terkumpul kemudian dianalisis dengan mengadaptasi teknik dari Miles & Huberman
Article history:            yaitu model analisis interaktif. Hasil penelitian menunjukkan bahwa SD Islam
Received: 28-06-2023        Terpadu Salafi telah melaksanakan perencanaan, pengorganisasian, pelaksanaan, dan
Revised 13-07-2023          evaluasi terhadap siswa, guru, dan tenaga kependidikan, kurikulum, sarana dan
Accepted 17-09-2023         prasarana, keuangan, dan hubungan masyarakat dengan baik, seperti: 1) sekolah telah
                            melaksanakan kegiatan perencanaan khususnya bagi siswa, guru, dan tenaga
                            kependidikan, kurikulum, sarana dan prasarana, keuangan, dan hubungan
                            Masyarakat; 2) sekolah telah melaksanakan kegiatan pengorganisasian bagi siswa,
                            dimana siswa laki-laki dan perempuan ditempatkan secara terpisah. kelas, dan guru
                            atau tenaga kependidikan laki-laki dan perempuan juga diberikan ruangan terpisah;
                            3) sekolah menerapkan kurikulum mandiri untuk kelas 1 dan 4, kemudian kurikulum
                            Kementerian Agama dan Kementerian Pendidikan Nasional untuk kelas 2, 3, 5, dan
                            6; 4) dalam pelaksanaan evaluasi, sekolah membuat ujian yang disiapkan sendiri,
                            bukan berasal dari Departemen Pendidikan Nasional.

Corresponding Author:
Rudi Erwandi
Universitas PGRI Silampari; rudi.erwadi.llg@gmail.com




                           http://pasca.jurnalikhac.ac.id/index.php/tijie/index

Salafi-Based Integrated Islamic Elementary School Management



   INTRODUCTION
         Currently, parents have entrusted their children to go to an integrated Islamic-
   based educational institution. The high interest of parents in sending their children
   to integrated Islamic schools is caused by 3 factors, theological, sociological, and
   academic factors.1 The theological factor is a reason based on religious considerations.
   Parents want their children to have a strong religious education base. Sociological
   factors are related to the increasing image of Islamic schools in Indonesia. Academic
   factors are related to SDIT’s ability to achieve high academic achievement for
   students.2
         Based on the 3 factors above, it is the basis for parents to send their children to
   integrated Islamic-based educational institutions. Management of integrated Islamic
   Education Institutions needs to consider quality religious education in order to attract
   parental choice of education from the Muslim middle class, according to Suyatno.3
   Besides that, to respond to the community so that they can send their children to
   integrated Islamic education institutions, of course, improvements are needed in
   terms of input, process, and output.4
         Improvement of this component has an impact on good output and dispels
   negative perceptions from the community.5 In addition to this, efforts to return to the
   principles of Islamic education institutions are the key to the development of
   madrasas for the better, namely the principle of compulsory education is the principle
   of education for all, the principle of education with an inclusive and global outlook,
   the principle of balanced or integral education, education in accordance with
   expertise, fun education, education based on research and plans as well as superior
   and professional education.
         Management of Islamic education is a process of structuring/managing Islamic
   educational institutions that involves Muslim and non-human human resources in
   moving them to achieve the goals of Islamic education effectively and efficiently 6.
   That means that in an Islamic educational institution it is necessary to have good

       1 Kardi Kardi et al., ‘Challenges of Online Boarding Schools In The Digital Era’, At-Tadzkir: Islamic

Education Journal 2, no. 1 (8 March 2023): 37–51, https://doi.org/10.59373/attadzkir.v2i1.11; Fitri Susanti et
al., ‘Pengaruh Kepemimpinan Dan Motivasi Kerja Pegawai Terhadap Kedisiplinan Guru Di Madrasah
Aliyah Negeri’, Kharisma: Jurnal Administrasi Dan Manajemen Pendidikan 2, no. 2 (26 August 2023): 91–102,
https://doi.org/10.59373/kharisma.v2i2.14.
        2 S Suyatno, ‘Sekolah Dasar Islam Terpadu Dalam Konsepsi’, Analisa Journal of Social Science and

Religio 22, no. 1 (2015): 121–33.
        3 Suyatno.
        4 Mohammad Sabarudin et al., ‘The Effect of Contextual Teaching and Learning Models on Al-Quran

and Hadith Subjects’, At-Tadzkir: Islamic Education Journal 2, no. 2 (26 August 2023): 129–42,
https://doi.org/10.59373/attadzkir.v2i2.43.
        5 Susanti et al., ‘Pengaruh Kepemimpinan Dan Motivasi Kerja Pegawai Terhadap Kedisiplinan Guru

Di Madrasah Aliyah Negeri’; Amalia Fasya, Nefi Darmayanti, and Junaidi Arsyad, ‘The Influence of
Learning Motivation and Discipline on Learning Achievement of Islamic Religious Education in State
Elementary       Schools’,     Nazhruna:    Jurnal    Pendidikan   Islam   6,   no.    1    (2023):     1–12,
https://doi.org/10.31538/nzh.v6i1.2711.
        6 Endang Listiowaty, ‘Konsep Manajemen Pendidikan Berbasis Islam Dalam Upaya Pencapaian

Tujuan Pendidikan’, Jurnal Tahdzibi: Manajemen Pendidikan Islam 5, no. 2 (2020): 105–16,
https://doi.org/10.24853/tahdzibi.5.2.105-116.



503| Vol. 4, No. (3) 2023: Tafkir: Interdisciplinary Journal of Islamic Education

Rudi Erwandi et al



   management in accordance with the rules and teachings contained in the Al-Qur’an
   and Hadith, while the management process of Islamic education includes planning
   Islamic education management, organizing Islamic education management,
   actuating Islamic education management and controlling management of Islamic
   education. In addition, in the management of Islamic education there are the
   principles of management of Islamic education, namely, amar ma’ruf nahi munkar
   (sincere), upholding the truth (honest), upholding justice (fair), conveying the
   mandate to experts (responsibility).7
         This research focuses on the management of Salafi-based integrated Islamic
   schools, bearing in mind that the development of integrated Islamic schools is
   currently very developed, where parents are very enthusiastic about sending their
   children to integrated Islamic schools by combining the general curriculum with an
   Islamic-based curriculum, in this study the Salafi-based curriculum.


   METHODS
         This study uses a qualitative approach with phenomenological methods. This
   research was conducted at the Raodatul Jannah Lobuklinggau Integrated Islamic
   Elementary School. The research subjects consisted of the Principal, the Teacher
   Council, and the School Staff. Data collection technique was an interview. The data
   analysis technique uses the Miles & Huberman interactive model, with the flow of
   the stages of data collection, data reduction, data display, and conclusion drawing &
   and verifying.
         The steps taken in the analysis after data collection are as follows. First, the
   development of a coding category system. The coding in this study was made based
   on research background cases, data collection techniques, data sources, research
   problems, and time of research activities. The coding used in this study is presented
   in the following table.
                           Table 1. Data Analysis Coding System
        No                       Coding Aspect                              Code
        1      Data collection technique
                1. Interview                                                  W
                2. Observation                                                O
                3. Documentation                                              D
        2      Respondent
                1. Principal                                                  KS
                2. Teacher                                                    G
                3. Staff                                                      SS
        3      Research Problems
                a. Planning                                                   P
                b. Organizing                                                 Pg
                c. Madrasa Program Implementation                             Pl


      7 Listiowaty.




504| Vol. 4, No. (3) 2023: Tafkir: Interdisciplinary Journal of Islamic Education

Salafi-Based Integrated Islamic Elementary School Management



                 d. Madrasah Program Evaluation                               E
        4       Time of Activity: Date, Month, and Year                   02-11-2022


         This coding is used in data analysis activities. The research focus code is used
   to classify research data obtained through interviews, document study, and
   observation. Then at the end of the field notes or interview transcripts are included;
   research location code, data collection techniques, data sources, date, month, and
   year. The following shows an example of implementing the code and how to read it.
     W-2-G-PRPM. 02-04-21



     Note
     W           : Interview
     2           : Respondent Number
     G           : Teacher
     P           : Planning
     02-11-22    : Date, Month, and Year

          Second, data sorting. After the codes have been made complete with
   operational restrictions, each field note is read again, and each unit of data listed in it
   is given the appropriate code. What is meant by units here are pieces of field notes in
   the form of sentences, paragraphs, or a sequence of paragraphs. The codes are written
   on the margins of the field note sheets. Then all field notes are photocopied. The
   results of the copy are cut into pieces based on data units, while the original field
   notes are kept as an archive. The pieces of field notes are sorted or grouped based on
   their respective codes as listed on the left edge. To facilitate tracking in the original
   field notes, a notation is given at the bottom of each data unit.
          Third, the formulation of conclusions as provisional findings in each single case
   is carried out by synthesizing all the collected data. For this purpose, several context
   diagrams are made first. If there is no bias, then only conclusions are made.

RESULTS AND DISCUSSION
Result
Salafi-Based Integrated Islamic Elementary School Planning
        The process of planning designed by the Salafi-based integrated Islamic
   elementary school is presented in Table 1.
         Table 2. Salafi-Based Integrated Islamic Elementary School Planning
  No Research Question                       Interview results                Informant
  1    Salafi-Based          “It is true that in carrying out good activities School
       Integrated Islamic the learning process really requires planning, principal
       Elementary School especially curriculum planning, finance,
       Planning              teaching and education staff, students and so
                             on”




505| Vol. 4, No. (3) 2023: Tafkir: Interdisciplinary Journal of Islamic Education

Rudi Erwandi et al



                                “we plan for students, by dividing and Teacher
                                separating between male and female students
                                in the learning process”

                                “Yes, during the learning process, male and Student
                                female students are separated to avoid direct
                                interaction between them in classrooms.”

                                “We are very committed to maintaining School
                                morals between male teachers and female principal
                                teachers by separating their rooms, so that in
                                the implementation of learning we can
                                always focus on their respective duties.”)

                                “It's true, we are well prepared, especially in Teacher
                                our morals and manners, because we are an
                                example and role model for students, if our
                                manners and morals are not good, then
                                students will also follow their example not
                                well, and vice versa, if our manners and
                                morals are good teacher, then students will
                                imitate him to be good”

                                “Yes, we are well prepared, especially in our School
                                morals and manners, because we are an staff
                                example and role model for students.”

                                “yes, we always carry out planning activities School
                                for facilities and infrastructure to support principal
                                student learning activities in class, for
                                example, we prepare independent books to
                                support the implementation of learning that
                                already has an ISBN”

                                “We plan the fulfillment of facilities and Teacher
                                infrastructure       long    before     the
                                implementation year, such as the use of
                                independent books, we plan the previous
                                year for next year’s implementation”

                                “We have planned a curriculum that will be School
                                developed in the form of lesson plans, so that Staff
                                teachers in teaching are obliged to make
                                lesson plans, as a guide in implementing
                                learning”

                                “I really emphasize to the teacher council to School
                                always make a lesson plan before teaching, principal




506| Vol. 4, No. (3) 2023: Tafkir: Interdisciplinary Journal of Islamic Education

Salafi-Based Integrated Islamic Elementary School Management



                                because the lesson plan is a teacher’s guide in
                                delivering learning material to students”

                                “Financial planning is also an important School
                                factor in supporting the implementation of principal
                                learning, because during the learning process
                                it requires money in its operational activities,
                                especially in implementing school programs”

                                “It is true that school financial planning is Teacher
                                very important to do to support the
                                implementation of school programs, which
                                really need a lot of money to implement”

                                “The relationship between the school and the School
                                community must indeed be well established, staff
                                therefore it is very necessary to plan a
                                collaboration between the school and the
                                community, so that the community can
                                provide their participation in the school”


          In carrying out organizational activities, planning is needed, because planning
   is the first step in carrying out future institutional activities. There is a lot that needs
   to be planned in school activities, starting from curriculum planning, finance,
   facilities and infrastructure, teaching and education staff, and students.
          Student planning is very important to be carried out by schools, so that students
   can carry out the learning process at school properly, without good planning, it is
   very difficult to implement learning to run well. Student planning is very important
   to do so that the implementation can run well.
          Besides planning to separate male and female students, a separation was also
   carried out between male and female teachers in carrying out their duties as educators
   and teachers at school.
          Furthermore, planning for teaching and educational staff is very important for
   the implementation of learning in schools, because teaching and educational staff are
   examples and role models for their students, therefore teaching and educational staff
   must be well prepared, both morally and academically.
          In addition to planning the planned teaching and educational staff, schools
   must also plan facilities and markets so that the implementation of the learning
   process can run well, if the facilities and infrastructure are not planned properly, it
   can hinder the learning process at school.
          Indeed, facilities and infrastructure must be well planned so that in the future
   they can support teaching and learning activities properly in schools, planning
   activities are carried out before the implementation year so that next year’s needs for
   facilities and infrastructure can be met properly, so that implementation can be
   carried out according to what has been planned.
          Besides planning facilities and infrastructure, it is also necessary to plan a
   curriculum in the process of implementing learning, the curriculum is a guideline for




507| Vol. 4, No. (3) 2023: Tafkir: Interdisciplinary Journal of Islamic Education

Rudi Erwandi et al



   teachers which is developed in the form of a lesson plan (RPP) which is very
   important, so that teachers in teaching can prepare it properly.
          It is very important that the lesson plan is prepared properly, this is to make the
   giri carry out its duties, that is, teaching can go according to what is expected, if the
   teaching teacher does not make a lesson plan, then the implementation of learning
   cannot go well.
          In addition to planning the curriculum, it is also necessary to plan finances well
   to support the implementation of learning in the classroom, but if finances are not
   planned properly, the learning process will be hampered, so that learning objectives
   cannot run well.
          The implementation of school programs really needs finance, so that school
   finances need to be planned properly, so that the operational implementation of
   school programs can be carried out properly, but if finances are not planned properly,
   the implementation of school programs will experience obstacles and constraints.
          In addition to school financial planning, it is also very important to carry out
   community relations planning activities, so that cooperation between schools and the
   community can run well, schools also need community support in their
   implementation.
          The last is planning of community participation in schools, which is not only
   material, but non-material, such as the contribution of thoughts or ideas for school
   progress, can also support school progress. Planning for community relations must
   be carried out by the school, so that the school has a partner in supporting the
   progress of the school, but if the partnership between the school and the community
   is not going well, then the school will work alone and it will be difficult to achieve
   school goals.

   Organizing Salafi-Based Integrated Islamic Elementary Schools
          In addition to planning what schools must do, organizing activities is very
   important for schools to map and sort out the priority scales that must be carried out.
   Organizing activities are carried out after planning so that schools can easily group
   school activities. Organizing students is very important because each student has a
   character, personality, and abilities of each.
          Organizing activities are very important for students to help smooth the
   learning process, such as grouping male and female students separately during the
   learning process, this is done to prevent mixing between male and female students
   during the learning process.
          Moreover, educators and educational staff need to be organized properly, so
   that they can carry out their duties properly. Organizing is done not to discriminate
   between the abilities of each teaching and educational staff, but for the benefit of the
   progress and quality of the learning process in the classroom.
          In this context, organizing activities are carried out to improve the quality of
   teachers in carrying out their duties, both as teaching staff and educators, as teaching
   staff teachers provide knowledge to students, here teachers are required to have the
   best abilities in the academic field, as well as educate, teachers become role models
   and examples, so that the teacher’s personality and character are highlighted in
   educating students, because the teacher is a role model and figure for their students.
          In addition to organizing teaching and education staff, schools must also carry
   out organizing activities for school facilities and infrastructure, so that the
   implementation of learning can support it well and be in accordance with learning



508| Vol. 4, No. (3) 2023: Tafkir: Interdisciplinary Journal of Islamic Education

Salafi-Based Integrated Islamic Elementary School Management



   needs. Facilities and infrastructure need to be organized properly so that what is a
   learning need can be fulfilled properly.
          Organizing activities for facilities and infrastructure such as setting up
   classrooms, reference books that will be taught is very important to be well prepared,
   because each class and level requires good advice and infrastructure so that learning
   activities can be carried out properly too.
          In addition to the activities of organizing teaching and educational staff,
   students, facilities and infrastructure, organizing the curriculum is also very
   important, usually schools besides using the government curriculum also use the
   foundation or independent curriculum as an addition in improving school quality.
          Each school has its characteristics and characteristics, so that it can be
   recognized and becomes an attraction for the community in sending their children to
   schools that have these characteristics, therefore it is very important to carry out
   organizing activities for the curriculum so that the process of implementing learning
   can run well and the quality of the school well achievable. Then financial organization
   also becomes very important to support school programs.
          Organizing finances is very important for schools, especially private schools
   which are purely sourced from student fees and donations, not sourced from the
   government, so that school finances must be properly regulated and managed, so that
   they can support the implementation of school programs properly, but if school
   finances are not organized properly, it is difficult for schools to realize their superior
   programs.
          In addition to organizing school finances, organizing community relations is
   very important to support school progress, the surrounding community is also
   responsible for school progress, because the community will also benefit from the
   school’s success in producing superior and noble human resources. However, if there
   is very little community involvement in the school, then the school will not get
   support or support from school partners.
          Community involvement in school progress is very important so that schools
   get partners in advancing schools, but if schools do not have partners, then schools
   will experience a heavy burden in school progress, usually community
   representatives to schools are the active role of school committees in advancing
   schools, therefore it is very it is important to carry out organizing activities for the
   community, especially for the school committee in supporting school programs.

   Implementation of an Integrated Salafi-Based Islamic Elementary School
          Implementation activities are activities carried out after planning and
   organizing activities, so that what has been planned will be carried out at the
   implementation stage. Student implementation activities where students are given
   learning through planned programs, so that students can carry out learning activities
   properly.
          In carrying out student activities, there are various kinds of school ways to carry
   it out, such as separating rooms between male and female students as a form of effort
   to educate and maintain the morals of those who are not muhrim, so this is very
   important to do so that during the learning process it can run well.
          Implementation activities are important activities, where what has been
   planned and organized can go well, such as implementation activities for students
   during the learning and teaching process, this needs to be carried out properly, so




509| Vol. 4, No. (3) 2023: Tafkir: Interdisciplinary Journal of Islamic Education

Rudi Erwandi et al



   that the learning process can run well and optimally, so that the goals learning can go
   well too.
          In addition to the implementation of students, also the implementation of
   teaching and educational staff, where the implementation of teaching and
   educational staff is carried out in accordance with the previous plan and organization
   of students. The activities of implementing students are very important so that
   educators and education staff can carry out their duties properly.
          The separation between male and female teachers as well as male and female
   treasurers is one of the school’s strategies for carrying out effective learning so that
   this separation can reduce contact between men and women who are not ihram and
   also maintain teacher morals in carrying out their duties.
          The implementation of teaching and educational staff must indeed be carried
   out properly so that in carrying out their duties they can be carried out properly,
   especially educators in this case are teachers, who educate and teach who must be
   able to set an example and set an example to their students, therefore the
   implementation of teaching and educational staff must well do.
          In addition to implementing teaching and educational staff, it is also necessary
   to implement adequate facilities and infrastructure to support learning and teaching
   activities in the classroom. Facilities and infrastructure really support the success or
   failure of the learning process. Good facilities and infrastructure can help and support
   the implementation of good learning as well.
          Implementation of good facilities and infrastructure is very supportive in
   implementing good learning as well, therefore it is very important for schools to carry
   out activities of facilities and infrastructure properly too, if schools do not prepare
   school facilities and infrastructure properly, it will have a negative impact on the
   learning process in the classroom, so that it also has an impact on the quality of
   learning.
          Indeed, schools should prepare facilities and infrastructure properly to support
   school progress, if facilities and infrastructure are not managed properly, it will
   greatly affect the learning process of students in the classroom.
          Besides the implementation of facilities and infrastructure, it is also very
   important to implement the curriculum properly in supporting the learning process
   in the classroom, the curriculum implemented in the form of a lesson plan is very
   important for teachers to use as a reference and guide in delivering learning material.
          Implementing a good curriculum is very important in the progress of schools,
   the curriculum is a school guide for carrying out learning activities properly, if the
   curriculum is not implemented properly, it will have a negative impact on the
   implementation of learning in the classroom.
          Besides implementing the curriculum, financial implementation is also very
   important in the implementation of quality learning. Quality learning cannot be
   separated from good financial management as well.
          Then also for the implementation of community relations it is very important
   to be carried out by the school, because community relations with the school really
   need to be carried out in supporting the progress of the school, therefore it is very
   necessary for schools to establish relationships with the community to advance the
   school.
          Cooperation between schools and the community must be well established in
   supporting school progress, the community is a partner for schools to advance




510| Vol. 4, No. (3) 2023: Tafkir: Interdisciplinary Journal of Islamic Education

Salafi-Based Integrated Islamic Elementary School Management



   schools, usually community representatives in schools are school committees who
   can collaborate with schools to advance schools.
   Evaluation of Salafi-Based Integrated Islamic Elementary Schools
         The data on how the school administers evaluation on their management are
   displayed in Table 5.
         Table 5. Evaluation of Salafi-Based Integrated Islamic Elementary Schools
     No Research                Interview results                        Informant
            Question
     4      Evaluation      of “To measure students’ abilities both School
            Salafi-Based        academically and non-academically, a principal
            Integrated Islamic test instrument is needed in the form of
            Elementary          questions, where we make them based
            Schools             on the conditions and abilities of our
                                students”

                                    “We pay great attention to the ability School staff
                                    of the teacher in carrying out his
                                    duties, because the teacher is the
                                    spearhead of student success in
                                    achieving learning goals”

                                    “Yes, the school principal always Teacher
                                    evaluates periodically the ability and
                                    quality of students in carrying out their
                                    duties, so that learning objectives can
                                    be achieved properly”

                                    “I, as the school principal, very often School
                                    check the condition of school facilities principal
                                    and infrastructure, especially those
                                    that are directly related to the learning
                                    process”

                                    “We always evaluate the teacher’s School staff
                                    learning implementation plan, because
                                    this is very important for the teacher in
                                    carrying out his duties, if the lesson
                                    plan is not corrected, it is feared that
                                    there will be errors which can result in
                                    the learning process in the classroom”

                                    “Evaluation of school finances is my School
                                    priority, because with the funds that principal
                                    have been spent it really has to be
                                    realized well, so that school programs
                                    can be achieved well too”




511| Vol. 4, No. (3) 2023: Tafkir: Interdisciplinary Journal of Islamic Education

Rudi Erwandi et al



                                    “Indeed, Jami always evaluates School staff
                                    cooperation with the community,
                                    because good cooperation can support
                                    the progress and success of schools”


          Evaluation is the final activity in management, in this case is the evaluation of
   students, where to see the ability of students both academically and non-
   academically, to find out students’ abilities both academically and non-academically,
   it is necessary to make assessment questions made to measure students’ abilities both
   academically and non-academically.
          Questions are made by the teacher based on the ability of students where
   students have been given material, so students can answer what the teacher has
   taught, the questions that have been made cannot be separated from the role of the
   teacher in making them, the teacher makes questions based on the material that has
   been presented, so that students can understand and answer questions well.
          The ability of the teacher in carrying out his duties, namely educating and
   rooting is a very important matter for the school to pay attention to, because it is the
   teacher who conveys and knows the actual condition of students during the learning
   process, therefore the school should be able to periodically evaluate the quality and
   the teacher’s ability to carry out their duties.
          In addition to evaluating teaching and educational staff, the school must also
   be able to evaluate the facilities and infrastructure that can support the learning
   process. of facilities and infrastructure is important to do.
          In addition to evaluating the condition of facilities and infrastructure, the school
   must also evaluate the curriculum that has been implemented, especially the quality
   of the lesson plan made by the teacher, the RPP is very important to evaluate, so that
   the teacher in carrying out his duties, namely teaching students does not deviate and
   is in accordance with the guidelines and procedures that have been made.
          Equally important in carrying out an evaluation is an evaluation of financial
   management, because this must be done so that the funds that have been spent are
   indeed in accordance with what has been planned and the programs that have been
   carried out are really successful as expected, if not then this has happened. problems
   in the implementation of school finances.
          Likewise, the evaluation of the relationship between school and community,
   which must be well established and can produce something that can support school
   progress, the community is the school’s partner in advancing the school.
          Evaluation of community relations, especially with school committees, is very
   important in supporting school progress, evaluations should be carried out
   periodically and continuously so that community participation in schools increases
   which has a very extraordinary impact on school progress.

   Discussion
   Salafi-Based Integrated Islamic Elementary School Planning
          The Raudatul Jannah Integrated Islamic Elementary School has carried out
   planning activities, especially for students, education and education staff, curriculum,
   facilities and infrastructure, finance, and good community relations. Realizing a
   superior school program cannot be separated from superior planning as well. The




512| Vol. 4, No. (3) 2023: Tafkir: Interdisciplinary Journal of Islamic Education

Salafi-Based Integrated Islamic Elementary School Management



   results of Sabirin8 state that the essence of planning is how the process is
   implemented. Because whatever plans are made if they are not implemented then all
   these plans have no meaning whatsoever. Planning plays an important role in the
   implementation of the madrasah program, there are various approaches to planning.
          The results of Priyanto’s research9 state that bottom-up and top-down planning
   approaches. The planning mechanism from the bottom up is usually carried out
   because it wants to meet the real needs of the community for education. This bottom-
   up planning process begins by identifying needs at the community level that are
   directly related to the implementation and impact of the planned education activities.
          In making program planning, it must be adjusted to the vision and mission of
   the madrasa.10 Leading Madrasahs must be designed in accordance with the vision
   and mission and institutional goals, analysis of the needs of the academic and
   institutional systems, and understand the geographic and cultural context. The result
   of Hasanah et.al’s study 11 Planning for the development of madrasas towards leading
   madrasas, namely: starting from improving the teaching and learning process, then
   fixing the system for accepting new students (input), teachers must be professional
   and competent, availability of supporting infrastructure, management with a global
   and progressive outlook and foresight, extracurricular activities as a venue for self-
   appreciation with sufficient budget to meet needs.12
          Then the role of leadership that is firm, intelligent and a solid team is an
   important part of managing a superior madrasah. The study result of Katni and Rois
   13 highlighted that all management elements in the madrasa become a solid team,

   interact, communicate and establish very close relationships because they are led by
   a school principal who is firm, open, candid and honest. The result of Masudah’s
   study14 indicated that madrasah management organizations need leaders/managers
   who really understand the basic concepts of strategy and quality management for
   madrasah primary schools so that these managers have a wise vision and are able to
   inspire staff/workers and the entire madrasah primary organizational community.




      8 S. Sabirin, ‘Perencanaan Kepala Sekolah Tentang Pembelajaran’, Jurnal Tabularasa PPS UNIMED 9,

no. 1 (2012): 111–28.
        9 Dwi Priyanto, ‘Pengembangan Perencanaan Pendidikan Islam (Konsep Strategi Pengembangan Di

Indonesia)’, INSANIA : Jurnal Pemikiran Alternatif Kependidikan 16, no. 3 (2018): 294–307,
https://doi.org/10.24090/insania.v16i3.1594.
        10 Agustini Buchari and Erni Moh. Saleh, ‘Merancang Pengembangan Madrasah Unggul’, Journal of

Islamic Education Policy 1, no. 2 (2017): 95–112, https://doi.org/10.30984/j.v1i2.429.
        11 W Hasanah et al., ‘Perencanaan Pengembangan Madrasah Di MAS Teladan Ujung Kubu

Kecamatan Tanjung Tiram Kabupaten Batu Bara’, Sabilarrasyid: Jurnal Pendidikan Dan Ilmu Kependidikan 4,
no. 1 (2019): 33–43.
12 Umin Kango et al., ‘Implementasi Strategi Pemasaran Di Madrasah Aliyah Unggulan Bertaraf

Internasional’, Munaddhomah: Jurnal Manajemen Pendidikan Islam 4, no. 1 (21 February 2023): 81–91,
https://doi.org/10.31538/munaddhomah.v4i1.340; Ririn Inayatul Mahfudhoh, M. Yunus Abu Bakar, and
Ah Zakki Fuad, ‘Modern Pesantren Leadership Based on Internalisation of Pancajiwa’, Nidhomul Haq :
Jurnal Manajemen Pendidikan Islam 8, no. 1 (23 March 2023): 108–24,
https://doi.org/10.31538/ndh.v8i1.3304.
        13 K Katni and Adib Khusnul Rois, ‘Pengelolaan Madrasah Dalam Perspektif Manajemen Mutu

Terpadu’, Muaddib 05, no. 02 (2015): 111–34.
        14 Masudah, ‘Konsep Dasar Manajemen Strategi Dan Mutu Madrasah Ibtidaiyah’, Jurnal Didaktia

Islamika 7, no. 1 (2016): 186–99.



513| Vol. 4, No. (3) 2023: Tafkir: Interdisciplinary Journal of Islamic Education

Rudi Erwandi et al



          The fulfillment of educational standards is also an inseparable component in
   creating superior madrasas. Eriyanto15 mentioned madrasahs should further
   empower each important component of madrasas in terms of content standards,
   process standards, graduate competency standards, assessment standards and
   management standards in order to achieve madrasah goals, vision and mission.16
          Educational institutions must be optimistic, madrasah products can compete
   with other public schools, to be able to compete with other public schools there are at
   least several strategic steps that must be implemented, namely planning, organizing,
   leadership, directing, mobilizing, communicating, coordinating, controlling,
   monitoring evaluation, budgeting, and the scope of education management.17

   Organizing Salafi-Based Integrated Islamic Elementary Schools
          The Raudatul Jannah Integrated Islamic Elementary School has carried out
   organizing activities both in organizing students, where male and female students are
   kept in separate classes and also teaching and educational staff is made to have
   separate rooms between male and female teachers, as well as the treasurer who serves
   male students -men are served by male treasurers and female treasurers serve female
   students.
          The organization that was carried out at the Raodatul Jannah Integrated Islamic
   Elementary School was based on Islamic Education management. Management of
   Islamic education is a process of structuring/managing Islamic educational
   institutions that involves Muslim and non-human human resources in moving them
   to achieve the goals of Islamic education effectively and efficiently.18 That means that
   in an Islamic educational institution, it is necessary to have good management in
   accordance with the rules and teachings contained in the Al-Qur’an and Hadith,
   while the management process of Islamic education includes planning Islamic
   education management, organizing Islamic education management, actuating
   Islamic education management and controlling the management of Islamic
   education. In addition, in the management of Islamic education, there are the
   principles of management of Islamic education, namely, amar ma’ruf nahi munkar
   (sincere), upholding the truth (honest), upholding justice (fair), conveying the
   mandate to experts (responsibility).19

   Implementation of an Integrated Salafi-Based Islamic Elementary School
         Raudatul Jannah Integrated Islamic Elementary School in its implementation
   uses an independent curriculum for grades 1 and 4, then for grades 2, 3, 5 and 6 uses
   the curriculum from the Ministry of Religious Affairs and the Ministry of Education
   and Culture. the book used; An independent book published by the Asy-Syafi’i Faith
   Library is only used for grade 1, for grades 2 - grade 6 others are in progress. books

        15 E Eriyanto, ‘Pengelolaan Pendidikan Islam Yang Efektif: Menjawab Tantangan Pendidikan Islam

Di Era Industri 4.0’, Jurnal Pendidikan Islam Indonesia 4, no. 1 (2019): 74–88,
https://doi.org/10.35316/jpii.v4i1.172.
        16 Fitri Meliani, Hasan Basri, and Andewi Suhartini, ‘Learning System in Salafi Manhaj Boarding

School’, Munaddhomah: Jurnal Manajemen Pendidikan Islam 4, no. 2 (9 March 2023): 175–86,
https://doi.org/10.31538/munaddhomah.v4i2.300.
        17 S Suprapti, ‘Analisis Kritis Manajemen Madrasah Di Era Otonomi Daerah’, Religi: Jurnal Studi Islam

5, no. 1 (2014): 102–23.
        18 Listiowaty, ‘Konsep Manajemen Pendidikan Berbasis Islam Dalam Upaya Pencapaian Tujuan

Pendidikan’.
        19 Listiowaty.




514| Vol. 4, No. (3) 2023: Tafkir: Interdisciplinary Journal of Islamic Education

Salafi-Based Integrated Islamic Elementary School Management



   published by Yudistira and Airlangga and Modules and books (ISBN). Then learning
   includes elements of education, preaching and social.
         Realizing a superior school has become a necessity so that it can become an
   educational institution that integrates general knowledge and religion at the forefront
   in producing a generation that is faithful and knowledgeable. The result of Wahed’s
   study 20 explained there are four fundamentalist strategic pillars in exploring the
   potential of superior madrasas, namely: 1) generating motivation, motivation is the
   foundation of everything you want to achieve, 2) reading opportunities, 3) time
   management skills, and 4) being diligent and tenacious. Then Yusuf 21 stated, to
   achieve the goal of becoming a superior madrasah, mature management is needed,
   support from various parties, and supporting infrastructure.22
         The result of Yusuf’s study 23 indicated that actually madrasas have better or
   more advanced capital compared to public schools to make themselves qualified.
   Quality schools can be seen from a clear vision, mission, professional management
   and good planning. Yusra24 stated that discipline, maximally empowered teacher and
   administrative staff resources, support from parents of students, fulfillment of
   curriculum needs according to local conditions, availability of facilities and
   infrastructure, carrying out financial management optimally were supporting factors
   in realizing superior madrasah.
         It was stated that the supporting factor in the development of superior classes
   was the formation of a curriculum development TEAM collaboration network, but
   the inhibiting factor was the readiness of students who had not been maximized in
   participating in superior class programs 25. The development of superior madrasas
   cannot be separated from the principal’s strategy 26, the strategy devised by the school
   principal, namely, increasing the ability to teach teachers, optimizing the use of media
   and educational facilities, carrying out routine supervision, establishing cooperation
   with the community and applying strict discipline which is always implemented.




        20 Abd Wahed, ‘Strategi Mewujudkan Sekolah Dan Madrasah Unggulan Di Era Global’, Al-Ibrah:

Jurnal Pendidikan Dan Keilmuan Islam 3, no. 1 (2018): 1–28.
        21 Muhammad Yusuf, ‘Perkembangan Madrasah Formal Di Indonesia’, INTIZAM : Jurnal Manajemen

Pendidikan Islam 2, no. 2 (2019): 135–46.
        22 Maidatus Sholihah, Muhammad Anas Maarif, and Moh Syahru Romadhan, ‘Konseling Islam

Dengan Dzikir Tarekat Qadiriyah Naqsabandiyah: Mengatasi Kegelisahan Jiwa Dan Bathin’, Al-Afkar,
Journal For Islamic Studies, 13 September 2021, 299–317, https://doi.org/10.31943/afkarjournal.v4i2.143;
Prastio Surya and Muhammad Husnur Rofiq, ‘Internalisasi Nilai Karakter Jujur Dalam Proses Pembelajaran
Di Kelas VIII Madrasah Tsanawiyah Unggulan Hikmatul Amanah Pacet Mojokerto’, Munaddhomah: Jurnal
Manajemen          Pendidikan       Islam    2,       no.   1      (4      August       2021):   31–37,
https://doi.org/10.31538/munaddhomah.v2i1.65.
        23 Yusuf, ‘Perkembangan Madrasah Formal Di Indonesia’.
        24 Y Yusra, ‘Implementasi Manajemen Sekolah Unggulan Di Indonesia: Studi Kasus SMP Al-Azhar

Palu Sebagai Lembaga Pendidikan Islam’, Jurnal Diskursus Islam 2, no. 3 (2014): 335–53.
        25 Farida Hanun, ‘Membangun Citra Madrasah Melalui Program Kelas Unggulan Di MTsN 2 Bandar

Lampung’, EDUKASI: Jurnal Penelitian Pendidikan Agama Dan Keagamaan 14, no. 3 (2016): 405–24,
https://doi.org/10.32729/edukasi.v14i3.9.
        26 Muhammad Yusuf Ahmad, Devi Arisanti, and Ridoan Nasution, ‘Strategi Kepala Madrasah Dalam

Mewujudkan Madrasah Unggulan Di MIN 3 Simpang Tiga Kecamatan Bukit Raya Kota Pekanbaru’, Al-
Hikmah: Jurnal Agama Dan Ilmu Pengetahuan 14, no. 2 (2017): 136–59, https://doi.org/10.25299/al-
hikmah:jaip.2017.vol14(2).1026.



515| Vol. 4, No. (3) 2023: Tafkir: Interdisciplinary Journal of Islamic Education

Rudi Erwandi et al



   Evaluation of Salafi-Based Integrated Islamic Elementary Schools
         In the implementation of the evaluation, the test questions were self-made, not
   from the National Education Office. All teachers make questions but are under
   control (corrected) by the school team whether the questions are feasible or not to be
   tested. For art subjects, only the theory is given (no practice). To improve the quality
   of teachers. Teachers are included in the training. Especially for female teachers only
   in the city of Lubuklinggau. For evaluation, teachers, facilities and infrastructure,
   curriculum, finance and society were evaluated by a Lantabul consultant from
   Jakarta.
         The fulfillment of educational standards is also an inseparable component in
   creating superior madrasas.27 Madrasahs should further empower each important
   component of madrasas in terms of content standards, process standards, graduate
   competency standards, assessment standards and management standards in order to
   achieve madrasah goals, vision and mission.

   CONCLUSION
          The emergence of Salafi-based integrated Islamic schools has been
   mushrooming due to the high enthusiasm from parents to send their children to this
   type of school. On this basis, the school should be managed appropriately based on
   Islamic teaching as an endeavor to sustain the quality of Islamic-based education.
          The present research reveals that a Salafi-based integrated school is managed
   through four processes: planning, organizing, implementing, and evaluating. These
   four steps are applied with respect to students, teaching and teachers, curriculum,
   facilities, finance, and school community relations. The intention is certainly to
   achieve an organizational goal—in this case, a madrasah objective—to become a
   leading and outstanding educational institution.
          These findings imply that the four steps cannot be separated in order to
   construct, promote, and improve excellent education based on the Islamic teaching
   and curriculum established by the Ministries of Religious Affairs and Education and
   Culture, as each stage determines the next phase. Careful and effective planning,
   organizing, implementing, and evaluating will enable schools to easily achieve
   quality education goals and standardized measurements established by authorities,
   in this case, the Ministry of Religious Affairs and the Ministry of Education and
   Culture. These findings are expected to shed light on how similar Islamic-based
   educational institutions should run their institutions for the purpose of advancing
   their educational mission.
          However, a much deeper investigation on this topic is highly recommended to
   reveal a more practical and deeper understanding of Salafi-based integrated Islamic
   schools. Furthermore, as this study solely involves one institution, more schools
   participating in a similar study are suggested since they will provide a fuller portrayal
   of the variety of Islamic schools’ management. Choosing a secondary level as the
   study site is also worth researching to discover how Salafi-based integrated Islamic
   schools at higher levels are managed.




       27 Eriyanto, ‘Pengelolaan Pendidikan Islam Yang Efektif: Menjawab Tantangan Pendidikan Islam Di

Era Industri 4.0’.



516| Vol. 4, No. (3) 2023: Tafkir: Interdisciplinary Journal of Islamic Education

Salafi-Based Integrated Islamic Elementary School Management



REFERENCES
Ahmad, Muhammad Yusuf, Devi Arisanti, and Ridoan Nasution. ‘Strategi Kepala Madrasah
        Dalam Mewujudkan Madrasah Unggulan Di MIN 3 Simpang Tiga Kecamatan Bukit
        Raya Kota Pekanbaru’. Al-Hikmah: Jurnal Agama Dan Ilmu Pengetahuan 14, no. 2
        (2017): 136–59. https://doi.org/10.25299/al-hikmah:jaip.2017.vol14(2).1026.
Buchari, Agustini, and Erni Moh. Saleh. ‘Merancang Pengembangan Madrasah Unggul’. Journal
        of Islamic Education Policy 1, no. 2 (2017): 95–112. https://doi.org/10.30984/j.v1i2.429.
Eriyanto, E. ‘Pengelolaan Pendidikan Islam Yang Efektif: Menjawab Tantangan Pendidikan
        Islam Di Era Industri 4.0’. Jurnal Pendidikan Islam Indonesia 4, no. 1 (2019): 74–88.
        https://doi.org/10.35316/jpii.v4i1.172.
Fasya, Amalia, Nefi Darmayanti, and Junaidi Arsyad. ‘The Influence of Learning Motivation and
        Discipline on Learning Achievement of Islamic Religious Education in State Elementary
        Schools’. Nazhruna: Jurnal Pendidikan Islam 6, no. 1 (2023): 1–12.
        https://doi.org/10.31538/nzh.v6i1.2711.
Hanun, Farida. ‘Membangun Citra Madrasah Melalui Program Kelas Unggulan Di MTsN 2
        Bandar Lampung’. EDUKASI: Jurnal Penelitian Pendidikan Agama Dan Keagamaan
        14, no. 3 (2016): 405–24. https://doi.org/10.32729/edukasi.v14i3.9.
Hasanah, W, N Nurhayati, T Zulham, and R Hidayat. ‘Perencanaan Pengembangan Madrasah Di
        MAS Teladan Ujung Kubu Kecamatan Tanjung Tiram Kabupaten Batu Bara’.
        Sabilarrasyid: Jurnal Pendidikan Dan Ilmu Kependidikan 4, no. 1 (2019): 33–43.
Kango, Umin, Yudi Nur Supriadi, Imriani Idrus, Yana Sonjaya, and Riskatul Hasanah.
        ‘Implementasi Strategi Pemasaran Di Madrasah Aliyah Unggulan Bertaraf
        Internasional’. Munaddhomah: Jurnal Manajemen Pendidikan Islam 4, no. 1 (21
        February 2023): 81–91. https://doi.org/10.31538/munaddhomah.v4i1.340.
Kardi, Kardi, Hasan Basri, Andewi Suhartini, and Fitri Meliani. ‘Challenges of Online Boarding
        Schools In The Digital Era’. At-Tadzkir: Islamic Education Journal 2, no. 1 (8 March
        2023): 37–51. https://doi.org/10.59373/attadzkir.v2i1.11.
Katni, K, and Adib Khusnul Rois. ‘Pengelolaan Madrasah Dalam Perspektif Manajemen Mutu
        Terpadu’. Muaddib 05, no. 02 (2015): 111–34.
Listiowaty, Endang. ‘Konsep Manajemen Pendidikan Berbasis Islam Dalam Upaya Pencapaian
        Tujuan Pendidikan’. Jurnal Tahdzibi: Manajemen Pendidikan Islam 5, no. 2 (2020): 105–
        16. https://doi.org/10.24853/tahdzibi.5.2.105-116.
Mahfudhoh, Ririn Inayatul, M. Yunus Abu Bakar, and Ah Zakki Fuad. ‘Modern Pesantren
        Leadership Based on Internalisation of Pancajiwa’. Nidhomul Haq : Jurnal Manajemen
        Pendidikan        Islam     8,     no.     1     (23      March       2023):     108–24.
        https://doi.org/10.31538/ndh.v8i1.3304.
Masudah. ‘Konsep Dasar Manajemen Strategi Dan Mutu Madrasah Ibtidaiyah’. Jurnal Didaktia
        Islamika 7, no. 1 (2016): 186–99.
Meliani, Fitri, Hasan Basri, and Andewi Suhartini. ‘Learning System in Salafi Manhaj Boarding
        School’. Munaddhomah: Jurnal Manajemen Pendidikan Islam 4, no. 2 (9 March 2023):
        175–86. https://doi.org/10.31538/munaddhomah.v4i2.300.
Priyanto, Dwi. ‘Pengembangan Perencanaan Pendidikan Islam (Konsep Strategi Pengembangan
        Di Indonesia)’. INSANIA : Jurnal Pemikiran Alternatif Kependidikan 16, no. 3 (2018):
        294–307. https://doi.org/10.24090/insania.v16i3.1594.
Sabarudin, Mohammad, Ibnu Imam Al Ayyubi, Rifqi Rohmatulloh, and Siti Indriyani. ‘The
        Effect of Contextual Teaching and Learning Models on Al-Quran and Hadith Subjects’.



517| Vol. 4, No. (3) 2023: Tafkir: Interdisciplinary Journal of Islamic Education

Rudi Erwandi et al



        At-Tadzkir: Islamic Education Journal 2, no. 2 (26 August 2023): 129–42.
        https://doi.org/10.59373/attadzkir.v2i2.43.
Sabirin, S. ‘Perencanaan Kepala Sekolah Tentang Pembelajaran’. Jurnal Tabularasa PPS
        UNIMED 9, no. 1 (2012): 111–28.
Sholihah, Maidatus, Muhammad Anas Maarif, and Moh Syahru Romadhan. ‘Konseling Islam
        Dengan Dzikir Tarekat Qadiriyah Naqsabandiyah: Mengatasi Kegelisahan Jiwa Dan
        Bathin’. Al-Afkar, Journal For Islamic Studies, 13 September 2021, 299–317.
        https://doi.org/10.31943/afkarjournal.v4i2.143.
Suprapti, S. ‘Analisis Kritis Manajemen Madrasah Di Era Otonomi Daerah’. Religi: Jurnal Studi
        Islam 5, no. 1 (2014): 102–23.
Surya, Prastio, and Muhammad Husnur Rofiq. ‘Internalisasi Nilai Karakter Jujur Dalam Proses
        Pembelajaran Di Kelas VIII Madrasah Tsanawiyah Unggulan Hikmatul Amanah Pacet
        Mojokerto’. Munaddhomah: Jurnal Manajemen Pendidikan Islam 2, no. 1 (4 August
        2021): 31–37. https://doi.org/10.31538/munaddhomah.v2i1.65.
Susanti, Fitri, Zakariyah Zakariyah, Mala Komalasari, and Jumira Warlizasusi. ‘Pengaruh
        Kepemimpinan Dan Motivasi Kerja Pegawai Terhadap Kedisiplinan Guru Di Madrasah
        Aliyah Negeri’. Kharisma: Jurnal Administrasi Dan Manajemen Pendidikan 2, no. 2 (26
        August 2023): 91–102. https://doi.org/10.59373/kharisma.v2i2.14.
Suyatno, S. ‘Sekolah Dasar Islam Terpadu Dalam Konsepsi’. Analisa Journal of Social Science
        and Religio 22, no. 1 (2015): 121–33.
Wahed, Abd. ‘Strategi Mewujudkan Sekolah Dan Madrasah Unggulan Di Era Global’. Al-Ibrah:
        Jurnal Pendidikan Dan Keilmuan Islam 3, no. 1 (2018): 1–28.
Yusra, Y. ‘Implementasi Manajemen Sekolah Unggulan Di Indonesia: Studi Kasus SMP Al-
        Azhar Palu Sebagai Lembaga Pendidikan Islam’. Jurnal Diskursus Islam 2, no. 3 (2014):
        335–53.
Yusuf, Muhammad. ‘Perkembangan Madrasah Formal Di Indonesia’. INTIZAM : Jurnal
        Manajemen Pendidikan Islam 2, no. 2 (2019): 135–46.




518| Vol. 4, No. (3) 2023: Tafkir: Interdisciplinary Journal of Islamic Education