Volume 1, Issue 5, June 2020                          E-ISSN : 2686-6331, P-ISSN : 2686-6358




     NATURAL SCHOOL MANAGEMENT: A NEW CONCEPT OF EDUCATION

   Firman Firman1
   1
     Universitas Jambi, Jambi, Indonesia

   ARTICLE INFORMATION                Abstract: A good managerial of the institution or
     Received: 25th May 2020          school will lead the resources in it to become
      Revised: 8th June 2020          effectively and efficiently to achieve a certain goal.
      Issued: 13rd June 2020          As a result, it is important to investigate the natural
                                      school management in order to give another
     Corresponding author: first      perception, understanding, and variation in managing
              author                  the school based on the perspective of the natural
                                      school as a new concept of the 21st education. This
               E-mail:                study used a qualitative method with a case study
       firman.fkip@unja.ac.id         approach. The data were collected through semi-
                                      structured       interviews,     observation,      and
                                      documentation. The data were then analyzed,
                                      described, and interpreted comprehensively. The data
                                      revealed that the school has good management in
                                      creating and preparing the character of the
                                      elementary students to become a good leader in the
                                      future.
      DOI:10.31933/DIJEMSS
                                      Keywords: educational management, natural
                                      school

   INTRODUCTION
             In the education 21st century, there are many choices of the school offered.
   From public school to the private schools that give the uniqueness of the school itself.
   One of the latest concepts proposed in the educational field is Natural school or sekolah
   alam. The natural school brings an alternative education that applied the universe as an
   object of learning. For example a place of learning, teaching material, and strategies of
   the teacher. This is in line with the concept of outdoor learning. According to some
   experts (Bilasa & Arslangilay, 2016; Çelik & Kasapoğlu, 2014; Öztürk Aynal, 2013;
   Preston, 2014; Price , 2015) in Husen and Islam (2017) believe that outdoor education
   in teaching and learning is increasingly being used as an effective approach for the
   realization of activities related to active learning and for teaching abstract concepts. It is
   also supported by other researchers that outdoor education is considered as an effective
   way of realizing active learning.




   Available Online: https://dinastipub.org/DIJEMSS                                     Page 617

Volume 1, Issue 5, June 2020                          E-ISSN : 2686-6331, P-ISSN : 2686-6358



         Several earlier studies have also linked this nature-based school to the positive
   impacts that have on children's development in the learning process. Some of the
   specific benefits that are identified by contact with nature are; improved awareness,
   reasoning, observation skills, co-ordination, balance, and reduced sickness (Driessnack,
   2009; Dowdell et al.,) in Husen and Islam (2017). Besides that Dayment and Bell
   (2008) and Downdell et al., (2011) in Gautheron (2004) add that when given a choice,
   children tend to choose an atmosphere related to nature, students will be more motivated
   and full of challenges in learning on objects surrounding objects.
         This research is intended to explore and to describe how the management process
   in the natural school developed in order to achieve its goals. Furthermore, from the
   background above, the researcher needs to answer a question, what makes this school
   different from the other schools in the context of the management, which consists of
   planning, organizing, actuating, and controlling.

   LITERATURE REVIEW
   Management
          Humans in living their life activities have different qualities between yesterday,
   now, and the day to come. As a creature that is intelligent and cultured, certainly wants
   a positive change in achieving life goals. The difference in quality obtained by every
   human being can be influenced by how each individual organizes, plans, manages every
   activity carried out. The success of each goal to be achieved is determined by each
   individual or institution in planning, organizing, implementing, and controlling every
   activity.
          The activities of planning, organizing, implementing, and supervising are called
   management. Because of that, human activity is inseparable from activities called
   management, so that the activities carried out can run as desired the process of directing
   and facilitating the work of people organized informal groups to achieve the desired
   goal (is a process of directing and providing work facilities to people organized
   informal groups to achieve goals).
          Another definition of management is as described by Terry in Hasibuan (2009)
   who states that management is a distinct process consisting of planning, organizing,
   actuating and controlling performed to determine and accomplished stated objectives by
   the use of human being and other resources (management is a typical process consisting
   of planning, organizing, implementing, and controlling actions taken to determine and
   achieve the targets that have been determined through the use of human resources and
   others). Koontz and O'Donnel in Hasibuan (2009: 3) define management as follows:
   Management is getting things done through people. In bringing about this coordinating
   of group activities, the manager, as a manager plans, organizes, staffs, directs, and
   control the activities of other people (management is an effort to achieve a certain goal
   through the activities of others). Thus the manager coordinates the amount of activity of
   others which includes planning, organizing, placement, direction, and control.
          Therefore, the manager coordinates the amount of activity of others which
   includes planning, organizing, placement, direction, and control. Other experts, Hersey
   and Blanchard in Siswanto (2005: 2) provide management constraints as follows:


   Available Online: https://dinastipub.org/DIJEMSS                                  Page 618

Volume 1, Issue 5, June 2020                          E-ISSN : 2686-6331, P-ISSN : 2686-6358



   Management as working with and through individuals and groups to accomplish
   organizational goals (management as an effort made with individuals or groups to
   achieve organizational goals). In this case, more emphasis on the definition is not
   intended only for one type of organization, but can be applied to various types of
   organizations, where individuals and groups combine to realize a common goal. In
   addition to some of the definitions above, there are several other definitions of
   management from experts. According to Hasibuan (2009: 2) the definition of
   management is the science and art of regulating the process of utilizing human
   resources and other resources effectively and efficiently to achieve a certain goal.
         Based on the statements and various definitions above, it can be understood that
   management is the process of achieving goals which include planning, organizing,
   implementing, and controlling by utilizing human resources and other resources carried
   out jointly by individuals or groups to achieve organizational goals.

   Management function
            Management in an organization is to carry out activities so that an objective is
   achieved effectively and efficiently. Strictly speaking there is no similar formula and
   generally accepted for the management function, however, the management function
   can be reviewed from the activities carried out by a manager. Management functions
   according to Deming in Mulyati and Komariah (2008: 92) are Planning, Do, Check, Act
   (PDCA), and according to Oey Liang Lee in Hasibuan (2009: 38) management
   functions are planning, organizing, directing, coordinating, and controlling. Another
   opinion regarding the management function expressed by Siagian in Hasibuan (2009:
   38) is Planning, Organizing, Motivating, Supervising, and Evaluating. While
   management functions according to Terry in Hasibuan (2009: 38), management
   functions are known as POAC acronyms, namely Planning, Organizing, Actuating, and
   Controlling.
            Based on the opinions of experts regarding the management functions above,
   it can be described regarding the management function of the activities that must be
   carried out at each management function. In business activities to achieve goals must
   carry out these functions. Every manager in carrying out his tasks and activities to
   achieve goals must do the planning, organizing, directing, and supervising.

   School Management
         Drucker (in Tatang, 2015: 17) states that the principles of school management are
   based on targets that place school leaders and stakeholders together to formulate a
   vision, mission, and educational goals that are applied in schools. Sagala (in Nurochim,
   2016: 11) argues that school management or education management is the application of
   management knowledge in the process of coaching, developing, and controlling
   business and educational practices that take place in schools. Douglas (in Tatang, 2015:
   17) mentions the principles of school management consisting: 1) prioritizing goals
   above personal interests and the interests of work mechanisms; 2) coordinate authority


   Available Online: https://dinastipub.org/DIJEMSS                                  Page 619

Volume 1, Issue 5, June 2020                          E-ISSN : 2686-6331, P-ISSN : 2686-6358



   and responsibility; 3) give appropriate responsibilities to school members; 4) understand
   the psychological factors of members, and 5) the relativity of values in school.
         Nurochim (2016: 17) explains that where school management is a set of human
   resources in the school becomes the executor based on the distribution of tasks that have
   been determined and cooperate with each other to achieve the expected educational
   goals and school goals. Based on the explanation, it is synthesized that school
   management is the application of management concepts and functions to the school
   management process in accordance with the goals to be achieved by the school.

   Natural school
         The concept of this school emphasizes nature as a source of inspiration for
   students, which is realized in the form of integrated learning space design with outdoor
   space (Veronika, 2012: 1). Maulana (2016: 24) states that the natural school is a school
   model that provides opportunities for students to develop according to their potential
   without being limited by external activities in the form of standard arrangements.
   Natural schools are unique school concepts compared to conventional schools, where in
   natural schools there are visual, spatial, kinesthetic, and naturalist elements.
         A broader understanding was expressed by Nasir (in Hadziq, 2016: 24) who
   argues that natural schools are an effort to implement an education system that
   comprehensively integrates the concept of balance between values, attitudes,
   knowledge, intelligence, skills, abilities, communication, and awareness of ecology
   environment. Heather (2014: 12) that natural schools are educational approaches and
   programs that apply starting from the majority of study time until almost all of the
   learning time is done outside the classroom.

   RESEARCH METHODS
         This study was designed as a qualitative method with a case study approach.
   Qualitative method is appropriate to this investigation as it produces detailed data from
   a small group of participants (Coll & Chapman, 2000) while exploring feelings,
   impressions, and judgments (Best & Kahn, 2006). Moreover, the qualitative method is
   suitable to develop hypothesis for further testing, understanding the feelings, values, and
   perceptions that underlie and influence behavior. Qualitative is a multi-method in focus,
   involving an interpretative, naturalistic approach to its subject matter, which means that
   the researcher sees things from different angles or different points of view (Malik &
   Hamied, 2016).
         A "case" in this context is research that was carried out in one of the natural
   schools at the level of Elementary in Jambi. The natural school at the elementary school
   level was categorized as the pioneer of the natural school in Jambi and it was
   established in 2008. This vision and mission of this school are to make the students
   become a good role model or a good leader in the future.
         The subject of this study was the headmaster, the founder, teachers, and also some
   teachers. The researcher delivered some questions related to the management of the


   Available Online: https://dinastipub.org/DIJEMSS                                  Page 620

Volume 1, Issue 5, June 2020                          E-ISSN : 2686-6331, P-ISSN : 2686-6358



   school to those people. In addition, observation and documentation were also held in
   order to support these findings. After all the data collected, the researcher then
   transcribed into the text on the computer and make coding based on the theory.

   FINDINGS AND DISCUSSIONS
        Results and outcomes achieved in research are grouped into: Planning,
   Organizing, Actuating, and Controlling or known as POAC according to Terry's theory
   in Hasibuan (2009: 38).

   1). A Good Planning Comes from The Mature Concept
         The concept of natural schools is a new environment in the world of education,
   especially in Jambi. There is one Natural School in the level of elementary in Jambi
   province as the first pioneer or founder of the establishment of a natural school in
   Jambi. Based on the interview and observation that was done by the researcher to this
   school, the researcher found that this school has a good attitude in preparing the
   students to become a leader in the future. It can be seen from the concept that is formed
   by this school which focused this school on the attitude of the students or “akhlak” of
   the students. The founder of this school stated that this school has a concept of Islamic
   school which utilized nature as one of the media in the learning process.
         In addition, not only from the students but also the concept of the classroom is
   different from the other school which designed openly like a gazebo. In this school,
   students do not surround by walls. There is good communication and coordination
   between teachers and students in managing classroom for example, the teacher invited
   the students to learn outside the class in order to know about how an animal’s life.
   Based on this experience, it helped the students in understanding and involving in the
   learning process itself.

   2). Curriculum as a Part of Good Organization
         Other interesting findings from this school can be seen from three curricula
   applied in this school. They are the curriculum 2013, the IT curriculum, and the BBA
   curriculum or learning with nature. Those three curricula synergized each other in order
   to reach the vision and mission of this school. What makes this school different from the
   other is because the IT curriculum and BBA curriculum are emphasized in order to
   design the students in becoming a good leader. For example, the IT curriculum is
   defined as an integrated Islam curriculum that focused on the students’ religion. Here,
   the students learn tahfidz (reading a holly Qur’an) and the Arabic language. For the
   BBA curriculum or learning with nature means that this natural school directed the
   students on their institute development and local wisdom, especially in highlighting
   Jambi culture. Thus, based on three curricula adopted, the management of this natural
   school provides many opportunities for the students for their self-development.

   3). Activity in Actualizing the Theory


   Available Online: https://dinastipub.org/DIJEMSS                                  Page 621

Volume 1, Issue 5, June 2020                          E-ISSN : 2686-6331, P-ISSN : 2686-6358



          Another interesting natural school activity is to form children with an
   entrepreneurial spirit. The students do not only learn in school, or outside the school but
   also take part in the community in order to train the students in having a good instincts
   and initiative. For example, one of the supporting activities is the "market day". It is an
   activity where the child has been prepared for several months by the teacher to cultivate
   the school garden, and in the end, the teacher asked the students to sell all their crops
   both to the parents of the students themselves, teachers and people who around the
   school.

   4). The Leader is the Main Controller
          The leader is the main controller. In this case, the founder of this natural school is
   the main controller who has the responsibility for the headmaster and teacher in
   communicating some problems related to the school or students. In addition, the
   chairman of the foundation has the highest authority in which finance, general affair
   (related to employees), and education are related to kindergarten, elementary, and junior
   high schools. The principal/headmaster and teachers always hold regular meetings to
   evaluate the work done by all educational devices and adjust them to the key
   performance indicators. Some work meetings are held annually, while leadership
   meetings are always held between the principal and the head of the foundation every
   day after dawn.
          Furthermore, the founder also indirectly teaches the teachers, principal, and school
   devices in managing time. For example, the founder asked the teachers and principal in
   conducting the meeting in the early hours of the day (after subuh time). As a result, the
   teachers and principle have good preparation in the morning when they meet the
   student. Another interesting aspect done by the leader or founder is giving some kinds
   of good words or motivation to the school devices to make them more optimistic about
   the day they worked.

   CONCLUSION
          Based on the results of research and discussion, it can be concluded that the
   managing system in this natural school has a good organization in many aspects such as;
   from the goals of the institution, curriculum, students, and also teachers. The
   management of natural schools can be adopted by other schools in order to improve the
   educational atmosphere.

   REFERENCES
   Ballantyne, Roy., dan Packer, Jan. (2008). Learning for Sustainability: The Role and
           Impact of Outdoor and Environmental Education Centres. Australia: The
           University of Queensland.
   Bejo, Siswanto. (2005). Manajemen Tenaga Kerja IndonesiaPEndekatan Administratif
         dan Operasional. Jakarta: Bumi Aksara.
   Best, J.W. & Kahn, J. (2006). Research in education. New Delhi: Prentice Hall of India
             Pvt. Ltd.


   Available Online: https://dinastipub.org/DIJEMSS                                    Page 622

Volume 1, Issue 5, June 2020                          E-ISSN : 2686-6331, P-ISSN : 2686-6358



   Çelik S & Kasapoğlu H. (2014). Implementing the recent curricular changes to English
           language instruction in Turkey: opinions and concerns of elementary school
           administrators. South African Journal of Education, 34(2)
   Coll, R. K., & Chapman, R. (2000). Qualitative or quantitative? Choices of
             methodology for cooperative education researchers. Journal of Cooperative
             Education., 35(1), 25-35.
   Connie Chairunnisa. (2016). Manajemen Pendidikan dalam Multi Perspektif. Depok:
           PT. Rajagrafindo Persada.
   Creswell, J. (2007). Qualitative Inquiry & Research Design: Choosing Among
         Five Approaches, 2nded. California : Sage Publication.
   Dowdell, K., Gray, T., & Malone K. (2011). Nature and its influence on children’s
         outdoor play. Australian Journal of Outdoor Education, 15(2), 24-35.
   Dyment, E.J., & Bell, A.C. (2008). Grounds for movement: green school grounds as
         sites for promoting physical activity. Health Education Research, 23(6) 952-962.
         doi: 10.1093/her/cym059.
   Erickson, Martha Farrell. (2008). Ensuring That All Children Can Spend Quality Time
           Outdoors. Beyond the Journal: The Children & Nature Network.
   Gautheron, O. (2014). Teachers' Perceptions of the Effects of Nature-Based Learning
           on Junior Level Students (Thesis). Institute for Studies in Education of the
           University of Toronto
   Hasibuan, Malayu. S.P. (2009). Manajemen: Dasar, Pengertian, dan Masalah Edisi
         Revisi. Jakarta: Bumi Aksara.
   Hikmat. 2014. Manajemen Pendidikan. Bandung: CV. Pustaka Setia.
           Imam Machali. (2016). The Handbook of Education Management. Jakarta:
           Prenadamedia Group.
   Husren & Islek .(2017). The effect of a school-based outdoor education program on
           Visual Arts teachers’ success and self-efficacy beliefs. South African Journal of
           Education, Vol 37 (3).
   Koontz, Harold and Cyril O'Donnel & Heinz Wihrich. (1986). Manajemen. Jilid 2.
           Terjemahan: Gunawan Hutauruk. Jakarta: Penerbit Airlangga
   Lloyd, Amanda., dan Gray, Tonia. 2014. Place-Based Outdoor Learning and
           Environmental Sustainability within Australian Primary Schools. Journal of
           Sustainability Education.
   Malik, R.S., & Hamied, F. A (2016). Research methods: A guide for the first time
             researchers. Bandung: UPI Press.
   Maulana, H. (2016). Pelaksanaan Pendidikan Karakter di Sekolah Alam. Jurnal
           Khasanah Ilmu. Volume 7, No.1 : 21-31.
   Miles, MB & Huberman, AM. (1994). Qualitative Data Analysis (2nd edition.
         Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage Publications.
   Nurochim. (2016). Administrasi Pendidikan. Bekasi: Gramata Publishing. [Online].
   Tersedia: http://www.susted.org/. [diakses tanggal 4 Agustus 2017].
   Norvadewi. (2015). Bisnis dalam Perspektif Islam. Jurnal Ekonomi dan Bisnis Islam Al-
           Tijary. Volume 1, No.1 : 33-46.
   Rasyad. (2015). Dimensi Akhlak dalam Filsafat Islam. Jurnal Substantia. Volume 17,
           No.1 : 89-102.
   Rosenow, Nancy. (2008). Learning to Love the Earth and Each Other. Beyond the
           Journal: Teaching and Learning abaout the Natural World. [Online]. Tersedia:



   Available Online: https://dinastipub.org/DIJEMSS                                  Page 623

Volume 1, Issue 5, June 2020                          E-ISSN : 2686-6331, P-ISSN : 2686-6358



          http://www.journal.naeyc.org/. [diakses tanggal 4 Agustus 2017]. Tatang S.
          2015. Manajemen Pendidikan Berbasis Sekolah. Bandung: CV. Pustaka Setia.
   Stornelli, A. (2017). Implementing a Nature-Based Approach in Elementary Schools.
          (Thesis). Department of Curriculum, Teaching and Learning Ontario Institute
          for Studies in Education of the University of Toronto.
   Wilson, Carla. (2011). Effective Approaches to Connect Children with Nature. New
          Zealand: Department of Conservation.




   Available Online: https://dinastipub.org/DIJEMSS                                  Page 624