How to Cite:
Sawitri, S., Rahayu, N. T., Fatmawati, E., Zaelani, M., Elihami, E., & Arif, M. (2021).
Implementation of Java cultural education in elementary school in Yogyakarta. Linguistics
and Culture Review, 5(S3), 1285-1298. https://doi.org/10.21744/lingcure.v5nS3.1905



Implementation of Java Cultural Education in
Elementary School in Yogyakarta

Sawitri
Veterans University, Sukoharjo, Indonesia

Nuryani Tri Rahayu
Veterans University, Sukoharjo, Indonesia

Endang Fatmawati
Diponegoro University, Semarang, Indonesia

Mohamad Zaelani
Muhammadiyah University Prof. Dr. HAMKA, Jakarta, Indonesia

Elihami Elihami
Muhammadiyah University of Enrekang, Indonesia

Muchamad Arif
Trunojoyo University, Indonesia


               Abstract---The purpose of the study was to describe the
               implementation of Javanese cultural education in elementary schools
               in Yogyakarta. The research method is a qualitative descriptive
               approach. Data collection techniques used field observation
               techniques, in-depth interviews, and documentation studies. Analysis
               of the data that has been collected is reduced and presented.
               Conclusions on the implementation of Javanese education and culture
               are as follows: (1). Implementation of the school's vision, mission and
               goals (2). Curriculum development in Javanese cultural education (3).
               Javanese cultural education learning (4). Habituation in Javanese
               cultural educators. Supporting factors are (a) good school background
               (b). Local government regulations support (c). Complete facilities and
               infrastructure (d) support from all school components (e). Good school
               management 6). Students come from Javanese society. Inhibiting
               factor (a). There are no expert instructors (b). There are no standard
               guidelines (c). Student interest is changing, (d). Lack of teachers in
               developing Javanese cultural education (e). Not maximal in utilizing
               learning media.


Linguistics and Culture Review © 2021.
Corresponding author: Sawitri, S.; Email: putrisawitriku@gmail.com
Manuscript submitted: 09 July 2021, Manuscript revised: 18 Oct 2021, Accepted for publication: 27 Nov 2021
                                                                                                             1285

1286

           Keywords---education, elementary school, implementation, Javanese
           cultural.


Introduction

The identity of the nation can be seen how the community can manage and
maintain the cultural heritage in the form of creation in the past which has been
developed and preserved until now. The community that forms the process of
managing the culture that is a feature of the nation's identity. The culture that
the Indonesian people have until now is like a mountain of experience consisting
of layers of culture formed throughout the history of the Indonesian nation.
(Annisa, 2019). The abundance of Indonesian culture is one of the
characteristics of a multicultural nation that needs to be maintained and
preserved. Preservation of Indonesian culture is in line with Government
Regulation of the Republic of Indonesia Number 19 of 2005 which mandates that
cultural content is not only contained in one subject because culture itself
covers all aspects of the life of the Indonesian nation.

The alternative in passing on cultural values in a society is through Javanese
cultural education. Education is basically to implement the heritage of the
nation's cultural values. With the education process, you can apply culture so as
to increase the understanding of the nation's culture itself (Ismail, 2018). The
inability of students to absorb Javanese culture because understanding of the
ideals of the nation is not prioritized. So that Javanese cultural education which
is a national culture as a national character is not optimal (Supriyadi et al.,
2012; Kusumo et al., 2020).

The penetration of globalization driven by advances in information and
communication technology also triggers moral degradation due to the loss of
noble cultural values marked by the erosion of the old cultural values of the
Indonesian nation such as hospitality, mutual cooperation, honesty, humility,
mutual respect and values (Fathoni, 2017). Another positive value. Integrating
culture through education culture is one way to pass on cultural values without
reducing the portion of education needed by students. It is important for the
Indonesian people to implement cultural education that prioritizes character
building in accordance with the noble values of the nation's culture (Calderhead,
1989).

Through the implementation of education - Javanese culture in schools,
especially elementary schools, noble values can be developed through the
application of Javanese culture during learning (Evans, 2008; Korthagen et al.,
2006). In addition, students can also know and participate in preserving Javanese
cultures given in a series of learning activities. There are many ways that can be
done to develop education - culture in schools, starting from the smallest things,
for example teaching students to be tolerant with others and have good character
so that they can be imitated. Next, start by developing traditional culture through
extracurricular activities in schools that can hone the ability of students to be
skilled and achieve (Prestoza et al., 2020; Putrayasa & Ramendra, 2021).

                                                                              1287

Yogyakarta Province is one of the centers of Javanese cultural orientation in
Indonesia. Yogyakarta Province has issued Regional Regulation number 5 of 2011
which contains the management and implementation of education culture.
(Adisusilo, 2014). The regional regulation was made based on the consideration of
the vision of the province's development to make it a center of education, culture,
and tourism destination, in an environment of an advanced, independent and
prosperous society. In addition, this regulation also realizes education based on
the nation's culture listed in the national education system. The concept of
applying the noble values of the nation's culture in the implementation of
education is contained in this regional regulation. The following is the concept of
cultural education (Yantoro et al., 2020).

Based on the Regional Regulation, the education unit should strive for the
realization of quality standards of education that make people intelligent as a
whole and cultured in line with the goals of national education. In addition,
cultural education in Yogyakarta Province is also supported by Regulation No. 68
of 2012 concerning guidelines for the application of noble cultural values in the
management and implementation of education (Kraus et al., 1998; Mavrotas,
2009). This governor regulation specifically shows that in implementing education
and cultural noble values in the province of Yogyakarta, it is carried out based on
the concept of "ing ngarsa sung tuladha, ing madya mangun karsa, tut wuri
handayani" by prioritizing the nature of honing, compassion, nurturing, and
paying attention to the niteni, nirokke method, add, nularke, nebarke.

Implementation of Javanese Cultural Education in elementary schools in
Yogyakarta through several intracurricular and extracurricular programs that
study Javanese culture (Boyle, 1998; Elmhirst, 2000). This is done with the aim
of improving the quality of students through the use of Javanese culture in
education so that students can have noble values upheld in Javanese culture
(Nyandra et al., 2018). Seen by the achievements of elementary school students
who achieved in the field of local culture such as karawitan, panembromo,
macapat, dance and so on (Lemos & Veríssimo, 2014). The school has
implemented uploading, manners and various other elements of Javanese culture
in the implementation of education.

Building the character of students with the noble character of the nation is a form
of implementing Javanese cultural education (Sutarman et al., 2021). The
principal as an official has the goal of learning character to be given to students
so that the nation's cultural values such as manners are in accordance with the
times. Applying the teachings of among which is considered a balance between
school and community education. The concept of education can maintain the
noble values of the nation's culture, especially Javanese culture, which is still
highly guarded in the application of glorious cultural education (Kosasih et al.,
2021).

The success of an elementary school that upholds Javanese culture that produces
students with good character can be a role model for other schools that will
implement Javanese cultural education, especially in the Special Region of
Yogyakarta (Brenowitz & Tuttle, 2003). Through this research, it is hoped that
there will be awareness from all educational institutions to restore the main goal

1288

of national education through the implementation of education based on the
nation's culture, especially in basic education (Widyaningtyas et al., 2018). Given
that basic education is the foundation of student development. The
implementation of Javanese cultural education is interesting to be studied and
used as a reference in the development of the implementation of education -
national culture. Not all schools can develop educational programs that are strong
in local culture, even very few schools use local culture in their education.
Planning, implementation to evaluation and how educators can guide students
well in every Javanese cultural education program.

Method

This study uses a qualitative approach. Systematic research to examine an object
of Javanese cultural education

Data source

Data sources are important as considerations in collecting data, which will
determine the relevance of the data to be studied (Moleong, 2013). The main data
source in research in describing phenomena that occur in the field

Data collection technique

Data collection techniques with research subjects adjusted for variables.
(Prastowo, 2012). In qualitative research with primary data sources on field
observations (Sugiyono, 2010), in-depth interviews and documentation studies:

   Field observations to find phenomena that occur in the field into data that
    can be described;
   In-depth interviews with key volunteers to obtain valid data;
   Documentation in the form of archival records, photos, films and other
    documents;
   Literature study to complete the theory in accordance with the research
    study.

Results and Discussion
Implementation of Javanese cultural education

The results showed that the implementation of Javanese cultural education in
elementary schools in Yogyakarta. Implemented through various things and
maximize the components of Javanese cultural education. This is in line with the
teachings of Ki Hadjar Dewantara, namely ing ngarsa sung tuladha, ing madya
mangun karsa, tut wuri handayani, a cultured education that seeks to apply the
notions of wiraga, wirama and wirasa, a component to realize the Javanese
cultural education. Its function is that students know the correct Javanese
culture, so that students have characters that are in accordance with Javanese
culture in life in society. As a basis for the provision of students to behave and
act like what should be done in Javanese culture (Asri et al., 2021).

                                                                              1289

According to Utomo et al. (2021), that education based on cultural values does
not depart from an empty space. The historical journey of local culture is a
witness to the civilization of how people can live, appreciate, and practice an
education system based on local culture.

Based on the results of field observations at elementary schools in Yogyakarta, it
shows that schools have implemented the among system which is a
characteristic of Javanese society in educating students as a form of
implementation of Javanese cultural education. The system is guided by the
characteristics of Ki Hadjar Dewantara's education which underlies and
underlies the various components of Javanese cultural education in the
implementation in Yogyakarta Elementary Schools. As stated by the principal,
which refers to the education taught by Ki Hadjar Dewantara with the among
teaching system which was developed according to Javanese cultural rules.

With the system of educators as well as pamong or caregivers that have been
carried out by teachers at Yogyakarta Elementary Schools (Djamarah & Zain,
2013). It is a Javanese cultural education system that applies kinship that
applies educators to students. As a homeroom teacher who applies interaction in
positioning himself as a tutor, he must supervise students such as taking care of
their own children in learning, so that there is no distance between students and
teachers, positioning themselves as parents of students at school. With the
guidance of Ki Hadjar Dewantara, “Ing ngarsa sung tuladha, Ing madya mangun
karsa, Tutwuri handayani.

Among system as a reference in the implementation of Javanese cultural
education through a curriculum development system as an educational
component in accordance with the school's vision, mission and goals,
curriculum and educational programs, learning, teachers, facilities and
infrastructure as school equipment.

Application of Javanese cultural education

The school has conducted cultural education and other noble character
education. In accordance with the school's vision and mission in accordance
with the stages in the application of cultural education such as art and the
cultivation of noble values in realizing Javanese cultural education.
Implementing the among system by giving examples of penance, compassion,
and parenting as a manifestation of Javanese cultural education (Candrawati et
al., 2019). As a vision and mission plastered on the walls and corners of the
school as a motto that is always remembered and implemented in life at school
and in society.

In terms of implementing Javanese cultural education, it has a goal that is
carried out optimally for students according to the development of the students
themselves. The implementation of Javanese cultural education is carried out to
achieve school goals. The application of Javanese cultural education in
elementary schools has noble character values. The learning carried out by
students is in accordance with the curriculum and its development. The learning

1290

outcomes of student graduates are sufficient provisions to continue their
education to a higher level.

Elementary school students in Yogyakarta have cognitive, affective and
psychomotor abilities which are realized through the application of Javanese
cultural education (Lono Lestoro et al., 2012). Making students smart and
virtuous. Students who are educated and guided so that they have intelligence
and have noble character. Have that radiates the subtlety of the soul in acting
and behaving.


Curriculum and development of Javanese cultural education

Application of Javanese cultural education in schools. As a form of application to
the curriculum and its development. Education Unit Level Curriculum with intra
and extra programs as additional learning. Tembang and batik lessons in
addition to class hours, allocation of time for Javanese language lessons (Zuchdi,
2011). Application of developing local content in accordance with the Education
Unit Level Curriculum. Schools report lesson hours in accordance with the rules
of the education office, and foundations in implementing a program of learning
activities for students.

Javanese cultural values which include the values of honesty, humility,
discipline, courtesy, cooperation, caring, and responsibility. As Javanese culture,
such as art, language, and takak rama that need to be taught to students in
order to understand manners or upload ungguh. I think the values that have
started to be improved through the program are the values of politeness, the
value of caring, discipline, simplicity, and respect. Cultivating character is like
uploading.

Javanese cultural values applied to students. It is carried out through various
approaches and among systems, to students through Javanese values and
manners that are conveyed continuously to students. Various materials that are
in accordance with values and character through optimal learning through
Javanese cultural education, by providing provisions for students who have
talents and interests in Javanese culture.

Education programs

The implementation of intra and extra learning programs obtained several
Javanese cultural education programs, namely, (1). Class area dance lessons in
all classes (2). Regional sound art lessons, songs for all grades (3). Batik lessons
for all classes. All guei supervisors are authorized to administer all Javanese
cultural education programs for each student. So that it can be adjusted to the
competencies that must be achieved. The implementation of Javanese cultural
education programs in schools is a learning program for the arts of dance, sound
art and Javanese language.

The standard of achievement of graduate learning with the program is submitted
to the supervising teacher with a reference to the implementation outline that

                                                                                 1291

has been set at the planning meeting at the beginning of the school year.
(Yulianto, 2017). The preparation of program planning is based on the
experience and ability of teachers, because each program has a clear reference
with its own development, in dance lessons that have a syllabus and use a
Learning Implementation Plan (RPP). With a program that involves the
foundation and teachers.

Dance lessons

Traditional dance lessons as a cultural education program in schools. In its
implementation, it is very careful. Traditional dance lessons as local content and
are carried out for all classes for 2 hours of lessons every week which are carried
out in the pavilion and respective classrooms. The time for traditional dance
lessons is adjusted to the conditions and facilities of the students' schools
because the pavilion is shared.

Local content of traditional dance lessons in all classes, it's just that the time is
adjusted to other lessons according to the schedule that has been arranged
made by each teacher the school prioritizes and prioritizes the teaching of
Javanese culture (Siswoyo et al., 2020). The implementation of traditional dance
lessons uses an approach that makes it easier for students. Traditional dance is
important and most often done by establishing an emotional connection, with
efforts to stimulate students' learning enthusiasm so that they do not slack and
hesitate in expressing themselves through traditional dance. Teachers always
give appreciation by showing students to be excited by providing opportunities
for performances at the end of the year.

Regional song sound art lesson

The sound art lesson of regional songs is a local content subject as material for
Javanese culture. Lessons to introduce local songs and children's songs to
students (Yasin, 2018). The sound art lessons of regional songs are used by
teachers as tutors to start teaching and learning activities as well as a
distraction in lessons.

The subject matter of the sound of the song that is taught to students is: (1).
Regional songs such as Lir-ilir, Padhang Bulan, Sluku Bathok, Menthok-
menthok, Gundhul-gundhul Pacul, Pitik Tukung, Aku duwe pitik, butterfly kuwi
and Suwe Ora Jamu (2). Dolanan songs such as Mushroom, Cublak-cublak
Suweng, Jaranan, Tak Pethik-pethik, Lepetan, and Suk-suk Pari Collapse, (3).
Macapat songs such as Sekar Gambuh, Maskumambang, Pocung and Pangkur.

Batik lessons

Batik lessons as the application of Javanese cultural education in schools. Batik
lessons are local content lessons instructed by the Yogyakarta city education
office and mayoral regulations as a means of introducing and preserving
Javanese cultural arts with Javanese batik through Javanese cultural education.
Batik lessons in schools introduce and channel students' creativity so that it

1292

creates a sense of love for their own culture. Implement for all classes held every
Saturday.

Traditional Batik lessons are conditional but there is no lesson syllabus for
students, by drawing batik motifs, then creating them into various themes with
variations and pictures, learning batik with direct practice of batik, with batik
tools (Yuliska, 2016). Direct practice of batik with a duration of two semesters.
With the name "rodo gambyang" as a batik lesson as a benchmark which is
taught by each teacher.

Javanese extra-curricular lessons

Javanese culture education with Javanese language extracurricular learning.
Program which is the development of local content lessons in the Java language.
A program that educates students with Javanese language lessons, within 2
hours of lessons on local content, and added to 4 hours of lessons, namely 3
hours as an intra-curricular Javanese language lesson and 1 hour as an
extracurricular Javanese language so that it is more dense (Irfan et al., 2019).
The schedule for the implementation of the Javanese extracurricular is adjusted
to the lesson schedule of each class in all classes. All students are required to
take extracurricular Javanese lessons. Extra-curricular Javanese language
lessons consist of Javanese language kaweruh, Javanese script, wayang, and
Javanese manners. The subject matter is adjusted to the ability level of students
in each class.

Learning materials that are adapted to current situations and conditions such as
Mahabharata, puppet shows and so on. For introductory classes the use of the
correct Javanese language and in the use of wayang stories, as well as Javanese
script material. The achievement of learning the Javanese language is by using
the Javanese language kaweruh in the development book so that students know
it, in everyday life it is done at home.

Karawitan extra-curricular lessons

Karawitan lessons are one of the mandatory activities for teachers and students
to carry out. Karawitan lessons are extracurricular activities that have been
carried out in schools for a long time. All students are required to participate in
extra-curricular activities. Program activities by doing direct practice in playing
musical instruments (Kharisma & Suyatno, 2019). The facilities and
infrastructure used in the form of gamelan, blackboards and stationery, musical
activities are carried out at the Pendopo. This program is delivered by teachers
who are assisted by musical experts. Teachers who support extracurricular
karawitan, master the skills of playing gamelan which are required by Javanese
cultural values. Opportunity to explain to students. How to use gamelan musical
instruments, not mystical but able to give respect to students, so that musical
instruments become meaningful.

Extracts clickular teaching based on experience and learning. Based on
adjustments with students related to values, which is the part that is easy to
convey to students in playing the gamelan and memorizing the pattern. Students

                                                                              1293

themselves can explain how to play the gamelan, if students are proficient and
comfortable and happy in learning karawitan and love their own culture.

Children's extra-curricular lessons

Children's extra-curricular lessons are extracurricular options for all students
from grade 1 to grade 6. It is carried out for children's play materials according
to the developmental stage and abilities of elementary school students (Hartati,
2017). A program to introduce and learn the play culture of children and the
Javanese community, which contains philosophy and values as well as advice,
by discussing accompaniment songs and gentle body movements. In
extracurricular learning for children, students are also able to explain about the
origins and types of traditional Javanese games.

Extracurricular lessons are related to the existence of local tembang sound art
lessons, because the material for children's songs is also taught to students,
while students follow and practice and do it directly. Traditional games with the
accompaniment of children's songs. Activities with programs to give students the
freedom to actively practice children's play, in extra-curricular lessons.

Discussion
Implementation of Javanese cultural education

The implementation of Javanese cultural education is one way to convey the
content of Javanese culture through educators to elementary school students.
Through education, lessons with various elements, values and character as well
as the development of students' interests and talents in Javanese arts and
cultural skills can be conveyed. The concept of education based on Javanese
culture is for the formation of student character through increasing knowledge
skills accompanied by the cultivation of Javanese character and cultural values.
Javanese cultural education is one form of preserving local content, namely
Javanese culture, through early learning of students.

The school implements a system of active teacher roles as supervisors who
observe and provide learning by allowing students freedom to develop, in
accordance with the teachings of Ki Hadjar Dewantara with the concept of
momong, among and ngemong education (Ki Hadjar Dewantara., 2011). Leading
and supervising do not need to interfere with children's lives when they are on
the road is a Javanese philosophy that describes how to educate students in
Javanese society. So the among system is also a form of Javanese education
culture.

Among system is used to support the natural nature of children who are
educated so that they can develop their life physically and mentally according to
their own nature. This is the essence of the system, other developments can be
incorporated into the requirements or equipment (educational component). In
this school, educators carry out their roles as leaders when delivering learning,
as friends who are able to provide motivation and position themselves as
supportive observers when students apply the knowledge they have gained (M,
Ngalim. Purwanto, 2011). In the among system, every tutor or teacher is required

1294

to behave (1). Ing Ngarsa Sung Tuladha which means that if the educator is in
the front, then he should set a good example for his students (2). Ing Madya
Mangun Karsa which means if the teacher is teaching, the teacher should
encourage students' willingness (3). Tut Wuri Handayani, followed closely behind
and encouraged, his spirit.

The education system is an education system that focuses on students. Where
all components of education are focused on the maximum development of
student abilities. Through the implementation of the Among system developed in
Javanese cultural education, namely: (1). Implementation of the school's vision,
mission and goals (2). Implementation of curriculum and curriculum
development (3). The process of teaching and learning through educational
programs (4). Habituation of the application of Javanese culture (5).
Conditioning in the school environment.

The noble values of Javanese culture are implemented through the
implementation of education with the values of honesty, humility, discipline,
courtesy, cooperation, caring, and responsibility (Hidayatullah, 2010). Javanese
culture that is raised through the meaning of Javanese philosophy that has
developed in poetry, songs, fairy tales, dance movements, as well as various
community activities in everyday life. The noble values of Javanese culture which
are interpreted as character education are instilled in all students through
various activities, in accordance with the values contained in regional
regulations number 5 of 2011 out of 18 kinds of values.

The implementation of Javanese cultural education which is applied through
teacher habituation, in socializing the school environment based on the
teachings of upload-ungguh, etiquette and Javanese cultural values (Elly, 2017).
Habituation carried out by the teacher is an example, among others, neatness in
dress, manners in behavior and speech. In addition, the teacher must set a good
example, namely coming on time and shaking hands when meeting with parents
and students as a step of habituation. Javanese culture as an ancestral heritage
that has values and character, and needs concrete role models and examples for
students as the next generation.

Teachers also need to make habituation to students to interpret the values and
manners of Javanese culture. The habituation activities carried out are: (1)
shaking hands before entering the classroom and before going home (2). Using
the smooth Javanese language in communicating with teachers and students (3).
Javanese culture accustoms students to emphasizing uploading and etiquette
during lessons and outside of learning through habituation, for example shaking
hands with teachers when coming to and from school. Habituation of etiquette
carried out in various student activities.

Conclusion

Based on the description and discussion above shows the implementation of
Javanese cultural education through various components, conclusions can be
drawn as follows:

                                                                            1295

   Implementation of the vision, mission and goals of schools that implement
    Javanese cultural education, namely by learning cultural arts, character,
    noble values of Javanese culture, which are realized through habituation;
   Implementation of the curriculum and development of Javanese cultural
    education, namely (a). Additional hours of intracurricular and
    extracurricular lessons that contain Javanese culture (b). Unite elements of
    art, language and Javanese culture (c). Apply the values of honesty,
    humility, discipline, courtesy, cooperation, caring, and responsibility (d).
    Familiarize and instill respect, harmony, wisdom, honesty, self-awareness,
    and form uploads and manners as a form of character according to
    Javanese culture;
   Teaching through Javanese cultural education programs, namely: (a).
    Intracurricular programs for dance, sound art, regional songs, and batik
    (b). Extracurricular programs must speak Javanese, learn musical
    instruments and children's dances;
   Conditioning the school environment in learning Javanese culture, namely:
    (1). The meaning of punokawan and pandawa puppet characters to support
    Javanese cultural learning (2). Naming buildings and rooms with names of
    clown figures and Javanese script writings as a feature of Javanese
    culture.

Impact

Based on the results of the discussion and conclusions, it can cause several
impacts, namely as follows:

   By learning the arts and culture, manners, noble values in a structured
    manner, which is realized through habituation which has an impact on the
    achievement of the school's vision, mission and goals in implementing
    Javanese culture;
   By adding working hours to intra extracurricular activities that have an
    impact on the curriculum and the development of Javanese culture;
   By running an intra-art program for dance, sound art, regional songs, and
    batik as well as extracurricular programs, it is mandatory to use the
    Javanese language, learn musical instruments and children's dances
    which have an impact on the learning process of Javanese culture;
   With the meaning of wayang characters and the naming of buildings and
    rooms with the names of wayang characters and Javanese script writings
    that have an impact on the school environment in the habituation of
    Javanese culture.

References

Adisusilo, S., (2014). Character Value Learning. Jakarta: PT Raja Graf indo
  Persada.
Annisa, F., (2019). Instilling Disciplined Character Education Values in
  Elementary School Students. Journal of Chemical Information and Modeling,
  53(9), 1689–1699.

1296

Asri, D. N., Cahyono, B. E. H., & Trisnani, R. P. (2021). Early reading learning for
    special needs students: challenges on inclusive primary school during COVID-
    19     pandemic. Linguistics     and    Culture    Review, 5(S1),   1062-1074.
    https://doi.org/10.21744/lingcure.v5nS1.1489
Boyle, J. (1998). Cultural influences on implementing environmental impact
    assessment: insights from Thailand, Indonesia, and Malaysia. Environmental
    Impact Assessment Review, 18(2), 95-116. https://doi.org/10.1016/S0195-
    9255(97)00082-6
Brenowitz, N., & Tuttle, C. R. (2003). Development and testing of a nutrition-
    teaching self-efficacy scale for elementary school teachers. Journal of nutrition
    education and behavior, 35(6), 308-311. https://doi.org/10.1016/S1499-
    4046(06)60345-X
Calderhead, J. (1989). Reflective teaching and teacher education. Teaching and
    teacher education, 5(1), 43-51. https://doi.org/10.1016/0742-051X(89)90018-
    8
Candrawati, M., Atmaja, H. T., & Khafid, M. (2019). Implementation of Discipline
    and Politeness Value and Their Relevancies Toward Social Attitudes of
    Elementary Students. Jurnal Profesi Keguruan, 5(1), 66-75.
Djamarah, S. B., & Zain, A. (2013). Strategi Belajar Mengajar (Cetakan ke-
    5). Jakarta: Rineka Cipta.
Elly, R., (2017). The Relationship of Discipline to the Learning Outcomes of Class
    V Students at Sd Negeri 10 Banda Aceh. Journal of Basic Enchantment, 3(4),
    43–53.
Elmhirst, R. (2000). A Javanese diaspora? Gender and identity politics in
    Indonesia's transmigration resettlement program. In Women's Studies
    International    Forum (Vol.    23,   No.    4,    pp.   487-500).   Pergamon.
    https://doi.org/10.1016/S0277-5395(00)00108-4
Evans, C. (2008). The effectiveness of m-learning in the form of podcast revision
    lectures in higher education. Computers & education, 50(2), 491-498.
    https://doi.org/10.1016/j.compedu.2007.09.016
Fathoni, A. (2017). Strengthening the competence of prospective teachers
    through an internship program for PGSD FKIP UMs students. National
    Seminar on Education PGSD UMS & HDPGSDI Java Region, 5, 37–44.
Hartati, W., (2017). Implementation Of Discipline Character Education In SD
    Negeri 7 Tanjung Raja. Journal of Management, Leadership, and Educational
    Supervision 1(1), 233– 255.
Hidayatullah, M. F., (2010). Character Education: Building National Civilization.
    Surakarta, Yuma Pressindo.
Irfan, Juliandy., Sudirman Z., Israwati, M. S. (2019). Implementation Of
    Character Of Discipline Students In State Private School 67 Pilot City Of
    Banda Aceh. Scientific Journal of Elementary School Teacher Education
    Students FKIP Unsyiah, 4 no 3(5), 55.
Ismail, I. (2018). Parental Involvement in Fostering the Character of Childrens’
    Discipline at Elementary School. Available at SSRN 3940536.
Kharisma, C., & Suyatno, S. (2019). The Role of Teachers in Instilling Disciplined
    Characters in Students at the Bleber 1 Prambanan State Elementary School,
    Sleman. Journal of Fundadikdas (Basic Education Fundamentals), 1(2), 131.
Ki Hadjar Dewantara. (2011). The work of Ki Hadjar Dewantara Part One:
    Education.

                                                                                  1297

Korthagen, F., Loughran, J., & Russell, T. (2006). Developing fundamental
   principles for teacher education programs and practices. Teaching and teacher
   education, 22(8), 1020-1041. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.tate.2006.04.022
Kosasih, C. E., Lukman, M., Solehati, T., & Mediani, H. S. (2021). Effect of dengue
   hemorrhagic fever health education on knowledge and attitudes, in elementary
   school children in West Java, Indonesia. Linguistics and Culture Review, 5(S1),
   191-200. https://doi.org/10.21744/lingcure.v5nS1.1349
Kraus, S., Sycara, K., & Evenchik, A. (1998). Reaching agreements through
   argumentation:       a     logical    model      and      implementation. Artificial
   Intelligence, 104(1-2), 1-69. https://doi.org/10.1016/S0004-3702(98)00078-2
Kusumo, M. P., Hendrartini, J., Sufro, Z. M., & Dewi, F. S. T. (2020). A qualitative
   study to explore the perception of patients towards diet in Javanese
   culture. Enfermería                       Clínica, 30,                     183-187.
   https://doi.org/10.1016/j.enfcli.2020.06.041
Lemos, M. S., & Veríssimo, L. (2014). The relationships between intrinsic
   motivation, extrinsic motivation, and achievement, along elementary
   school. Procedia-Social      and      Behavioral       Sciences, 112,      930-938.
   https://doi.org/10.1016/j.sbspro.2014.01.1251
Lono Lestoro et al., (2012). Character Education Culture in Surakarta City.
   Yogyakarta: Center for the Preservation of Cultural Values (BPNB) Yogyakarta.
Mavrotas, G. (2009). Effective implementation of the ε-constraint method in multi-
   objective mathematical programming problems. Applied mathematics and
   computation, 213(2), 455-465. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.amc.2009.03.037
Moleong, L. J. (2013). Qualitative Research Methodology Revised
   Edition. Bandung: PT Remaja Rosdakarya Offset Publisher.
Ngalim, M. Purwanto., (2011). Theoretical and Practical Education Science.
   Bandung: PT Teen Rosdakarya
Nyandra, M., Kartiko, B.H., Susanto, P.C., Supriyati, A., Suryasa, W. (2018).
   Education and training improve quality of life and decrease depression score in
   elderly population. Eurasian Journal of Analytical Chemistry, 13(2), 371-377.
Prastowo, A. (2012). Qualitative research methods in the perspective of research
   design. Yogyakarta: Ar-Ruzz Media.
Prestoza, M.-J. R., Paludipan, C. P., & Abad, A. E. (2020). Perception of
   elementary school teachers on Laro Ng Lahi in Quirino, Isabela. International
   Journal       of    Linguistics,     Literature     and      Culture, 6(3),    1-8.
   https://doi.org/10.21744/ijllc.v6n3.876
Putrayasa, I. B., & Ramendra, D. P. (2021). Syntactic study based on character
   education values essays of fourth grade elementary school student in Bali
   Province. International Journal of Linguistics, Literature and Culture, 7(5), 396-
   404. https://doi.org/10.21744/ijllc.v7n5.1931
Siswoyo, B., Herman, N. S., & Dewi, D. A. (2020). Machine learning approach as
   an alternative tool to build a bankruptcy prediction model in banking industry.
   In IOP Conference Series: Materials Science and Engineering (Vol. 830, No. 2, p.
   022083). IOP Publishing.
Sugiyono, S. (2010). Educational Research Methods: Quantitative, Qualitative,
   and R & D Approaches. Bandung: CV. Alfabeta.
Supriyadi, B., Sudarwanto, B., & Werdiningsih, H. (2012). In Search of the Power
   of Javanese Culture against the Cultural Urbanization in Kotagede,
   Yogyakarta-Indonesia. Procedia-Social and Behavioral Sciences, 68, 676-686.
   https://doi.org/10.1016/j.sbspro.2012.12.258

1298

Utomo, T. P., Cakranegara, P. A., & Pahlawati, E. (2021). Character Education Of
  Students Based On Culture And Local Wisdom. Review of International
  Geographical Education Online, 11(10), 1196-1203.
Widyaningtyas, H., Winarni, R., & Murwaningsih, T. (2018). Developing
  Students’responsibility Through Numbered Head Together Model In Social
  Science Learning At Elementary School. Int. J. Indones. Educ. Teach, 2(2), 112-
  119.
Yantoro, Y., Pamela, I. S., Purwati, E., & Ismaini, E. (2020). Strategi Guru Kelas
  Tinggi Sekolah Dasar dalam Menumbuhkan Disiplin Siswa melalui
  Manajemen Kelas. Elementary: Jurnal Ilmiah Pendidikan Dasar, 6(1), 37-46.
Yasin, M., (2018). Implementation of discipline, responsibility and respect
  character education at MIN 5 Bandar Lampung.
Yulianto, D. E. (2017). Teacher Approach In Inculcating Discipline Attitudes In
  The Fourth Grade Students At Sdn Patokan 2 District Tahun 2017. Jurnal
  IKA PGSD (Ikatan Alumni PGSD) UNARS, 5(2), 58-72.
Yuliska, F., (2016). Creating Discipline Character In Cepit State Elementary
  School. Journal of Elementary School Teacher Education 5th Edition 2016,
  456–463.
Zuchdi, D. (2011). Character Education in the Theory and Practice Perspective.
Zuchdi, D. (2011). Pendidikan karakter dalam perspektif teori dan praktik. Press
  (ed).