A Study on the Role of School                          Okul Yöneticilerinin Okul Geliştirmedeki
         Administrators in School Improvement                            Rollerine İlişkin Bir Çalışma


                                                     Münir ŞAHİN*




                                             Submitted / Geliş:        17.01.2023
                                             Accepted / Kabul:         21.03.2023
                                             Published /Yayın:         26.03.2023

                                                 10.29228/INESJOURNAL.67734

           Article Information:      Review Article       Makale Türü:     Derleme (Değerlendirme) Makalesi



                                                        Citation / Atıf

Şahin, M. (2023). A study on the role of school administrators in school improvement. The Journal of International Edu-
cation Science, 10 (34), 382-398.

Şahin, M. (2023). Okul yöneticilerinin okul geliştirmedeki rollerine ilişkin bir çalışma. Uluslararası Eğitim Bilimleri
Dergisi, 10 (34), 382-398.


                     This article was checked by Intihal.net. Bu makale İntihal.net tarafından taranmıştır.
             This article is under the Creative Commons license. Bu makale Creative Commons lisansı altındadır.




*Assist. Prof. Dr., Tokat Gaziosmanpaşa Üniversitesi, munir.sahin@gop.edu.tr

 A Study on the Role of School Administrators in School Improvement
  Okul Yöneticilerinin Okul Geliştirmedeki Rollerine İlişkin Bir Çalışma


                      Assist. Prof. Dr. Münir ŞAHİN
Abstract: School administrators are responsible for making the necessary
controls and inspections by ensuring that the school operates according to
the expected rules and regulations. As in every field in the world, there is a
change in educational institutions, educational methods, educational mate-
rials, content of education and school management. In this sense, the school
administrator of the 21st century, where more than the classical school
management approach is expected, has an important place in school devel-
opment. According to the traditional method, organizations will change
spontaneously over time. However, planned development takes place with
the determination of the areas to be changed in advance and a certain plan-
ning. In order to ensure school development, this planning should be done
by the school administrator. Today, change should not be expected to be a
coincidence in any organization, including schools. All these improvement
efforts for schools are to increase the quality of the learning and teaching
process and ensure that students achieve the emotional, social and academ-
ic achievements. Schools were established to process a valuable raw mate-
rial whose input and output is human. Successful achievement of the ex-
pected achievements of the students, who will form the future of the socie-
ty, may differ according to the school, the quality of human resources, and
the management style. A developing school is also a learning school. While
policy makers have an important influence in the development of schools,
school administrators also have important work to do in this task. In this
study, the roles of school administrators in school development were exam-
ined in the light of studies in the literature.
Keywords: Educational administraton, school development, school admin-
istrators, roles of school administrators, education.
Öz: Okul yöneticileri, okulun beklenen kural ve düzenlemelere göre çalış-
masını sağlayarak gerekli kontrol ve denetimleri yapmaktan sorumludur-
lar. Dünyada her alanda olduğu gibi eğitimi kurumlarında, eğitim yöntem-
lerinde, eğitim materyallerinde, eğitimin içeriğinde ve okul yönetiminde de
değişim olmaktadır. Klasik okul yönetimi anlayışından fazlasının beklen-
diği 21.yy okul yöneticisi bu anlamda okul gelişiminde önemli bir yere sa-

A Study on the Role of School Administrators in School Improvement                     384




      hiptir. Geleneksel yönteme göre örgütler zamanla kendiliğinden değişecek-
      tir. Ancak planlı gelişim önceden değişim yapılacak alanların belirlenmesi
      ve belirli bir planlama ile olur. Okul gelişimini sağlaya bilmek için bu plan-
      lamayı okul yöneticisi yapmalıdır. Günümüzde okullar da dahil olmak
      üzere hiçbir örgütte değişimin tesadüfü olması beklenmemelidir Okullara
      yönelik yapılan bütün bu geliştirme çabalarının altında öğrenme ve öğret-
      me sürecinin kalitesini artırarak öğrencilerin duygusal, sosyal ve akademik
      olarak hedeflenen kazanımları elde etmelerini sağlamaktır. Okullar girdisi
      ve çıktısı insan olan değerli bir hammaddeyi işlemek üzere kurulmuştur.
      Toplumun geleceğini oluşturacak olan öğrencilerin beklenen kazanımları
      başarılı bir şekilde elde etmeleri okula, insan kaynaklarının kalitesine, yö-
      netim tarzına göre farklılaşabilmektedir. Gelişen okul aynı zamanda öğre-
      nen okuldur. Okulların gelişmesinde politika yapıcılar önemli etki alanına
      sahipken, okul yöneticilerinin de bu görevde yapabileceklerin önemli işler
      bulunmaktadır. Bu çalışmada okul yöneticilerinin okul geliştirmedeki rol-
      leri literatürde yer alan çalışmalar ışığında incelenmiştir.
      Anahtar Kelimeler: Eğitim bilimleri, okul geliştirme, okul yönetimi, yöne-
      tici rolleri, eğitim.
       Introduction
       It is seen that the concepts such as school improvement, effective school and
learning school in the literature are used in different countries in a way that includes
the same meanings (Balcı, 2007: 11). Underlying all these improvement efforts for
schools is to increase the quality of the learning and teaching process, and to ensure
that students achieve the targeted gains emotionally, socially and academically. Bur-
salıoğlu (1978) defines schools as an open system, which is an important place of prac-
tice established for the purpose of education to gain the targeted goals. School entry
and exit processes create the interaction of the school with its environment. The school
is a part of the society and culture it is in. Being an open system, the school's ability to
function depends on its continuous development. Because "The only thing that does
not change is change itself," says Heraclitus, a philosopher who lived in Ephesus be-
tween 535-475 BC. Organizations that adapt to this change continue to exist, while or-
ganizations that cannot adapt perish. It is possible to use the same expression for
schools. Schools that cannot meet the needs of the society and that are behind the time
are either closed or completely changed and take on a different identity. Therefore, the
survival of these institutions depends on their ability to meet the needs of society. Soci-
eties that cannot equip students with sufficient knowledge and skills, that are behind
the times, that can focus on the areas needed by the society in the light of teaching
methods and technologies and new information and documents, have to fulfill an im-
portant duty as the change and development agent of the society.

       With the developing science and technology, the needs of societies and their
expectations from school also change. When change occurs positively, it is expressed as




                    INESJOURNAL (The Journal of International Education Science)
                              Yıl/Year: 10, Sayı/Number: 34, Mart/March

Münir ŞAHİN                                                                          385

improvement. There are two important forms of development, planned and tradition-
al. According to the traditional method, organizations will change spontaneously over
time. However, planned development takes place with the determination of the areas
to be changed in advance and a certain planning. Today, change should not be ex-
pected by chance in any organization, including schools (Çelebioğlu, 1990: 105). School
and administration are two important elements that complement each other. The exist-
ence of one without the other is in danger. The task of the administration is to keep the
school alive, organize and organize it to achieve its goals. The school is the source of
the behavior of the administrator and the values of the administrator should be con-
sistent with the values of the school (Bursalıoğlu, 1991: 90).

       Efforts must be made for the school to achieve its goals and for students to be
successful. In order to improve the situation of the school, the school administrator
should set goals and strategies for the future of the school, and participate in making
decisions about when and how these goals will be achieved. Bennis defines school de-
velopment as “a complex educational strategy aimed at changing beliefs, attitudes,
values and structures so that the organization can be more effective to adapt new tech-
nologies, markets, dangers and the pace of change” (Cited by Özen, 1991: 91). Robins
and Judge (2011) define organizational development as the sum of organizational ac-
tivities and efforts to increase the welfare of employees, based on democratic values.
Balcı (1995), who sees organizational development as a process of change to achieve
certain goals, emphasized the continuity of school development with this definition.
Schools have to lead the society at the point of following the changes in the society and
the findings in the field of technology and science according to the changing times and
conditions. However, when they can do this, they can direct the change in society in
the desired direction.

       It is observed that new studies on such topics as school development, leader-
ship, school environment, school management and teachers are constantly carried out.
In all these and similar reviews, education in school is believed and new models are
tried to be developed for successfully navigating educational games at school. The con-
cept of school development emerged from the idea of a more democratic and liberating
education concept in the 1950s, to create an entity consisting of one or more content
(Hakanson & Sunberg, 2016: 92). The topics, school development and school effective-
ness are generally studied concepts to determine the school activities and features of
teachers which promote school success. According to Creemers and Reynold (2018),
the definition of effective and successful school is considered as having a measurable
educational progress for all students in the school, which is spent on evaluations such
as family history and economic status. It refers to school improvement trainings and
planned educational changes for students to experience learning outcomes. School im-




                                     www. inesjournal.com

A Study on the Role of School Administrators in School Improvement                    386




provement focuses on improving the qualifications of teachers and students directly.

       The Role of School Administrators in School Improvement

       The studies on school improvement focus on subjects such as classroom climate,
school eco, teacher solidarity, school leadership, teacher and student relations (God-
dard, Goddard, Kim, & Miller, 2015; Korkmaz & Şahin, 2013; Ramberg, Låftman,
Almquist, & Modin, 2018). Other prominent factors are teacher competence, support-
ing students, and determining a common vision among teachers (Fukkink, Jilink &
Oostdam, 2017; Reynolds, Temple, Robertson & Mann, 2001). The changing world and
changing conditions make it necessary for schools to be in a continuous development.
Schools, whose main function is to train people, need to raise generations that can
adapt to the changing world conditions and even lead the change in the world. There-
fore, there is no end point for school improvement and development. School adminis-
trators, as well as many stakeholders, have important roles in the dynamic and contin-
uous development of schools. A school principal is one of the pillars of keeping the
school up and running; should develop ways and methods of constantly encouraging
students to do their best, and motivate the desire for progress and growth in the stu-
dent. This will provide much needed inspiration in the school, create a positive envi-
ronment for current students and enable the school to embrace newcomers with a safe
and healthy learning environment.

       Balyer (2014) emphasized that the roles of school administrators have changed
and stated that school administrators are expected to create and implement the educa-
tional vision, employ employees, manage human resources and school-society rela-
tions, develop learning communities, evaluate teacher performance and increase stu-
dent success. Today, school administrators have roles in planning, organizing and de-
cision making (Bulach, Boothe & Pickett, 2006). More specifically, the task of the school
administration is to provide school development, manage the decision-making system,
plan, design a safe atmosphere and environment, manage the curriculum, prepare the
school program, support the professional development of teachers and find resources
for the activities of the school (Balyer, 2014: 25). Castle and Mitchell (2001) divided the
managerial roles into two as managerial and instructional roles.

       The school administrator has the role of an organizer according to the school
stakeholders. He is the person on whom all work in the school depends. The stake-
holders of the school see the school administrator as the person who organizes the ed-
ucational activities. However, according to school administrators, the task of the school
administrator is to organize the physical infrastructure of the school, develop vision,
plan, and motivate teachers. According to the assistant administrators and teachers at
the school, the role of the school administrator is to distribute the lessons, make the
program and plan. Non-governmental organizations, on the other hand, state that the



                    INESJOURNAL (The Journal of International Education Science)
                              Yıl/Year: 10, Sayı/Number: 34, Mart/March

Münir ŞAHİN                                                                           387

duty of the school administrator is to provide communication. According to the top
managers, the school administrator acts as a catalyst who manages the school and pro-
vides communication with the top management. The role definitions that Yıkıcı (2019)
made above are important in terms of showing the expectations of the school's stake-
holders from the school administrator. All these roles given to the school administrator
reveal the burden that an education administrator carries and its importance in terms
of school development.

       Claiming that the idea of learning schools emerged in the 2000s, Senge et al.
(2000) stated that schools are open to innovation and change. According to them, as the
stakeholders of the school in learning schools, people inside and outside the school,
educators, teachers, administrators, students, families, local businessmen, trade union-
ists and other adults can learn from each other and counter the threats to the future of
the school together. It is the school administrator's duty to ensure coordination and
cooperation among the school's stakeholders.

       The school administrator should determine the change and development goals
of the school and lead the development of educational activities in line with these
goals. With the role of teaching, the school administrator should encourage the em-
ployees, teachers and students in the school to learn innovations, and should instruct
them in the use of new teaching methods and materials, when necessary, in learning
and using them actively by teachers.

       The school administrators, who are responsible for the quality of education in
schools and the learning of teachers and students, spend more of their time on admin-
istrative affairs, crisis management, providing resources for expenditures, personnel
affairs, renovation and repair works of the school (Middlewood, Parker & Beere, 2015).
However, as a result of rapidly increasing information and developing communication
technologies in the last thirty years, it is seen that societies that can use these infor-
mation and technologies have made significant progress. On the other hand, it cannot
be expected that the school will lag behind its time in the transfer of knowledge, which
is one of its main functions. For this reason, it has brought up the education systems of
schools, learning processes, the quality of the materials used, and the review of schools
in terms of structure, purpose, process and result. In the words of Fındıkçı (1996), it is
the duty of schools to raise the learner and information person that the information
society needs. In this sense, schools are expected to have a learning school characteris-
tic. To be innovative in education, to keep up to date with more qualified educational
environments, and to ensure that educational processes are used more effectively in
order to raise creative-thinking children can be realized under the leadership of school
administrators.

        When it comes to taking action as a school administrator, you should be the




                                    www. inesjournal.com

A Study on the Role of School Administrators in School Improvement                    388




one who makes the decisions and gets things done. Sharing your decision-making role
at school with your teammates and making decisions in cooperation will not only give
legitimacy to your decisions, but will also facilitate the acceptance of others. If the
school administrator is also a good listener, it will earn the respect of other employees.
A good leader should not be afraid to learn and apply the ideas of their president. Hav-
ing an open space where employees can express their thoughts in order to contribute to
the process can help to come up with new ideas needed in school development (El-
banna, 2022).

       Changing world and environmental conditions have also changed the quality of
skills expected from people. In order to develop these qualities, educational activities
in schools should be carried out according to a program. The first step of change in 21st
century schools should be in these programs in schools (Fadel, Bialik & Trilling, 2015).
The school administrator has responsibilities in many issues from the management and
cleaning of the school, from the entrance and exit of the students to the lessons, from
the lesson plans of the teachers, from the school garden to the ceremonies that should
be held at the school. Forming all activities in the school according to the rules deter-
mined in line with the permission and knowledge of the school administrator, in line
with his suggestions and opinions, requires the school administrator to have a good
supervisor role. However, the school administrator's role in school development covers
a very deep and wide area. From families to students, from students to teachers, from
teachers to other employees and senior management, the school administrator, who
has an important role in the development of relations with a sense of mutual trust, has
an important role in developing the school as a whole within the understanding of in-
structional leadership.

        It is not possible to evaluate school development separately from the general
education structure of a country and to exclude it from the educational context. In
some countries such as Turkey, it is seen that it is aimed to increase school success
through legal changes and regulations made by the central government for school de-
velopment. It is seen that these changes occur mostly in the form of structural changes.
Kebschull (2012) pointed out that the main factors that will affect the structural change
of schools are redesigning the professions of employees, radical changes, continuous
improvement, total quality management, learning organization, redefining the work
flow, getting work done on time, and change management. These factors that force
schools to change and develop should be well analyzed by school administrators and
policy makers. For this reason, it is expected that the school administrator will be sensi-
tive to environmental events, developments and the needs of the society, and can pre-
dict the future with today's data.

       Fullan (1997) argues that cultural changes should be made instead of structural




                    INESJOURNAL (The Journal of International Education Science)
                              Yıl/Year: 10, Sayı/Number: 34, Mart/March

Münir ŞAHİN                                                                           389

changes for school improvement. In this, a culture of cooperation and solidarity should
be established between the school administrator and the teachers, and among the
teachers. Changing school culture for school success is taking a bit of risk. Mutual trust
among teachers, openness in practice, taking joint and individual responsibility of stu-
dents are the strategies foreseen for change (Hargreaves, 1997: 26). Ensuring trust
among teachers and teachers' trust in the administrator may change depending on the
school administrator's strategies, his attitude towards events, his evaluation of the
school in terms of instructional leadership, his openness to change and his relations
with the environment, and the way he uses the role of supervisor in the school. In Tur-
key, it is seen that school improvement studies are carried out mainly by using ap-
proaches such as student-centered education, strategic planning and school develop-
ment, and performance-based evaluation (MEB, 2010). School administrators are ex-
pected to develop strategies suitable for the school's own conditions by evaluating cen-
tral decisions and local realities together, and to be a good analyst since the environ-
mental, socio-economic conditions and human resource competencies of each school
may be different. One of the principal's duties is to make the school live longer.

       Stagnation in administration can cause stagnation in school. Organizations and
schools that do not change despite the pressure of change and cannot respond to the
demands of the external environment may disintegrate. The most needed change in the
21st century is to realize the structuring that can flexibly adapt to the demands of the
environment and to review the objectives (Gibson, Ivancevich, & Donnely, 1976). Being
prepared for the demands of change, preventing the role conflict of different specialties
within the school, balancing the power relations are important issues that administra-
tors have to deal with in the role of school leader.

According to Bernhardt (2003), answers to some important questions about the school
should be given by the school administrator. This demographic information about the
school includes the data such as the number of students, staff, classrooms, capacity,
education status of the employees, class sizes, age range of the students, gender, num-
ber of special students, student absenteeism rates. Another data is the learning data of
the students. Learning data can be teacher assessments and students' scores on stand-
ardized tests. Perception data is another type of data. It is the data on the perceptions
of teachers, students and parents about learning activities at school and the school.
These can be determined through surveys or observations at different events. Finally,
there are data on the processes of the school. The school's programs include assessment
strategies, instructional strategies, and classroom practices.

                           School Improvement Approaches

       To create a common vision, mission, goals and values, to establish a teaching
and learning-oriented system for the success of students, to establish cooperative learn-




                                     www. inesjournal.com

A Study on the Role of School Administrators in School Improvement                     390




ing groups, to ensure the active participation of the family and society in school activi-
ties, to use guide data in decision-making and continuous development, to develop a
sustainable leadership approach, are the recommended principles for school improve-
ment (Cummings and Worley (2009). Huse (1980: 27) classified organizational devel-
opment approaches under three objectives: 1) changing employee behavior 2) changing
organizational structures, 3) problem analysis. In a development plan that aims to
change the behavior of the employees at the school, the school administrator can carry
out studies for the development of the employees in order to be more effective, plan
individual aids, plan activities for team building, development of relations between
teams, and knowledge and skill development. Even if the legal power of the school
administrator is limited in structural changes, he can make structural changes through
re-planning, job enrichment and structuring based on experience. Activities intended
for problem analysis can be done by applying different strategies. It may be suggested
to use the processes of reviewing, interviewing, keeping communication channels
open, being in close contact with stakeholders, and participatory decision-making pro-
cesses.

          Evaluation of student achievement, education of special students, effective
teaching practices, school evaluation and successful educational leadership are im-
portant issues for school development. The idea that the school can directly affect the
success of students has been the main motivation for research on this subject. There is a
large literature on school leadership regarding the pressure of school administrators,
who are in the position of school leaders, to contribute to the development of the
school and their contribution to the school. School leaders should develop methods
and strategies that can ensure the continuous development of the school.

          It is seen that the developing technology has found a wide place in the field of
education. In the creation of a blended teaching environment in which this technology
and traditional teaching methods are used together (Ünsal, 2012), school administra-
tors should fulfill the leadership role. In order to improve and transform the school,
personalizing the teaching services at the school, making personalized learning plans,
and creating materials suitable for the learning styles of the learners will increase the
quality and effectiveness of the learning activities (Özarslan, 2010). In this context, the
school administrator will be responsible for the structural integration of educational
technologies into the school, on the one hand, and inspecting the effective use of per-
sonalized education plans and educational technologies, on the other hand.

          School administrators can form teams of teachers for similar course activities, so
that teachers can get to know each other more deeply and develop trust in each other.
Teams of teachers will provide mutual feedback and emotional support. Teams will be
a place where new methods are tested and joint evaluations are made, ensuring that




                      INESJOURNAL (The Journal of International Education Science)
                                Yıl/Year: 10, Sayı/Number: 34, Mart/March

Münir ŞAHİN                                                                             391

communication among members continues and encouraging them to take risks to try
new methods (Kruse & Louis, 1997: 265).

       The success of schools is generally evaluated by looking at the university
placement rates or the rate of enrollment in high schools, such as science high schools
in secondary schools, which are given special importance and with a high university
placement rate, that is, the results of the High School Entrance Examination. School
success is not only a development that the school administrator can increase alone, but
it is seen that effective school administration has a role in school success.

       Every school administrator must constantly seek to find new ways to improve
the school. Being inexperienced and innovative must be balanced with persistence and
determination to achieve a mix of old and new. Meador (2020) proposes some interest-
ing activities for all members of the school community to improve schools. According
to Meador, if the school administrator regularly writes articles for a local newspaper
about the school, the success of the school, the efforts of the individual teachers and the
recognition of the students, it will allow the public to be informed about what is going
on at the school. Another suggestion is that teachers organize activities that will ensure
the participation of parents on a monthly basis. This will help increase parent involve-
ment by giving them the opportunity to attend their children's schools, share a class-
room with them, and learn together. Many studies conducted in Turkey (Çelenk, 2003;
Çalık, 2007; Şahin, 2019; Şahin, 2022) have revealed that parent participation contrib-
utes positively to student success.

                           Strategies for School Improvement

       Although there are different opinions about the time students spend at home
(Yılmaz & Öznacar, 2016, Şahin, 2017), it would be more appropriate to say that stu-
dents spend most of their time either at school or at home with their families. It is the
family's responsibility to support the educational work done at school by the family at
home and to prepare suitable working conditions for the student, and it significantly
affects the success of the school. For the school to be effective, the school and the family
must support each other (Şimşek & Tnaydın, 2002; Şahin & Üstüner, 2018). The role of
the school administrator is to keep the bond between the school and the family strong.
By organizing different activities that families can participate in, it should be ensured
that the family gets to know both the school and the academic life of their child more
closely. In addition, when considered in terms of school improvement, when the aim is
to increase student success, such activities can be a way to learn about expectations
from the school. Getting rid of the boring atmosphere of official parent meetings,
where families come together with other families and teachers, will help parents to
express their opinions about the school and teachers more comfortably.




                                      www. inesjournal.com

A Study on the Role of School Administrators in School Improvement                    392




       The close cooperation between the family and the school, which is the comple-
ment of the education in the school, will increase the success of the school. For this rea-
son, the activities suggested by Meador (2020) to bring family and school together are
considered important. Therefore, the school administrator should develop the neces-
sary strategies for the school and family to organize activities together. For example,
the school administrator's regular meeting with the parents at lunch will create a more
comfortable environment for the parents to reflect their positive and negative thoughts
about the school. The school administrator will perceive the feedback received from the
families as a reflection of the school and will have the opportunity to see the negative
and positive aspects of the school more accurately.

        Another suggested strategy for developing a school is an activity where the
school administrator, together with the school staff and teachers, can offer each other
the food they have prepared once a month. This activity will provide an opportunity
for employees, teachers and administrators to spend time and have fun together in a
more friendly environment. This activity will be an important opportunity for the de-
velopment of friendships and for teachers and staff to get to know each other. In addi-
tion, by choosing the teacher of the month, it can contribute to increasing the recogni-
tion of successful and dedicated teachers (Meador, 2020). It is possible that all these
activities can be perceived as activities that can be done in private schools. However,
these and similar activities in public schools, when requested, are small strategies that
must be used in order to increase the success of the school and to create opportunities
to improve the school.

                           Conclusion and Recommendations

       Every organization is forced to change depending on the time and conditions. It
is seen that change is inevitable for the success and survival of organizations. The fact
that this change is in the direction that the organizations want depends on the change
in the structure, purpose and behavior of the employees at a sufficient level. When it
comes to school organizations, the central government should take measures sensitive
to economic, social and cultural change, take sides rather than stand against it, and
encourage sub-governments for change and development. As Yıldırım (2016: 32) states,
every school “must re-examine its existing opportunities and the work it does.” The
needs of the organization, the needs of the environment should be analyzed, and after
deciding what can be changed, planning for change should be made.

       Being an effective school is only possible with effective school management.
The effectiveness of schools depends on meeting the needs of the environment and age.
It is not possible to think of school development separately from these environmental
needs. Knowing the environment depends on the school administrator's relations with
the internal and external stakeholders of the school. Information obtained from these



                    INESJOURNAL (The Journal of International Education Science)
                              Yıl/Year: 10, Sayı/Number: 34, Mart/March

Münir ŞAHİN                                                                             393

stakeholders can be considered as data. School administrators, who should have a
good analysis ability, can try different strategies to determine the deficiencies of the
school and the aspects that need improvement. It can manage the perception of the
school by organizing activities to make the school and its students more visible in the
society.

       Clearly, school management alone is not sufficient for effective school devel-
opment. It is seen that school administrators have the necessary role of supporting the
motivation and commitment of the employees in order to determine the direction and
create a positive school culture and to increase the success by encouraging the devel-
opment of their schools in challenging conditions. Day and Sammons (2014) state the
following difficulties that school administrators may encounter: to provide good learn-
ing and teaching at school, to ensure the comprehension of basic knowledge and skills,
to ensure participation, strategic use of resources and environment, building the school
as a learning community, finding stakeholders outside the school, and family to en-
courage them to support new learning opportunities.

       Maintaining the dynamic structure of the school and maintaining its harmony
to meet the needs of the society together with the developments in technology and sci-
ence will only be possible if the development and change take place at a sufficient lev-
el. It is necessary for the education given at the school to reach its goal and for the stu-
dents to achieve the targeted level of success, not only at the school level, but also for
the development of the whole society. Education is a long-term investment. It may on-
ly be possible to reap the fruits of the activities done today after many years. Therefore,
flexibility is important in educational organizations. Rather than adapting to develop-
ments without delay, it should be aimed that educational organizations become institu-
tions that lead development and change.

       Thanks to the development studies carried out at the right time, the school will
be saved from being an idle organization. Preventing the waste of material and human
resources depends on making a change decision at the right time. Continuing to pro-
duce a product that the society does not need or use is only possible with an organiza-
tion that has closed its eyes to the world. For this reason, much more change and trans-
formation are needed in order to catch up with the age in this century, which we de-
scribe as the age of technology, where everything is consumed very quickly and new
ones are produced instead. School improvement efforts will also provide us with the
opportunity for change in order to provide the product that society needs.

       School improvement activities ensure that employees are informed about the
purpose and function of the school. It encourages employees to develop their
knowledge and skills. It improves the decision-making ability of the school. Correct
identification of problems enables the development of correct solutions. Many prob-




                                     www. inesjournal.com

A Study on the Role of School Administrators in School Improvement                  394




lems are solved before they are even born. While the school works better as a system
and achieves the goals more effectively, student success increases. It enables students
to grow up more equipped with the knowledge and skills needed by the real world
they may encounter in the future, not with the changed knowledge of the past.

                                         Suggestions

       There are many factors that affect student success. The most important factors
are the teacher, teaching materials, teaching environment and family. Providing school
improvement is possible by developing these factors. The school administrator's work
on the areas that need improvement by determining the needs of the school can only
be successful with the contributions of the school's stakeholders. For this reason, the
school administrator should be able to direct the stakeholders in line with the objec-
tives by acting together with the other members of the school, not alone. Therefore,
they must have effective communication skills. The positive reflection of the school on
the environment will only be possible with the positive effects of the education in the
school and the sharing of the activities with the environment. Transforming schools
from being a closed box into living organisms will make it easier for them to adapt to
change, and the change in the school will be sustained as needed with the support of
the environment.

       Schools have to be the engine of society. Every individual forming the society
takes his place in the society by passing through certain educational organizations. The
role of schools is important in preparing the members of the society for life and making
them successful citizens. Schools, on the other hand, have to be in constant develop-
ment. As traditional classes do not exist today, the need for traditional professions has
not remained due to industrialization. School administrators and policy makers, who
are aware of the organic relationship between school and society, need to make schools
a flexible structure that can keep up with change.

       The relationship of school administrators with the stakeholders of the school
will help in determining the perception of the society about the school and the expecta-
tions from the school, and in restructuring the school regarding the areas needed by
the society. Although flexibility is not very possible in a school system like Turkey,
which is managed with very strict rules, a school administration sensitive to social,
economic and technological developments can take measures to create the educational
technology infrastructure that the school may need.
       The fact that school administrators spend most of their time on school repair
works and classical management works may cause the creation of an effective school
atmosphere related to the real purpose of the school, which is the achievement of edu-
cational goals. On the one hand, it is not possible for the school administrator, who is
dealing with the fatigue of the school's renovation works and searching for resources,




                   INESJOURNAL (The Journal of International Education Science)
                             Yıl/Year: 10, Sayı/Number: 34, Mart/March

Münir ŞAHİN                                                                                  395

to spare enough time to support the academic development of teachers and students. It
is considered necessary for school administrators to get rid of their civil engineer iden-
tities and turn into education and change agents in order to increase student success.



   The following statements are made in the framework of “COPE-Code of Conduct and Best
                          Practices Guidelines for Journal Editors”:
 Ethics Committee Approval:                      Ethics committee approval is not required
                                                 for this article.
 Declaration of Conflicting Interests:           No conflicts of interest were reported for this
                                                 article.
 Financial Support:                              It has been reported that this study did not
                                                 receive financial support from any per-
                                                 son/institution or organization during the
                                                 research and writing phase.
 Statement of Support and Acknowledgment: No outer support
 Double-Blind Peer Review:                       External-independent
    “COPE-Dergi Editörleri İçin Davranış Kuralları ve En İyi Uygulama İlkeleri” beyanları:
 Etik Kurul Belgesi:                             Bu çalışma için etik kurul onayı gerekme-
                                                 mektedir.
 Çıkar Çatışması Beyanı:                         Bu makalenin araştırması, yazarlığı veya
                                                 yayınlanmasıyla ilgili olarak yazar/ların
                                                 potansiyel bir çıkar çatışması yoktur.
 Finansal Destek:                                Bu çalışmanın araştırma ve yazım aşamasın-
                                                 da herhangi kişi/kurum veya kuruluşlar
                                                 tarafından finansal destek almadığı bildiril-
                                                 miştir.
 Destek ve Teşekkür Beyanı:
 Çifte Kör Hakem Değerlendirmesi:                Dış-bağımsız


REFERENCES
Balcı, A. (1995). Örgütsel gelişme. Pegem. No: 18, Ankara.

Balcı, A. (2007). Etkili okul / okul gelistirme. (4. Baskı). Ankara: Pegem Yayıncılık.

Balyer, A. (2014). School principals’ role priorities. Journal of Theory and Practice in Edu-
        caiton, 10(1), 24-40.

Bernhardt, V.L. (2003). No schools left behind. Educational Leadership, 60 (5): 26-30.

Bulach, C., Boothe, D. & Pickett, W. (2006). Analyzing the leadership behavior of school
        principals, NCPEA, 1(1), 1-13.

Bursalıoglu, Z. (1978). Eğitim yönetiminde teori ve uygulama. Ankara: A.U. Eğitim
        Fakültesi Yayınları, No:71.

Castle, J. B. & Mitchell, C. (2001). Roles of elementary school principals in Ontario:   tasks
        and tensions, executive summary. Ontario Principals’ Council: 1-9.




                                      www. inesjournal.com

A Study on the Role of School Administrators in School Improvement                    396




Creemers, B., & Reynolds, D. (2018). School effectiveness and school improvement.
       Journal editorial text:
       www.tandfonline.com/action/journalInformation?show=aimsScope&journal
               (2021-1202).

Cummings, T.G., Worley, C.G. (2009). Organization development & change, (9th Edition).
       South-Western, Canada.

Çakmak, Ö. (2010). Okul öncesi eğitim kurumlarında aile katılımı. Abant İzzet Baysal
       Üniversitesi Sosyal Bilimler Enstitüsü Dergisi, 1 (20), 1-17.

Çalık, C. (2007). Okul-çevre ilişkisinin okul geliştirmedeki rolü: kavramsal bir
       çözümleme. GÜ, Gazi Eğitimi Fakültesi Dergisi, 27(3), 123-139.

Celebioglu, F. (1990). Davranıs acısından orgutsel degisim. Istanbul: Istanbul Universitesi
       İşletme Fakultesi Yayın No: 238.

Çelenk, S. (2003). Okul başarısının ön koşulu: Okul aile dayanışması, İlköğretim Online
       2 (2), 28-34 http://www.ilkogretim-online.org.tr (18.02.2016).

Day, C. & Sammons, P. (2016). Successful school leadership. Education Development Trust.
       Berkchire: The University of Nottingham.

Elbanna, A. (2022). Role of an administrator in a school: What makes them special?
       Skolera, https://blog.skolera.com/role-of-administrator-in-school/ 10.09.2022.

Fadel, C., Bialik, M. And Trilling, B. (2015). Four dimension education. The competence
       learner needs to succeed. Boston: The Center for Curriculum Redesign

Fındıkçı, İ. (1996). Öğrenen okula doğru eğitim yöneticilerinde kendini geliştirme.
       Eğitimimize Bakışlar 1 (Ed. İ. Fındıkçı), İstanbul: Kültür Koleji Eğitim Vakfı
       Yayınları, 143-155.

Fukkink, R., Jilink, L., & Oostdam, R. (2017). A meta-analysis of the impact of early
       childhood interventions on the development of children in the Netherlands: An
       inconvenient truth? European Early Childhood Education Research Journal, 25(5),
       656–666.

Fullan, M. (1997). The Challenge of School Change. IRI/Skylight.

Goddard, R., Goddard, Y., Kim, E. S., & Miller, R. (2015). A theoretical and empirical
       analysis of the roles of instructional leadership, teacher collaboration and collec-
       tive efficacy beliefs in support of student learning. American Journal of Education,
       121,501–530.

Gibson, J.L., Ivancevich, J.M. & Donnely, J.H. (1976). Organizations behavior, structure,
       processes. Dallas. U.S.A: Business Publications.




                    INESJOURNAL (The Journal of International Education Science)
                              Yıl/Year: 10, Sayı/Number: 34, Mart/March

Münir ŞAHİN                                                                             397

Håkansson, J., & Sundberg, D. (2016). Utmärkt skolutveckling. Natur & Kultur.

Hargreaves, A. (1997). Rethinking educational change. In M. Fullan (Ed.), The Challenge
       of School Change (pp. 3–32). IRI/Skylight.

Huse, E. F. (1980). Organization development and change. West Publishind Company.
       Printed in the U.S.A.

Kebschull, S. (2012). Redesıgnıng schools. Public Impact, Chapel Hill, NC.
       http://oppotunityculture.org. 15.05.2022.

Kruse, S. D., & Louis, K. S. (1997). Teacher teaming in middle schools: Dilemmas for a
       schoolwide community. Educational Administration Quarterly, 33(3), 261–289.

MEB. (2010). İlköğretim kurumları standartları eğitim dökümanı. Ankara: İlköğretim Genel
       Müdürlüğü.

Meador, D. (2020, August 25). Strategies for school leaders that promote school im-
       provement.        Retrieved   from     https://www.thoughtco.com/strategies-that-
       promote school-improvement3194585

Middlewood, D., Parker, R., & Beere, J. (2005). Creating a learning school. London: Paul-
       Chapman Publishing.

Özen, Ş. (1991). Yönetimi geliştirmede bir yaklaşım: Örgüt geliştirme. Amme İdaresi
       Dergisi, 24 (2), 90-106.

Ramberg, J., Laftman, S. B., Almquist, Y. B., & Modin, B. (2018). School effectiveness
       and students’ perceptions of teacher caring: A multilevel study. Improving
       Schools, 22(1), 55-71.

Reynolds, A. J., Temple, J. A., Robertson, D. L., & Mann, E. A. (2001). Longterm effects
       of an early childhood intervention on educational achievement and juvenile ar-
       rest: A 15-year follow-up of low-Income children in public schools. JAMA,
       285(18), 23-39.

Şahin, M. (2017). Okulun çevre unsuru olarak sosyal medyaya ilişkin yönetici, öğretmen ve
       veli görüşleri (Yayınlanmamış Doktora Tezi). İnönü Üniversitesi Eğitim Bilimleri
       Enstitüsü, Malatya.

Sahin, M. (2019). Egitimde sınıf oturma düzeninin önemi, Ihlara Egitim Arastırmaları
       Dergisi, 4(1), 73-101.

Şahin, M. (2021). Social media in the eye of parents. Education Quarterly Reviews, 4(3),
       169-183.

Şahin, M. & Korkmaz, C. (2013). 2009 Pisa başarılarına görev ülkelerin insani gelişmi
       lik düzeyleri arasındaki ilişki. Mustafa Kemal Üniversitesi Sosyal Bilimler Enstitüsü




                                     www. inesjournal.com

A Study on the Role of School Administrators in School Improvement                               398




               Dergisi, 10(22), 225-247.

Şahin, M. & Üstüner, M. (2018). Sosyal medyaya ilişkin okul yöneticilerinin görüşleri.
       İnönü Üniversitesi      Eğitim      Fakültesi     Dergisi,         19   (1),   335-355.   DOI:
       10.17679/inuefd.334250

Şimşek H. & Tanaydın, D. (2002). İlköğretimde veli katılımı: öğretmen-velipsikolojik
       danışman üçgeni. İlköğretim online dergisi, s.12-16.

Özaslan, Y. (2010). Kişiselleştirilmiş öğrenme ortamı olarak IPTV. Sözel Bildiri, Ululararası
       Egitim Teknolojileri 2010 (International Educational Technology),Istanbul.

Ünsal, H. (2012). Harmanlanmıs öğrenmenin basarı ve motivasyona etkisi. Türk Eğitim
       Bilimleri Dergisi, 10(1), 1-27.

Senge, P., McCabe, N. C., Lucas, T., Smith, B., Dutton, J., & Kleiner, A. (2000). Schools
       that learn: a fifth discipline fieldbook for educators, parents, and everyone who cares
       about education. New York: Doubleday.

Yıkıcı, B. (2019). Okul yöneticilerinin okul gelişimi ve stratejik planlamadaki hazır bul
       nusluğunun paydaşlahra göre değerlendirmesi (Yayınlanmamış Doktora Tezi).
       Yakın Doğu Üniversitesi Eğitim Bilimleri Enstitüsü, Lefkose.

Yıldırım, A. (2016). Okul temelli örgüt geliştirme. İçinde, E. Yılmaz, M. Çalışkan & S. A.
       Sulak (Ed.), Eğitim Bilimlerinden Yansımalar, (ss.31-44). Konya: Çizgi Kitabevi

Yılmaz, E. & Öznacar, B. (2016). Veli, ebeveyn- anne baba ve okul. İçinde, E. Yılmaz, A.
       Ünal, M. Çalışkan, & S. A. Sulak (Ed.), Eğitim Bilimlerinden Yansımalar,
       (ss.59-70). Konya: Çizgi Kitabevi




                    INESJOURNAL (The Journal of International Education Science)
                              Yıl/Year: 10, Sayı/Number: 34, Mart/March