Author Accepted Manuscript


Title
Governance and educational leadership: Studies in education policy and politics


Publication
In S. Courtney, H. Gunter, R. Niesche and T. Trujillo (eds) Understanding
educational leadership: Critical perspectives and approaches. Bloomsbury: London


Key words


Governance; Leadership; Performance Management; Marketisation; School
Autonomy


Authors
Andrew Wilkins, Goldsmiths, University of London, andrew.wilkins@gold.ac.uk
Brad Gobby, Curtin University, brad.gobby@curtin.edu.au


ORCID
0000-0002-4486-8034 (Andrew Wilkins)
0000-0002-2170-5435 (Brad Gobby)


Short bio
Andrew Wilkins is Reader in Education at Goldsmiths, University of London. His
research interests include a focus on data governance, public infrastructures, policy
assemblages, democratic cultures and their interconnections and disconnections in
the field of education. His recent books include Modernising School Governance
(Routledge 2016) and Education Governance and Social Theory (Bloomsbury 2018).
Brad Gobby is a Senior Lecturer in the School of Education at Curtin University,
Western Australia. He has published widely on the topics of education policy, politics
and school autonomy in peer-reviewed international journals and edited books, and
is an editorial board member of the Journal of Educational Administration and
History.




                                                                                     1

Chapter summary



In this chapter we describe and critically analyse the relationship between

governance and educational leadership. The aim of making explicit such a

relationship is to show the application and value of governance to the study of

educational leadership. Taken in its widest sense, governance can be loosely

characterized as a political and economic strategy aimed at perfecting the design of

accountability relations and structures. Decreased government involvement in the

running and monitoring of education provision means that public servants, be they

school leaders or school governors, are called upon to make themselves

accountable to stakeholders and evaluation and funding bodies, typically through

horizontal and vertical relations of accountability that rely on performance

benchmarking, external inspection and high-stakes testing. Governance (broadly

conceived) concerns the extent to which these relations and structures of

accountability function successfully within a narrow definition of rational self-

management.


 Definition

 Governance refers to the ways in which government and non-government entities
 intervene, both formally and informally, to shape the way organisations and individuals
 conduct themselves. These interventions are designed to facilitate certain kinds of
 change (change in individual behaviour or organisational structure) or limit the
 possibilities for change in order to maintain the status quo. In both cases, governance
 is designed to improve conditions by which change can be affected or limited to serve
 different political, economic and environmental aims.




By implication educational leadership (and management) is a function and condition

of governance since it provides a set of vital relays for linking the formally



                                                                                           2

autonomous operations of schools with the political ambitions of the state and the

interests of the wider public. The relationship between governance and educational

leadership, we argue, is therefore crucial to mapping the current political moment,

namely to detail the specific rationalities and configurations that bear upon the

development of schools as organizations and the different interests served or

excluded by these configurations.




A further, related aim of the chapter is to trace empirically the application and value

of governance to the study of educational leadership so that other researchers may

utilize similar or adapted and revised analytical strategies. To achieve this, we

deploy two distinctive formulations of governance to show how governance-in-

practice (in this case, educational leadership practices) can be differently

conceptualized and understood. These two formulations of governance are

instrumental-rational and agonistic-political. In a pragmatic sense, governance can

be understood as a blueprint or model for producing schools that are ‘publicly

accountable’ (narrowly conceived) – properly audited and monitored, high achieving,

financially sustainable, law compliant, and non-discriminatory. Governance, in this

sense, can be considered a technical, even apolitical dimension of the leadership

and management of schools as organizations – it is about striving to generate critical

mass to meet certain strategic and operational priorities that enhance the quality and

standards of schools. This is an instrumental-rational formulation of governance.

But educational leadership, as an expression of governance, is deeply politicized in

this sense. For educational leadership to be considered legitimate for example, it

must, for the most part, conform to a dominant account of what educational



                                                                                          3

leadership and its purpose is (to be discussed later). But who gets to decide the

purpose and design of educational leadership?



 Definition

 Leadership is defined here as discourse. It is a dynamic and culturally and historically-
 specific body of knowledge and practices that are concerned with influencing the
 conduct of others and self to specific ends. The meaning, practices and effects of
 leadership (including educational leadership) are shaped by social and political
 interests and power, and therefore the field and exercise of leadership are both sites of
 contest and struggle.




We therefore require a second formulation of governance: agonistic-political. Such a

view is important to contesting the supposedly politically neutral aims and language

of governance and opening up analytic spaces in which the politicized nature of

governance, and by implication educational leadership, reveals itself through the

different interests served and excluded by such programmes. Later in the chapter

we draw on two case studies of education reforms taken from two national policy

contexts – the academies programme in England and the Independent Public

Schools (IPS) programme in Australia – to illustrate how the same phenomenon can

be analysed differently using these two formulations of governance.




The chapter is structured as follows. In the first section, we offer a historical account

of the development of the concept and practice of governance through an

examination of the changing role and responsibility of government. Following this we

illustrate the significance of governance to educational leadership through a

consideration of key global education trends and reforms, notably school autonomy

and the relentless drive for self-improvement and self-management within a context



                                                                                             4

of devolved education service planning. The next section draws on case study

material taken from England and Australia to show the value and application of

governance to educational leadership research, specifically how governance can be

traced empirically and conceptualized differently through educational leadership

practices using two distinct formulations of governance: instrumental-rational and

agonistic-political. In the final section we draw together these various perspectives

and insights to reflect on some of the dilemmas and tensions inherent to theorizing

governance in the context of educational leadership research.




Governance




The political and economic significance of governance can be richly theorized and

understood when analysed in the context of the recent history of the development of

government. In this section we provide a definition of governance by way of a brief

economic and political history of the changing role and responsibility of government,

specifically the transformation of government in some Western countries during the

1980s and the subsequent reconfiguration and repurposing of different governments

around the globe. These changes in the formation of government have direct

implications for the configuration of state practices as well as the relationship

between citizens and the state. As we intend to show, governance can be

understood as both a condition and response to these changes.




The late 1970s and 1980s represent a watershed moment in the history of politics

and economics. Spearheaded by the free market principles of liberal economists

                                                                                        5

and political conservatives, the 1980s ushered in a new era of government for many

Western countries – a model of government that would later be replicated by

countries around the globe. Against a background of high inflation and economic

stagnation during the 1970s, the post-war social democratic state came under fierce

opposition from right-wing economists and politicians who declared policy initiatives

and redistribution programmes underpinned by strong government intervention to be

oppressive, cost-ineffective and demoralizing. Instead, the role and responsibility of

government was gradually reimagined and repurposed during the 1980s to

compliment a new vision of welfare, citizenship and the economy, one in which the

vitality of market forces, the circulation of capital and the rights of individuals as

consumers took precedence over previous social and economic goals, specifically

the need to protect individuals and groups against the unintended consequences of

capitalism and to secure the unconditional welfare rights of citizens.




Proposals for a small state underpinned by deregulated industry, decreased public

spending, conditional citizenship and individual responsibility attracted widespread

support among right-wing think tanks, politicians and economists during the late

1970s. It was not until the 1980s with the rise of Thatcherism in England and

Reganism in the US that proposals for a small state were transformed from a

collection of ideas into a governmental programme. The institutionalization of

‘economic liberalism’ under Thatcherism and Reaganism was integral to this

mobilization as it helped to carve out a new role and responsibility for government in

the macroeconomy, one that gave legitimacy to the small state. The post-war social

democratic state, with its emphasis on economic protection and government-

subsidized mass social programs, was effectively curtailed to make way for new

                                                                                         6

government priorities: global alignment, capital mobility and fiscal responsibility.

These same economic and political imperatives continue to shape and inform the

role and responsibility of governments today. The scaling back of the welfare state

and the contracting out of public utilities and resources to private companies and

charities capture the essence of a small state.




Yet despite reluctance among governments to own and manage their public utilities

and resources, governments appear no less active in setting rules and managing

expectations intended to shape and inform how public organizations govern

themselves – what Cooper (1998: 12) calls ‘governing at a distance’. These rules

and expectations are enshrined through the formulation of professional guidelines,

performance targets, strategic objectives and contractual obligations against which

public organizations are compared and judged to be efficient, cost-effective,

consumer-responsive, industry-facing, and high-performing. Designed to make

organizations more knowable and governable, these technologies and techniques

enhance the capacity of governments and other non-government bodies to exercise

control over the internal operation of public organizations or, at the very least, limit

the choices public organizations have in terms of how they self-evaluate. Consider

the important role played by test-based accountabilities, comparative-competitive

frameworks and data management systems at the level of the school. These forms

of punitive intervention and self-management are typically carried out by school

leaders and governors on themselves and others, yet they are principally designed

to make schools more amenable to scrutiny by external authorities and evaluation

bodies, especially national para-government agencies like the school’s inspectorate,



                                                                                           7

the Office for Standards in Education, Children's Services and Skills (Ofsted), who

evaluate schools on behalf of government and the consumer public.




On this understanding, a useful definition of governance offered by Rhodes (1996:

652) is ‘government without governing’. In other words, governance can be used to

characterize both the absence and presence of state power: the weakening of

traditional structures of government and the strengthening of the continuation and

exercise of state power over and through organizations. It is therefore misleading to

characterize government and governance as separate forces or technologies since

governance can be understood to be a form of ‘government’: ‘modes of action, more

or less considered or calculated, which were destined to act upon the possibilities of

action of other people’ (Foucault 1982: 790).




While the term governance lacks a precise meaning, it is typically used in political

science, public policy and sociology literature to describe societies and economies in

which vertical structures of top-down government are replaced (or supplemented) by

the development of horizontal, flexible networks of bottom-up government. Here the

term governance is used to capture the ways in which key roles and responsibilities

for service planning – specifically the appraisal, monitoring and budgeting of public

services – have shifted from government entities to para-government organizations,

management groups, leadership teams and even communities. These new forms of

bottom-up government, sometimes called small government or devolved

government, are often celebrated within policy documents and political speeches as

levers for community empowerment and downward accountability since they work to


                                                                                         8

shift power away from national governments, even local governments, to produce

contexts in which service planning and delivery is managed through the

‘spontaneous’ interaction, cooperation and co-influence of multiple stakeholders

rather than the planning committees of political authorities and their ‘vested

interests’. In 2011 the former British Prime Minster David Cameron set out a vision

of a ‘Big Society’ in which he made similar claims about the strong relationship

between devolution and community empowerment, the idea being that devolution

enriches opportunities for community and citizen participation in service planning and

delivery.




Viewed from a different perspective, governance is designed to weaken the influence

of traditional structures of government and bureaucracy, even democratic processes,

so that opportunities arise for improved public-private partnerships and the

management, delivery and monitoring of public services by non-government, ‘non-

political’ entities, such as charities, businesses and social enterprises. Governance

therefore refers to qualitative changes to the design, management and ethos of

public services, specifically the use of narrow, instrumental definitions of quality and

accountability to measure the cost effectiveness and impact of public services. The

shift from government to governance also signifies something unique about the

exercise of modern forms of state power, namely the desire to govern through

improving conditions for self-organization and self-improvement. Not to be confused

with government and at the same time not to be analysed separate from it,

governance can be described as a political and economic strategy aimed at

supporting contexts in which the governing of the health, happiness, wealth,



                                                                                           9

education and welfare of the population is achievable in the absence of any direct,

coercive government intervention.




Related to this concept of governance is a very specific understanding of the nature

and exercise of responsibility. No longer exclusively the domain of state intervention

and protection, matters of public interest including duties of care and responsibility

for others and to the self (broadly conceived) are purposefully reimagined under

governance as matters of private interest and individual responsibility. Economic

stability and job security emerge as goals and moral obligations to be satisfied by

individuals and organizations for example. Governance therefore signals the

abrogation of state responsibility and its reluctance to protect individuals and

organizations against some of the worst excesses of unregulated markets. At the

same time, governance can be viewed as a political strategy or policy programme

designed to foster the adaptive capacities of citizens and communities to operate

within this new risk environment and the vulnerabilities and insecurities it engenders.

Governance is concerned with improving conditions in which individuals and

organizations are best placed to navigate and respond to these uncertainties and

their attendant calculations and risks. Governance therefore operates at the

intersection of two distinct processes: ‘dis-embedding’ and 're-embedding' (Keddie

and Mills 2019). Take schools in England for example. Under proposals to improve

conditions for a self-improving school system, many schools are granted autonomy

and flexibility to function outside the bureaucracy and politics of local government as

administratively self-governing entities or ‘state-funded independent schools’. Yet

this process of ‘dis-embedding’ requires those same schools to anchor themselves

more rigidly to new relations and fantasies of market discipline and competition as

                                                                                         10

well as complimentary state-mandated directives, provisos and obligations – a

process of ‘re-embedding’ that strengthens relations of accountability between

schools and central government through the prism of a market logic (see Wilkins

2016).


 Reflection
 Every person occupies different roles in their daily life: citizen, employee, parent,
 student, teacher, consumer, activist, patient, carer, leader, community member.
 Consider the different roles you occupy, either voluntarily or involuntarily, and
 reflect on:
 What kinds of responsibilities underpin that role?
 Do you choose these responsibilities, or have you been chosen to perform them?
 Who or what compels you to perform these responsibilities?
 How and why did you learn to perform these responsibilities effectively?
 How can you be sure you have inhabited and performed these responsibilities?


Leadership



Informed by positivist scientific approaches, the mainstream field of Educational

Leadership, Management and Administration (ELMA) is construed here as

contributing a scientific understanding of administration and the structures and

functions of organizations. More recent scholarship on leadership has focused on

the desirable traits and behaviours of leaders, characterizations of heroic and

exceptional leaders and organizational change in the context of universally

prescribed categories of ‘best practice’. Increasingly, this field is inhabited by critical

voices that stress, rather than diminish, ELMA’s relationship to wider political, social

and cultural forces and their continuing impact on education (Bates 2010). The

mainstream field of ELMA has been critiqued for its instrumentalist and individualist

models of leadership, its lack of theoretical and philosophical engagement, and the

                                                                                         11

epistemological realism that leads it to accept the dominant education reform context

as a mere uncontested backdrop of leadership. We now direct our attention to the

critically-informed analysis of leadership’s relationship to politically-driven structural

and performative reform.



As discussed above, the rationale of ‘government without governing’ has

engendered models of self-directed service planning and delivery. In education, this

has taken the form of school autonomy and self-management. Imagined by its

proponents as a condition of school improvement, school autonomy is endorsed by

global governance bodies like the Organization of Economic Cooperation and

Development (OECD) and the World Bank, although there is no conclusive evidence

that school autonomy improves educational outcomes for students. Nevertheless,

the centralized and hierarchical coordination and management of schools has given

way to local decision-making and network governance, framed by economic logics

that model schools on the corporate competitive enterprise (Courtney, McGinity and

Gunter 2018). Through the process of contractualization, the freedom accorded to

schools as service providers is disciplined by market competition and the

requirement to demonstrate improved performance to governing bodies and other

regulatory agencies. This means that school autonomy is largely conceptualized

and exercised through the logic of competitive performativity; that is, through

systems of accountability that evaluate and report school, student and staff

performance, often narrowly measured through quantifiable performance

benchmarking and testing.




                                                                                         12

Educational leadership is a strategy of this New Public Management (NPM) reform

project. While adherence to (and the efficient administration of) centralized policies

and procedures were valued in the case of bureaucratically-managed school

systems, different kinds of principal agency are required for the autonomous school.

Governance promotes and compels new kinds of visionary, empowered, innovative

leaders equipped to independently and strategically lead and solve organizational

problems in flexible, rapidly changing and insecure market and policy settings. Such

a corporate model of leadership and its associated notions of ‘best practice’ has

been successfully operationalized by a cadre of bureaucrats and policy

entrepreneurs who promote the use of private consultancies, certain popular books,

governmental agencies and reports, and school leadership bodies like the National

College for School Leadership in England.



In this sense, leadership performs governance-in-practice. Notions of leadership

and the practices of leading are refashioned around this system of governance that

diminishes state-directed, hierarchical forms of power by facilitating the conditions of

local empowerment and self-governance. With private business and corporate

leaders being models for school governance, principals are charged with creating

strategic and business plans, collecting and evaluating data and performance,

monitoring and managing teacher performance, managing school finances,

diversifying income streams, and promoting schools to users as consumers. School

leaders are expected to establish and manage external partners and stakeholders to

improve performance and accountability. In England, for example, school governors

have been spotlighted as integral to school leadership by holding school leaders to

account for financial and educational performance (Wilkins, 2016).


                                                                                      13

Viewed within the discourse of governance, educational leadership is a largely

technical, universal and politically neutral know-how for optimizing organizational

processes, calculability and outputs. This is the dominant view of the mainstream

field of ELMA, which advances ahistorical, apolitical and functionalist accounts of

leadership. Socially critical scholarship, however, brings into the analysis of

educational leadership the historical and cultural relations of power ‘which shape and

pattern school leadership in particular periods and in various cultural settings’ (Grace

1995: 3). For this knowledge-base, which is concerned with politicizing the technical,

educational leadership represents a vital relay that links the changing political

objectives of the state to the management of schools. Leadership, as both a body of

knowledge and practice, is therefore constituted through governance and tactically

deployed in political strategies of ‘governing at a distance’.


 Activity
 Leadership is often trapped in the discourses of organizational efficiency,
 performance and accountability.
 Consider your ideas about leadership by engaging with the following:
 Are leaders born or made?
 What makes a ‘good’ school leader?
 Where do your ideas about leadership come from?
 How might the social and cultural context of a school influence what ‘good’
 school leadership is?
 To what extent can and should school leaders challenge the dominant ways of
 thinking about and doing educational leadership?


Case study one: England




                                                                                      14

Experiments in market-based reforms to education in England since the 1980s have

not only strengthened the status and importance of educational leadership to schools

but carved out normative spaces in which certain kinds of educational leaders and

leadership styles are, by choice or necessity, more widely practised. Borrowing from

business practices and scientific management theory more generally, the internal

operation of the school now more closely resembles a business with all the trappings

and incentives that accompany setting up and running a business, namely output

controls, performance indicators and private-sector styles of management practice.

The imprint of business ontology on school culture is nowhere more visible than in

the use of standardization and testing. Standardization and testing function, on the

one hand, as tools for defining and measuring self-improvement, the principal means

through which school leaders and governors (those tasked with the responsibility of

holding senior leaders to account for the financial and educational performance of

the school) evaluate pupil’s educational performance and make judgements about

the quality of teaching. On the other hand, standardization and testing are tools for

satisfying performance benchmarks and baseline assessments defined by the

national school’s inspectorate (Ofsted), external regulators and international

assessment bodies (see Programme for International Student Assessment, PISA).




From this perspective, educational leadership can be considered a tool of

governance to the extent it recalibrates schools as navigable spaces according to

data management systems that register their explicitness and transparency as

performative entities. As we demonstrate in this section, the movement towards

greater devolved management and school autonomy in England, as exemplified

through the academies programme, means that large numbers of schools operate as

                                                                                     15

managers and overseers of their own provision with professional discretion over

funding allocation, admissions and staff pay and conditions. This raises the issue of

a ‘regulation gap’ with local government no longer acting as the principal

management group for schools. Unwilling to concede too much control to schools,

central government and para-government agencies have intervened by compelling

school leaders and governors to adopt certain roles and responsibilities in order that

their actions are knowable and governable from the perspective of external funders

and regulators. Participation in school leadership and governance therefore tends to

be limited to those who are technicians of ‘best practice’ or ‘what works’ and those

who are effective translators for the realization of government-mandated initiatives

and performance-driven objectives (Courtney, McGinity and Gunter 2018).




Since the 1980s both Labour and Conservative governments in England have

continued (much less discredited or disrupted) the ideological work of creating an

education system in the image of the market. This includes new legal arrangements

to improve conditions for privatization management of education services. City

Technology Colleges (CTCs) introduced under the terms of Education Reform Act

1988 and the Local Management of Schools (LMS) enabled some publicly-funded

schools to pursue such an arrangement, that is, a form of administrative self-

governing unimpeded by the politics and bureaucracy of local government. Later in

the 2000s, the New Labour government introduced the City Academies programme

to enable alternative providers, specifically charities, universities and social

enterprises set up as private limited companies, to oversee management of

underperforming schools in disadvantaged, urban areas, thus removing certain

schools from local government jurisdiction. In 2010 the Coalition government (a

                                                                                       16

cooperation between the Conservative and Liberal Democratic party) revised the

academies programme to enable all schools to convert to academy status by joining

or creating their own foundations or trusts (see the Academies Act 2010). At the

time of writing, statistics released by the Department for Education (DfE) indicate

there are 7,317 open academies representing 30% of the total number of primary,

secondary, special and alternative provision schools in England.




Research suggests that the conversion of local government-run schools into

academies (or ‘academisation’) has implications for the way schools are organized

internally, especially among ‘sponsored academies’ that are run by large

management groups called multi-academy trusts (MATs). Key changes include a

stricter focus on performance management, centrally-mandated contractual

obligations and market discipline to enhance upward accountability to funders and

regulators with restrictions placed on who gets to participate in school governing

bodies, usually determined by skills audits and competency frameworks (Wilkins

2016). Against a background of diminishing local government support, school

leaders and governors increasingly find themselves entrenched by bureaucratic-

managerial roles and responsibilities spanning oversight of premises management,

succession planning, budget control, resource allocation, and employment disputers.




As already alluded to in the introduction, we propose two ways through which to

interpret these changes to educational leadership. On the one hand, educational

leadership can be understood from the narrow rational perspective of an

instrumental-technical account of governance. A key role for school leaders and


                                                                                      17

governors in the current education landscape is to maintain the long-term

sustainability of the school as a high-reliability, high-performing organization, one

that maintains reputational advantage in the local education marketplace and

strengthens accountability upwards to funders and regulators. On the other hand,

these approaches to educational leadership typically fail to acknowledge the different

sets of political and economic interests served and excluded through these

configurations of the school, key among them being the smooth function of the

school as a corporate competitive entity. NPM techniques, such as the ones

outlined above, help to render the internal operation of the school more amenable to

the scrutiny of others and more readily calculable in the context of webs of

‘commensurability, equivalence and comparative performance’ (Lingard, Martino and

Rezai-Rashti 2016: 542). Viewed from an agonistic-political perspective,

governance as a strategy in rational self-management serves to strengthen relations

of accountability between central government and schools, making governance a

‘key fidelity technique in new strategies of government’ (Rose 1999: 152).



Case study two: Australia


Australia’s system of education is composed of a public system of schools which

educates approximately 65% of the nation’s school students, and a government-

subsidized private system made up of Catholic and independent religious and non-

religious schools. Each of Australia’s states and territories is constitutionally

responsible for their education system, with each having their own education

departments and regulatory bodies. Since the 1960s and 1970s, Federal

Governments have increasingly exerted influence over state education policy and

practice, often using funding to tie the states to national political priorities. This
                                                                                         18

control has tightened over the past decade with the establishment of mandatory

national curriculum and testing, and professional standards and accreditation

agencies. At the same time, Federal governments have endorsed an agenda for

greater principal and school autonomy.



For over a century, Australia’s systems of public education have been highly

centralized, with state-based education bureaucracies planning and coordinating

compulsory school education across Australia’s vast geography. This orthodoxy was

challenged in the 1990s by the Kennett Government’s decentralization agenda for

the state of Victoria. The Kennett government devolved administration, planning and

resource allocation to schools. It introduced stakeholder governance through school

councils and facilitated competition by deregulating student enrolments. Business

planning, managing school budgets and the recruitment and employment of staff

became key responsibilities of school leaders. Despite these reforms, most

Australian states remained largely resistant to school self-management reform until

the late 2000s with the introduction of the Independent Public Schools (IPS) initiative

in Western Australia (WA) and its subsequent adoption in the state of Queensland.



The WA government and Department of Education promote IPS as a tool for

empowering schools and the local community through improved conditions for

devolved decision-making. For schools that opt into the program, principals assume

responsibility for recruiting and employing staff, determining a staff profile/positions,

financial and resource management (a ‘one-line budget’), managing small contracts,

and developing business and strategic plans. This autonomy however is disciplined

by contractual accountability, whereby each school signs a Delivery and


                                                                                        19

Performance Agreement (DPA) with the Director-General of the Department. This

agreement stipulates the responsibilities of the school and the Department, and the

performance targets to be achieved and reported on as part of a three-year cycle

(through a Department review). Overseeing the school’s progress towards its

performance goals is the school board, which provides input into the school’s

business plan and signs off on the DPA. The board does not intervene in or manage

the school, nor does it exercise authority over or performance manage school staff.

Rather, it performs an accountability function that strengthens the alignment between

central government objectives and schools.



Importantly, IPS does not accord schools full autonomy. Schools are subject to

union-negotiated industrial agreements, must teach the mandated curriculum, must

submit themselves to external accountabilities, have their student enrolments

regulated by ‘catchment zones’, and must comply with Department and public sector

policies and standards. Nevertheless, responsibility for the management of

performance has been devolved to schools and this freedom to self-manage has

proved so appealing that, at the time of writing, 577 of 809 public schools have opted

into the program over the past decade. Over the years, criticism of the unfair

advantages gained by IPS schools has resulted in the Department extending some

key features of IPS to non-IPS schools, including full responsibility for financial

management.



Approached from an agnostic-political perspective, a critical issue for school

autonomy reforms like IPS is how governance transforms the meaning and practices

of principal autonomy and leadership. The promotion of corporate knowledge and


                                                                                      20

the stress placed on demonstrating improved performance in the context of

competition for resources and students, is resulting in some principals modelling

their professional identities on the Chief Executive Officer role of private enterprise

(Gobby 2013). This corporatized and entrepreneurial form of leadership, along with

the increased administrative burden associated with self-managment and

accountability requirements, is resulting in a values-drift. In this situation, corporate,

financial and resource objectives, management and processes are prioritized over

pedagogical and curriculum leadership. Therefore, when undertaken in the context

of performative and market-based relations, school autonomy does not induce

freedom but instead compels the exercise of entrepreneurial, corporate and

accountable forms of self-governed conduct.



While this governance approach to the management of schools was promoted in the

rhetoric of school and community empowerment, this has not materialized for many

stakeholders. For principals and teachers, schools are operating according to the

logics and priorities of central governments, their regulatory bodies and the forces of

market competition, regardless of the needs of local contexts. There is limited

opportunity for principals, teachers and other stakeholders to act outside of these

legitimated ways of conceiving and leading schools. School boards, for instance, are

being used by principals to select members with business and expert knowledge to

shore up the corporate and governance know-how of schools. The effect is that

boards avoid discussing substantive issues about educational purpose, curriculum

and pedagogy, and those without governance know-how are excluded from school

decision-making.




                                                                                          21

Conclusion


In this chapter we have introduced the concept of governance as an analytical tool

through which to interpret and understand educational leadership, but also to engage

with the field of educational leadership research more generally. In order to nuance

our analysis of what educational leadership is (or what different people claim it to be

or should be) and compliment a multi-dimensional conception of educational

leadership, we provided two formulations of governance: instrumental-rational and

agonistic-political. Each formulation offers a specific orienting position to framing the

concept of educational leadership as governance-in-practice, as evidenced in our

discussion of the academies programme in England and the Independent Public

Schools (IPS) programme in Australia.




The first formulation of governance offered here – instrumental-rational – lends itself

to a functionalist account of educational leadership, by far the more dominant

framing of the two in terms of its impact on education policy and practice globally.

Global discourses of ‘good governance’, where they relate to the strategic

management of organisations according to the explicitness of performance indicators

and output controls, communicate a view of organisations as necessarily governable,

answerable and transparent. A requirement of ‘good governance’ is not only that

organisations make themselves accountable in this way, but more importantly, that

there are universally-prescriptive conditions and indicators by which organisations

can be judged and compared as accountable, usually within a framework of market

discipline that values corporate, performative and contractual measures of

accountability. Where educational leadership performs this function, an


                                                                                       22

instrumental-rational account of governance is appropriate. Yet certain techniques

and technologies are required to flourish, namely on the ground and among frontline

staff, especially among those responsible for leadership and management, in order

for organisations to be ‘recognizable’ as exemplars of good governance. It is here,

then, that an agonistic-political formulation of governance is necessary, one that

attends to the intrinsic links between governance and governmental programmes

more generally.




When theorised through the lens of an agonistic-political formulation of governance,

educational leadership can be conceptualised as sites of struggle over meaning as

morally-charged requirements to make decisions ‘locally’ and in the best interests of

students sometimes conflict with compulsory, government-mandated requirements to

make the internal operation of the school more business-like in terms of its value

structures and normative commitments. The idea here is that governance is a

process of abstraction or reification by which schools and related educational

organisations are de-socialised from their immediate contexts to serve wider political

and economic interests, usually through tools and technologies of performance and

compliance checks. This process of abstraction does not always succeed in the way

that government entities and intergovernmental organisations would like it to,

however, as educational leadership is the everyday labour of socially situated actors.

Yet, the prevalence of images and discourses of ‘heroic’, entrepreneurial, corporate,

managerially-adept leaders, both in England and Australia, should be a reminder that

educational leadership is vulnerable to capture from a market determinism which

produces opportunities and legitimacy for the state to intervene in the running of

schools.

                                                                                      23

Further reading


Gunter, H. 2009. Leadership and the Reform of Education. Bristol: The Policy Press.
Rhodes, R.A.W. 1996. The new governance: Governing without government.
Political Studies, 44 (4): 652-667
Stevenson, H. 2018. Transformation and control: What role for leadership and
management in a ‘school-led’ system?. In A. Wilkins and A. Olmedo (eds) Education
governance and social theory: Interdisciplinary approaches to research. Bloomsbury:
London, pp. 209-226
Stoker, G. 1998. Governance as theory: five propositions. International Social
Sciences Journal, 50 (155), 17-28
Wilkins, A. and Olmedo, A. 2018. Conceptualising education governance: Framings,
perspectives and theories. In A. Wilkins and A. Olmedo (eds) Education governance
and social theory: Interdisciplinary approaches to research. Bloomsbury: London, pp.
1-20


References


Bates, R. 2010. History of educational leadership/management. In P. Peterson, E.
Baker and B. McGaw (eds) International Encyclopedia of Education. Elsevier
Science: Oxford, pp. 724-730
Cooper, D. 1998. Governing Out of Order: Space, Law and the Politics of Belonging.
London: Rivers Oram Press
Courtney, S., McGinity, R. and Gunter, H. 2018. Introduction: theory and theorising
in educational leadership. In S. Courtney, R. McGinity and H. Gunter (eds)
Educational Leadership: Theorising Professional Practice in Neoliberal Times.
Routledge: London and New York, pp. 1-11
Foucault, M. 1982. The subject and power. Critical Inquiry, 8 (4), 777-795
Gobby, B. 2013. Principal self-government and subjectification: the exercise of
principal autonomy in the Western Australian Independent Public Schools
programme. Critical Studies in Education, 54 (3), 273-285.
Grace, G. 1995. School Leadership: Beyond education management: An Essay in
Policy Scholarship. The Falmer press: London.
Keddie, A. and Mills, M. 2019. Autonomy, Accountability and Social Justice: Stories
of English Schooling. Routledge: London and New York
Lingard, B., Martino, W. and Rezai-Rashti, G. 2013. Testing regimes,
accountabilities and education policy: commensurate global and national
developments. Journal of Education Policy, 28 (5), 539-556

                                                                                      24

Rose, N. 1999. Powers of freedoms: Reframing political thought. Cambridge:
Cambridge University Press
Wilkins, A. 2016. Modernising School Governance: Corporate Planning and Expert
Handling in State Education. Routledge: London




                                                                                 25