University of Nebraska - Lincoln
DigitalCommons@University of Nebraska - Lincoln

Journal of Women in Educational Leadership                      Educational Administration, Department of


5-9-2022

Dr. Barbara Higdon: Let It Begin With Me
E. B. Bachman




Follow this and additional works at: https://digitalcommons.unl.edu/jwel

   Part of the Educational Administration and Supervision Commons

This Article is brought to you for free and open access by the Educational Administration, Department of at
DigitalCommons@University of Nebraska - Lincoln. It has been accepted for inclusion in Journal of Women in
Educational Leadership by an authorized administrator of DigitalCommons@University of Nebraska - Lincoln.

Journal of Women in Educational Leadership, 2022
doi: 10.32873/unl.dc.jwel.206
http://digitalcommons.unl.edu/jwel/
ISSN 2379-2191




                  Dr. Barbara Higdon:
                  Let It Begin With Me

                       E. B. Bachman, Ph.D.

                          Office of Graduate Studies
                        University of Nebraska-Lincoln

     Correspondence — E. B. Bachman, Ph.D., University of Nebraska—Lin-
        coln, 104 Seaton Hall, Lincoln, NE 685488-0619.
        email ebachman1@unl.edu


     Abstract
     College and university leadership has been analyzed in many
     ways using critiques of leadership styles, reviews of issues and
     individual philosophies. An examination of Dr. Barbara Higdon’s
     career and impact as an educator and educational leader will add
     to the story of women educational leaders in the United States.
     The record of such would be incomplete without her story.



“Let It Begin With Me” was the title of Dr. Barbara Higdon’s presentation
for a lecture series in the greater Kansas City area in 1993. In the pre-
sentation, she described skills needed for peacemaking. Those skills in-
cluded internal attitudes, insights and feelings; sensitivity to the feelings



                                      1

2                        E. B. BACHMAN IN JWEL


of others; resources of character and spirit such as sincerity and integ-
rity. External skills of communication, analysis, strategizing, educating,
and training were also identified. These skills are often listed as neces-
sities for an effective leader (Higdon, 1994).
    Kouzes & Posner (2007) developed a leadership theory based on five
practices for exemplary leadership. Effective leaders are not afraid to
“set the example” for the mission of the larger institution – to inspire
a shared vision enlisting all for the common cause. At the same time,
effective leaders must be willing to challenge, to process, to innovate,
improve, and take risks. No leader can be successful without realiz-
ing that it is the team effort that is the basis for success. Enabling oth-
ers to collaborate and grow while recognizing individual contributions
adds to the success of, not only the team, but the leader as well. Hower
(2005) proposed that “good influencers” have characteristics and behav-
iors that build trust, authenticity, show integrity, and show both confi-
dence and concern. They speak up for what they believe in but also lis-
ten and allow themselves to be influenced by others. Good influencers
know their facts.
    A review of leadership theories must include theories and charac-
teristics associated with Christian philosophies in order to fully look
at the impact of Dr. Higdon’s life and leadership within all her commu-
nities. Most often described as “servant leadership”, characteristics
have included empathy, vision, inspiration and trustworthiness (Ben-
nis, 1989). Spears (2010), after review of servant leader writings, added
healing, awareness, persuasion, and stewardship to the list. A focus on
the growth of people and building community expanded the list even
more. Servant leadership does not always remain extracted from main-
stream leadership practices (Anderson & Shafer, 2005). In fact, many
of the ideologies overlap. The implementation may be the difference be-
tween traditional and servant views of leadership.
    Barbara Higdon emphasized all of these practices in her leadership
positions. Dr. Higdon believed in the power of each person to become
what he or she wanted and needed to be. As she approached the issues
that faced each institution she chose to lead, or assist in leading, the
values she held and led with were affirmed by the examples she set.
Dr. Higdon lived her beliefs and showed others, without any premise of
power, how to do likewise.

            DR. BARBARA HIGDON: LET IT BEGIN WITH ME                   3

    As I desired to learn more about Dr. Higdon’s life and leadership
style, I sought to hear the stories of people with whom she interacted,
professionally and personally, in different capacities. I wanted to hear
about her influence beyond what could be found in the records of her
community of faith and her professional texts. In my search, I was able
to identify individuals who were her former students, colleagues, and
friends as well as her family members. Dr. Higdon left a legacy which
guided young women and men as they pursued their passions and devel-
oped leadership styles that helped them formulate policies and practices.


Who was Barbara Higdon?

Although neither of Dr. Higdon’s parents had a college degree, they both
placed a high value on education. According to family, her fondness for
learning was nurtured by her mother who had received her teaching
certificate and served as a substitute teacher. Her mother also authored
many Christian education materials for young children. The need to go
to college was instilled in Barbara by her parents at an early age during
a time when “girls didn’t routinely go to college.”
    Barbara McFarlane Higdon was the
oldest of four children born to Robert
and Ruth (Chapple) McFarlane in Inde-
pendence, Missouri. She attended pub-
lic schools in the greater Kansas City
metropolitan area. Her secondary edu-
cation culminated with her valedicto-
rian address to her graduating class-
mates in Northeast High School in 1947
(Obituary).
    Barbara was a young co-ed in the
late 1940s and early 1950s during the
time of the Korean War, the hunt for
communists under the umbrella of Mc-
Carthyism, and the limitation on those
who could enter the United States based
on the enactment of the Immigration Figure 1 Dr. Barbara Higdon

4                        E. B. BACHMAN IN JWEL


and Naturalization Act. During her studies for the associate’s degree
at Graceland College (now University), she began to mold a person-
ality that stood up for the under-represented and populations on the
fringe. She became a student leader. In the course of her education at
Graceland, she protested organizations or clubs that were “by invita-
tion only.” (Obituary) Her belief was that all activities should be open
to those who wished to participate.
    Barbara continued her education, first at the University of Kansas,
and then, after her marriage to William Higdon in 1950 (Ancestry), at
the University of Missouri. She encountered individuals who struggled
with the impact of the Civil Rights Act, witnessed the effect of Rosa
Parks’ actions, and the Brown vs. Board of Education ruling. Barbara be-
gan to raise her voice for the cause of equality for women through ar-
ticles in church and college publications. (Higdon, 1958; Higdon, 1969,
Higdon, 1971)
    Prior to completing her doctorate from the University of Missouri,
her academic career led Barbara and Bill to Texas Southern University.
To put this into perspective, as late as 2008 the practice of dual-career
hiring in academia was considered a challenge. (Bell, 2010) Dual-ca-
reer hiring policies were not codified until the late 1990s or early 2000s.
This allows institutions to handle dual-career hiring on a case-by-case
basis. (Bell, 2010). Barbara was hired on her own merits into the same
institution as her husband.
    In 1956, Southern University was the only Texas state institution
where African-Americans could receive a college education (Morain,
1995). Students in her classrooms and on campus were affected by the
continued effects of the civil rights movement in the Jim Crow South.
She was one of a few female white professors at the college. Meeting the
challenges she faced head on, Barbara viewed this as a particularly re-
warding time in her life as she began to help young adults see their po-
tential and navigate the social constraints present (Obituary).
    In 1963, she and Bill moved back to Lamoni, Iowa to teach at their
first alma mater, Graceland College. It was to be the first of three oc-
casions when she would be involved in the Graceland campus commu-
nity as an educator and leader. As can be the case, particularly in small
colleges, instructors are involved in their students’ lives. Such was the
case with Barbara.

            DR. BARBARA HIGDON: LET IT BEGIN WITH ME                    5

   Students were her passion. This was evident in the interviews con-
ducted with her former students. She sought to be the best educator
she could be. From the students’ freshman first semesters to their se-
nior honors courses, she genuinely took an interest in those who en-
tered her classroom. Barbara set the example for students and faculty.
Described as being an integral part of students’ lives, she provided a
role model for both the young men and young women she encountered
and taught. One of those young women indicated Barbara was the first
younger woman that she knew who had a family and a Ph.D. Barbara
acknowledged the importance of role models of women in leadership
for young women in an article about her inauguration as president of
Graceland. (Howard, 1985). One of her male students explained that
her role model included seeing the potential in each student and calling
them out if “they weren’t living up to it.” Admiration of her impact in
her role modeling and interest in individual students were prominent
descriptions. Many of the instructor-student interactions eventually de-
veloped into lifelong friendships.


Historic Leadership

In the Christian text, the book of Micah, Chapter 6, verse 8 states that
we are required to “act justly, love mercy and walk humbly” (NIV, 2011).
The principles were “part and parcel” of who she was, according to for-
mer students and colleagues. Women leaders want their work to be
purposeful, meaningful and such that others will be inspired to achieve
(Llopis, 2014). She never sought a leadership position, but, she answered
“the call” when she saw a need, especially for Graceland College. She
cared for Graceland deeply, even if it meant breaking the mold.
    “Breaking the mold” was something Barbara was “humbly good” at,
based on her life and work. She was the first female faculty member
at Graceland. Her colleagues and students remembered her as quietly
changing the expectations for professional attire for female faculty on
campus from a dress to a pantsuit! She negotiated the unprecedented
contract that allowed her to continue to teach after her husband became
president of Graceland. Her expectation was to be allowed to continue us-
ing her gifts and desire to teach as well as be involved with campus life.

6                        E. B. BACHMAN IN JWEL


    In 1975, Dr. Higdon became the Dean of the School for Education
at Park College (now University) and was soon asked to be the Vice
President of Academic Affairs (Saints Herald, 1975). She was the first
woman to hold this position in the small, liberal arts college located
just a few miles north of Kansas City in Parkville, Missouri. Park was
also known for its strong presence on military bases across the United
States. The school was in a time of transition and needed to find a fo-
cus to strengthen its enrollment and programs. She helped mold the fo-
cus of the college while molding the lives of the students – especially
the women students.
    As the mid-1980s approached, she was asked to become the President
of Graceland College (Saints Herald, 1984; Wade, 1984). This was an-
other milestone for her as well as Graceland, since she was the first fe-
male president of the college in a non-acting role. It was not until 2018
that Graceland appointed their second woman to serve in this capac-
ity. Like Park, Graceland is a small, liberal arts college. Graceland’s pri-
mary campus, however, is nestled in rural southwest Iowa. Graceland
also has a successful School of Nursing program housed in the Greater
Kansas City area. Both Park and Graceland had similar on-campus stu-
dent body sizes (around 800); the curricula was similar; and, for a
while, the affiliated sponsoring church was the same. Like Park College,
Graceland College was in transition in 1984. Graceland was a private
college supported by church funds and tuition dollars. It was also in the
                                                    heart of farm country.
                                                    The United States was
                                                    experiencing a farm
                                                    crisis that affected in-
                                                    stitution and fam-
                                                    ily budgets across the
                                                    country. Many farm-
                                                    ers were facing finan-
                                                    cial ruin (Iowa PBS).
                                                    Enrollments through-
                                                    out the U.S. were low.
                                                    Graceland was no ex-
Figure 2 Higdon Hall, Graceland University,
                                                    ception. She continued
Lamoni, Iowa                                        to lead as president of

            DR. BARBARA HIGDON: LET IT BEGIN WITH ME                    7

Graceland through the crisis, assisting faculty and students to see their
future in spite of the challenges. Barbara chose to retire and pass the
leadership to others in December of 1991 (Saints Herald, 1991).
    In 2000, after transitioning to University status, Graceland again
called her. This time it was to serve as Provost. The following year, her
faith community asked her to lead in the establishment of a theological
seminary. She helped develop its curriculum. Graceland’s final request of
her was to return to campus in 2006 to serve on the Board of Directors.
    Dr. Higdon’s leadership style came into the forefront in her profes-
sional life. Again, she was a role model as a colleague, administrator,
and influencer on campus. Her colleagues described her as a good lis-
tener who knew how to tell those she spoke with “the truth” in a way
they would hear it. She found ways to help others become a part of the
solution for an issue. Barbara was a strong person who understood that
in order to be a good leader, you also needed to have compassion. From
the classroom to the board room, she would always consider both sides
of the argument or decision so that there was a fair balance in the ac-
tions taken. Her belief in the worth of all persons provided the founda-
tion for this leadership asset.
    A former student described her as an ethical leader who would not
ask anyone to violate something they believed in. Her primary guiding
principle in absolute intellectual honesty and integrity provided an
authentic style of leadership. In the times when she had to voice her ex-
pectations for behavior for a student or provide an unpopular decision
to the campus, everyone knew she had done so from a factual perspec-
tive. Barbara valued open and free communication. She had the ability
to make the students or faculty with whom she was having a dialogue
with feel good, even when she did not agree with what the person said.
She respected the integrity of others and showed how to engage in
civil discourse with respect. The caveat was the expectation that they
“knew their stuff.”
    They also knew that she included compassion with her authority.
A former student stated that one of her principles was trying to find
the good, truth, or positive aspects of something and beginning with
that. Her consideration of all sides assisted people to feel they had been
heard; and, their position had been acknowledged. Another student
stated that she was an “affirmational person” who in her interactions

8                             E. B. BACHMAN IN JWEL


Chronology of Major Positions
Position                        Location                            Dates

Professor                       Texas Southern University      1956-1963
Professor                       Graceland College               1963-1975
Vice President, Academic        Park College                   1974-1984
  Affairs & Dean of Faculty
President                       Graceland College              1984-1991
Director                        RLDS Temple Peace Center       1992-1996
Provost                         Graceland University                2000
Curriculum Developer            Community of Christ Seminary        2001
Board Member & Academic         Graceland University Board     2006-2011
 Affairs Committee




with others would help them recognize their own gifts as she “opened
the world” to them. Another student, involved in student activities, dis-
cussed how a “gap” between the student body and her office did not ex-
ist. Colleagues echoed these sentiments, adding that she not only had
the “head but the heart” in whatever she did.
    Barbara had a strong work ethic and recognized those who worked
hard. A former colleague described how she recognized those around her
who were willing to do so for her and the college by frequently sending
notes of encouragement or appreciation. This was done at times when
criticisms may have been extremely personal. Barbara was never de-
terred from any job being completed that she believed was necessary.
Students and colleagues both stated that she was committed to help-
ing everyone be successful. When that happens, the institution is suc-
cessful. In her own words, “Education should not merely confer compe-
tence but also offer an obligation of service to society” (Higdon, 1985).
    Even though students were her first passion, she gave intellectual
AND emotional support as well as professional support to many who
crossed paths with her in whatever course that took. She strengthened
Graceland through a time of critical need enabling others through her
selfless compassion.

            DR. BARBARA HIGDON: LET IT BEGIN WITH ME                    9

Expanding influence

Barbara’s influence was not restricted to Graceland. Throughout her pro-
fessional life, she also served on foundations and boards across Iowa.
Organizations that valued or promoted education and the rights of in-
dividuals were high priority. These foundations and organizations in-
cluded the Iowa Board for Public Programs in the Humanities and the
First in the Nation Foundation (FINE). They valued education, aligning
with her foundational belief that everyone should have the opportunity
to be a lifelong learner (Saints Herald, 1970, 1971; Saints Herald, 1988).
    During the interviews, all those who added their voices to her story,
noted that the subject of peace and Barbara’s passion for the topic were
woven into the threads of the tapestry of her life. She worked for peace
through educating about and focusing on the root causes of disharmony
and inequality. Her belief was that, through education, the problems of
mistrust, discrimination, and poverty could be addressed. She helped
establish many peace oriented organizations or efforts for peace edu-
cation within organizations.
    She became chair of the Iowa Peace Institute Board of Directors in
1981 (Saints Herald, 1981). Her efforts for peace education included a
term as Director, Temple Peace Center (now the Peace and Justice Min-
istries) for the Community of Christ and the establishment of an an-
nual Peace Colloquy. She was also instrumental in the creation of pro-
grams such as Outreach International, a global nonprofit that supports
local leaders and community led groups who develop lasting solutions
to poverty-related issues. (Outreach, 2021)
    She left a legacy of examples of how to lead and live peacefully in
the world. Her embodiment provided an example to her students and
colleagues of how to be torchbearers for peace, justice, and equality; to
be the humble difference maker in the world. Barbara embodied effec-
tive leadership which was respected in all circles in which she walked.


Summary

Often it is believed that when a person passes from their physical life on
earth, their influence will fade. Barbara enriched the lives of everyone

10                      E. B. BACHMAN IN JWEL


she encountered. Her influence was a quiet one gradually manifesting
itself in other’s actions. Like a domino effect, it continues as those who
knew her go through their lives and interact with others, family, and
friends. For former students turned educators, she continues to be an
influencer on how they treat their own students today.
    One of her female students stated, “I don’t know if I would have be-
lieved enough, because of what it takes to get a Ph.D., in my vulnerabil-
ity, to manage all of that if Barbara hadn’t been in my life. She gave an
example of the idea what life was possible.”
    It began with her. She stepped humbly, yet boldly, forward to be a
role model, interacting with and for students, staff and faculty. It con-
tinues through the legacy she left in everyone’s lives.


References

Ancestry.com (2017) Missouri Marriage Records, 1805-2002. Downloaded
  on 25 Jun 2017.
Anderson, C. & Shafer, P. (2005) Deeper power. Enlightened Power:
  How women are transforming the practice of leadership. Coughlin, L,
  Wingard, E. & Hollihan, K. (Eds). San Francisco, CA: Josey-Bass, p.
  55-68.
Bell, D. A. (2010) The intricacies of spousal hiring. The Chronicle of
  Higher Education. https://www.chronicle.com/article/the-intricacies-
  of-spousal-hiring/. Viewed on February 20, 2021.
Benes, W. (1989) On becoming a leader. Reading, MA: Addison-Wesley
  Publishing Company, Inc.
Graceland University, Obituary, https://www.graceland.edu/news-
  events/news/623555/barbara-higdon-1930-2011, viewed 11/18/2012.
Higdon, B. J. (1958) What is this new woman? Saints Herald, 105, p.
  252-253.
Higdon, B.J. (1969) What the church is saying to women’s liberation.
  Saints Herald, 119, p.14.
Higdon, B. J. (1971) Women-created in God’s image? Saints Herald¸121, p.
  380.
Higdon, B. J. (1994) Committed to Peace. Independence: Herald House.

             DR. BARBARA HIGDON: LET IT BEGIN WITH ME                      11

Howard, B. (1985) New Era for Graceland. Saints Herald, p.7-8.
Hower, K. (2005) Influencing for impact. Enlightened Power: How women
  are transforming the practice of leadership. Coughlin, L, Wingard, E. &
  Hollihan, K. (Eds). San Francisco, CA: Josey-Bass, p. 111-131.
Iowa PBS, The 1980s Farm Crisis. http://www.iowapbs.org/mtom/
  classroom/ module/13999/farm-crisis. Viewed September 2020.
Kouzes, J.M. & Posner, B.Z. (2007) The Leadership Challenge, 4th Ed. San
  Francisco, CA: John Wiley & Sons.
Llopis, G. (2014) Why so few women college presidents? Forbes.
   http://www.forebes.com/sites/glennllopis/2014/02/03/the-most-
   undervalued-leadership-traits-of-women/#322c9c6a690c. Viewed on
   February 13, 2016.
Micah 6:8 (2011) in Holy Bible: New International Version, Grand Rapids:
  Zondervan
Morain, T., Ed. (1995) Family Reunion: Essays on Iowa. Ames, IA: Iowa
  State University Press, p.160.
Outreach International (2021) https://outreach-international.org/
  Viewed February 20, 2021.
Saints Herald (1979), Dean’s hat at Park College passed to a woman, 126,
   p. 96.
Saints Herald (1984), President Graceland College, 131, p. 148.
Saints Herald (1987), Graceland President to Iowa Foundation, 134, p.
   303.
Saints Herald (1991), Graceland President to Retire, 138, p. 301.
Saints Herald (1992), Selected Chair of Peace Institute Board of Directors,
   139, p. 117
Spears, L. C. (2010) Character and servant leadership: Ten characteristics
  of effective, caring leaders. The Journal of Virtues & Leadership, (1), 1,
  p. 25-30.
Wade, L. (1984) Graceland job again in Higdon family. Independence
  Examiner, 1984