Research in Educational Administration & Leadership
                                                 Volume: 9, Issue: 2/ June 2024



          Educational Leadership and Social Justice: 4.0

                                   Ira Bogotch
                Florida Atlantic University, Boca Raton, United States



    Abstract                                                               Article Info
    Working through tensions, conflicts, and contradictions are
                                                                      Article History:
    everyday realities for practicing educators and educational               Received:
    researchers who struggle to undue social injustices. The           January 18, 2024
    aim of this essay looks critically at the dimensions of                   Accepted:
                                                                          April 15, 2024
    educational leadership for social justice with respect to (1)
    educational roles and responsibilities (i.e., leadership
    practices), (2) theoretical frameworks (i.e., using theories
                                                                            Keywords:
    and concepts), and (3) real-world correlates (i.e., the actual
                                                                    Leadership for social
    effects of injustices). In so doing, the research agenda moves                justice
    beyond single-axis, single-frame, one-dimensional, or              Intersectionality,
    strictly single-problem empirical studies. The intent is not Individual and Group
    to either define social justice or resolve the tensions,                    Identity,
    conflicts, and contradictions of everyday realities; rather, it Multidimensionality,

    recognizes that whether educators are engaged in practice Research methodologies
                                                                          in educational
    or research, we need a more holistic and critical awareness               leadership
    of the meanings of social justice that encompasses the                       Preface.
    dynamics within and beyond schooling.



    Cite as:
    Bogotch, I. (2024). Educational leadership and social justice: 4.0.
            Research in Educational Administration & Leadership, 9(2), 179-207
            DOI: 10.30828/real.1421708

                   Bogotch (2024). Educational leadership and social justice: 4.0.
                              https://doi.org/10.30828/real.1421708



Preface

In 2012, Kadir Beycioglu extended an invitation, a challenge really, to
all educational leadership researchers as follows:

       Is there anyone who would like to go sailing on a non-linear
       ship to know, to explore and to do educational administration and
       leadership? (Beycioglu, 2012), p.358. Italics in the original)

While often quoted, this invitation has yet to be fully embraced by
educational practitioners or researchers. The topic of educational
leadership and social justice is a really big idea that cannot be
adequately addressed unless we recognize the role of leadership
throughout education and the aim of research as connecting the world
of ideas, the history ideas, to theoretical frameworks and research
designs. Leadership for social justice requires diverse ideas and
different ways of knowing as part of a sustained research agenda for
collective actions. A prime example of such thinking was expressed by
Donald Campbell in 1971 with his call for inserting experimental
designs for addressing intractable public policy problems, such as
poverty. His call, along with others, have not yet been heard and still
await implementation.

A starting point for any analyses or syntheses regarding social justice
has been factual differences. The most significant differences on almost
any human capital scale are how resources and opportunities are
unevenly distributed. There are always questions of whether, when, or
how to intervene, or, conversely, to let events or nature take its course
(Sowell, 2023). The decisions involve politics, philosophies, as well as
education.   For educators, addressing differences is part of the
everyday. Education and schooling specifically are default positions in




                                                                                     180

              Research in Educational Administration & Leadership
                           9(1), March 2024, 179-207.



that they represent that which is considered normal for children and
adolescents. It is why countries pass compulsory education laws.

With the most extreme injustices, such as wars, famines, and forced
migration, schooling is taken away or disrupted. In such instances, the
very act of establishing a place called schools and making it safe to
attend can be considered a socially just condition. In less extreme cases,
where schooling is already a viable option, leadership for social justice
turns its attention towards closing social, political, and economic
divides. But not always successfully.

As a preface, it is important to note that social justice is viewed
differently by different thinkers. One school of thought holds
governments primarily responsible for promoting social justice;
another school of thought places that responsibility onto individuals
themselves regardless of circumstances. The reason why it is important
to recognize these two political philosophies is that most schools are
publicly supported and run by state governments with school leaders
as agents representing the state. My intent here will not be to debate
the merits of different political ideologies, but rather to offer a model
of educational leadership and social justice that is applicable in diverse
– different - settings.

I intend to do so using literature that focuses on multiplicities along
different axes. In one sense, the multiplicity comes from intersectional
constructs, for example sex and race (Crenshaw, 1989); in another the
multiplicity is a matter of reconceptualizing multiple axes operating
concurrently. Thus, the prefixes of multi-inter-trans- and- cross should
be helpful going forward.

In each instance, I believe our work is best viewed hypothetically. That
does not mean we do any work half-heartedly. If we agree that



181

                   Bogotch (2024). Educational leadership and social justice: 4.0.
                              https://doi.org/10.30828/real.1421708



complexity surrounds social justice and educational leadership, then
we need to be sensitive, tentative, and hypothetical as we, test different
ideas carefully and frequently inside changing contexts. At the same
time, we must remain steadfast so long as the educational and social
injustices persist. But seeing our work as hypothetical, incomplete and
unfinished requiring experimentation, seems sensible. It is also what
makes this work on-going and adventurous. We don’t know what we
don’t know, so going forward is always a matter of problematic
outcomes. For these reasons, a hypothetical stance is warranted.
Clearly, I am dependent on other thinkers for these insights, namely
William James, John Dewey, Michele Foucault, Jean Lyotard, and the
famous American Psychological Association scholar/statistician
Donald Campbell.

One further point by way of a preface: I am striving here to re-create
educational leadership for social justice as intimately personal work
wherein the researchers and participants in communities see
themselves in the theories, methods, and findings. Additionally, the
hypothesized model has to be viewed as meeting educationally-valid
criteria for its specific context. The appeal of this hypothesized model
is that it allows researchers to choose where to begin – which injustice
to address - and how to proceed methodologically. The challenge,
however, is that it does not end with any single study focused on one
organizational role, one responsibility, one framework or even one
problem. As Argyris and Schon wrote in 1974, the learning (as well as
our doing) has to be publicly tested by others as it proceeds forward.
I am hopeful that in this way, the diverse ironies and limitations
identified in the literatures on educational leadership for social justice
by Capper & Young (2014) can be incorporated into a synthesis (e.g., a
meta-analysis) or new research agenda.




                                                                                     182

             Research in Educational Administration & Leadership
                          9(1), March 2024, 179-207.



So, like Beycioglu, I am extending an invitation as a challenge. I am
aware that I have not eloquently connected all the dots along the four
hypothesized dimensions of educational leadership and social justice.
The assumption which drives this challenge, however, is a recognition
that researchers working by themselves on small-scale empirical
studies will never be able to connect the dots because we are
dependent upon others for learning. Working individually, our
tentative findings are often reported in published journals as
conclusions when they are not conclusive. Therefore, the task is to
engage in a collective “revise and resubmit” process as part of a new
research agenda with respect to educational leadership and social
justice.

Social Justice as a Complex Set of Theories, Practices, and Methods

This essay is meant to continue some important conversations already
published in the literatures on educational leadership for social justice.
The guiding assumption is that whatever findings have been reported,
peer-reviewed, published, and cited are all still in process, still
hypotheticals (Dewey, 1916a), still fragments and partial truths
(Bogotch & Roy, 1997), still limited (Capper & Young, 2014) and very
much unfinished. I believe Beycioglu (2012) understood this state of
the art as he encouraged researchers to be fearless, knowing that what
is likely to happen comes with uncertain consequences for both
researchers and their participants. This is challenging work and not to
be approached as “business-as-usual.”

To begin, I will ask that during the time it takes to read this essay,
please try to put aside or bracket any inclinations for arriving a fixed
definition of educational leadership for social justice? We cannot rush
important ideas and actions. If our findings are hypothetical, then they
must be subjected to more critical analyses and further experimental


183

                   Bogotch (2024). Educational leadership and social justice: 4.0.
                              https://doi.org/10.30828/real.1421708



testing. But even I write this I am aware of the fast-pace of school life
and the need to meet deadlines. How do we balance that reality with
careful study? I am also aware that how each of us choose to live our
lives as educators (practitioners and researchers) is influenced by our
personal histories. So, the first challenge is to align as closely as
possible our personal histories with the realities that come with our
professional responsibilities. The former is what makes us passionate
about the work we do; the latter, when done well, brings us satisfaction
from the work and our relationships at work. There are times,
however, when these two dynamics are not aligned and we find
ourselves in situations in which the decisions we have to make are
more about compliance with fidelity than about our choosing to do the
right thing. Educational leadership and social justice take us to a
different place; it gives us purpose, a compass, and meanings.

For theoretical support, I have relied upon K. Crenshaw (1989) who
introduced the notion of intersectionality in order to move our
understandings of both the law and multidimensional constructs (e.g.,
race and sex as social justice) so that their meanings can be re-
conceptualized as equitable relationships (e.g., characterized by the
prefixes: multi- inter- trans-cross). Crenshaw explicitly advised us to
avoid   single-axis    frameworks            when         studying          marginalized,
disadvantaged, underprivileged, and/or colonized populations. In
1996, Nancy Fraser further advanced how to think about social justice
arguing that we needed to move beyond any single group’s identity –
even our own - so that the meaning of social justice would (a) disrupt
persistent injustices for everyone, everywhere, and (b) recognize
“others” not just psychologically, but also structurally. She labelled
these structural recognitions as “participatory parity.” Then, in 2004,
Lois Weiss and Michelle Fine developed a theory of method called




                                                                                      184

              Research in Educational Administration & Leadership
                           9(1), March 2024, 179-207.



“critical bifocality” by which they, too, explained the reciprocal
influences of individual actions and organizational structures. In other
words, structures create individual thoughts and actions while, at the
same time, the individual’s thoughts and actions reproduce and/or
resist those very structures within specific economic and political
contexts. These three independent seminal thinkers set the stage for us
to re-think educational leadership and social justice as theory, practice,
and method not through definitions or measures, but as social
relationships in organizational and societal contexts.

What I describe dimension by dimension in this essay will be viewed
as hypothetical, but also as deliberately ambitious and provocative. I
am asking “what if,” thought experiment questions, so as to insert
multi-inter-trans-cross relationships into research as theory, methods,
and practices. I have incorporated real-world events/problems into the
model to ground our work in research questions that are broader than
technical questions needing answers. The latter is important, but it is
not socially just work. Rather, these managerial concerns are the
ordinary (Jansen, 2008), the normal, domesticated standardization
combined as the grammar of schooling (Carlson, 1965; Sarason, 1990;
Tyack & Cuban, 1995). Therefore, whenever an educator at any level
chooses a non-linear approach, it must be as a hypothetical and
situational, for it challenges the status quo.

Beycioglu’s quote at the beginning called research an exploration. Too
often, such a call is mistaken for explaining organizational dynamics
and seeking consensus for decision-making. But what if the
exploration looks to uncover what has been ignored, hidden, forgotten,
and/or deleted by current policies and practices? What if, as according
to Jean-Francois Lyotard (1984),




185

                    Bogotch (2024). Educational leadership and social justice: 4.0.
                               https://doi.org/10.30828/real.1421708



        `consensus’ like the `social totality’ is outmoded. Justice can only be
        built around the recognition of the variety that exists in language
        games, and consensus is localized to players of particular language
        games (p.66).

Asking what if questions can take us beyond rational strategic thinking
in that if forces us to consider different opinions, curiosities,
contradictions, and judgments. How then do we make our differences
explicit as assumptions, values, questions, and methods? How do we
honor who we are, our identity, but keep open possibilities for others
who are different? Again, even as we start a research project from our
own topic of interest, identity, a specific context, or problem (e.g.,
racism, sexism, etc.), how do we become more inclusive of others?

In sum, we come to social justice, personally and professionally, with
our desires to make a difference in teaching and leading for ourselves
and others. As a social construct, we must join – socially - with others.
We remain free to know, explore, and act in ways that reflect our
personal philosophies, values, and beliefs and to pursue this
individually as well as in communities (Bogotch, 2002, Capper &
Young, 2014, Furman & Shields, 2005). But that should not be the
endgame of education, social justice, or leadership. Our professional
obligations are to recognize and welcome this variety of language
games and associations (Bogotch 2023, Wittgenstein, 1953) or else we
remain trapped inside endless searches for fixed and exact definitions
(e.g., a totality, a consensus).

Is Philosophy a Distraction or Is it Useful for Educational Leadership
Researchers?

I choose to look to the discipline of philosophy for interesting
questions and provocative thoughts. It is what leads me to see things



                                                                                      186

               Research in Educational Administration & Leadership
                            9(1), March 2024, 179-207.



differently, in unexpected ways, as discoveries and surprises.
Philosophy, for me, is a critical method; it suggests ways of being,
knowing, and doing. Philosophers, of course, provide definitive
answers, but their understandings – methods - are not always
straightforward or obvious. They bring us into complex and confusing
worlds. Sometimes, they will offer prescriptive solutions, but most
times not. I think educational leadership researchers and practitioners
should adopt their own philosophical dispositions, but I also
understand the environmental pressures (see Meyer & Rowan, 1977)
to be data-driven, decisive, firm, and positive.

That said, the choice of which philosophers to read and cite matters. I
am       always        perplexed            when          educational    leadership
theorists/researchers writing about social justice turn directly to a
systems’ theorist, John Rawls, as a primary source. By the time Rawls
actually arrived at the term social justice by way of his Theory of Justice
(1971), he had written that it was all “unhappily abstract” (p 179- 216)1.
Social justice is practical, not abstract.

Social justice begins with concrete experiences:

         social justice is what faces you in the morning. It is awaking in a house
         with adequate water supply, cooking facilities, and sanitation. It is the
         ability to nourish your children and send them to school where
         education not only equips them for employment but reinforces their
         knowledge and understanding of their cultural inheritance. It is the
         prospect of genuine employment and good health, a life of choices and
         opportunities, from discrimination (Dodson, 1993, n.p.)



1This unhappy abstraction may have contributed to why Frederick Hayek (1976)
believed that any definition of justice – as a general rule – falls apart (p. xi).



187

                      Bogotch (2024). Educational leadership and social justice: 4.0.
                                 https://doi.org/10.30828/real.1421708



But Rawls confuses justice with social justice. His descriptions of ideal
states of affairs may, of course, be applied conceptually to aspects of
education, but even as a heuristic, his distributive principles of fairness
and differences never approach educational strategies or social
interactions. Moreover, Rawls assumes that those who negotiate his
social contract are fully rational and already educated. Rawls never
understood that in order for rational beings to negotiate, they have to
first be educated. Education lays the foundations for a socially just
society before, during, and after any social contract. How could Rawls
know this? He didn’t, for he admits that all of his sources on [adult]
learning and education came from secondary sources (p. 411).

Therefore, in terms of choosing a starting point in philosophy, we
should look to Iris Marion Young (1991), who asserted in Justice and the
Politics of Difference:

        “[E]ducation is primarily a process taking place in a complex context
        of social relations.” (p. 26).

Young understood both context and practices. Philosophy helps us ask
questions pertaining to living well. If true, we must choose those
philosophies who can engage educators in the doing of education. This
means, for me, that social justice begins first in the everyday world of
educational practices, not as an abstraction. It is “social.” But the term
“social” by itself is neutral; meaning that not all social relationships or
social processes are positive, good, or educational. Therefore, we have
to be selective so that the social does not lead to wars, pollutions,
famine, destructions. We need factual evidence that the social is doing
good works for communities/humanity. As educators, we believe that
education can play a positive role in creating real opportunities for
vulnerable peoples by disrupting systemic injustices! But what guides
us in this right direction? Following Hannah Arendt (1963/94), social


                                                                                        188

             Research in Educational Administration & Leadership
                          9(1), March 2024, 179-207.



justice can represent a higher-purpose theory (p. 253), while social
injustices can and have become “terribly and terrifyingly normal (p.
276). Without guarantees in educational processes, however, the
Sisyphean challenge in educational leadership is to tilt the supports –
the moral levers of power - in favor of that which promotes the socially
just while limiting the barriers to these just/equitable/inclusive
outcomes. It calls for careful and rigorous research.

In practice, social justice moves seamlessly from educational plans to
policies and practices (Kemmis, 1995). It is what I have previously
referred to as contextual (Bogotch, 2002). That is, “Educational plans,
policies, and practices are always framed by contexts which stretch
from the intimacy and immediacy of local circumstances to reach and
intersect with broader social frames, nationally and internationally,
communally and globally. They are the products of struggle, and they
give rise to still further struggles for better education for a better world
(pp. 144-145).

Parenthesis: American Educational Research Association (AERA)
Conference Symposium, April 2018

At AERA, I had organized a symposium titled Mapping Leadership for
Social Justice: Innovations, Applications, and Syntheses. The invited
speakers were noted scholars who had written extensively on social
justice and educational leadership, Jeffrey Brooks, Anthony Normore,
and Jane Wilkinson on the possibilities of a metatheory; Carolyn Shields
on the promise of their being one social justice framework; Khaula
Murtadha and Colleen Larson on democratic ethics within social justice;
Colleen Capper and Michelle Young on the previously referenced
ironies and limitations of social justice. Unfortunately, neither Capper
nor Young could be present. As Chair and Discussants, I had invited




189

                   Bogotch (2024). Educational leadership and social justice: 4.0.
                              https://doi.org/10.30828/real.1421708



Terrance Green, Muhammad Khalifa, and Terah Venzant Chambers to
offer critiques.

After the presenters summarized their views on leadership for social
justice, the first discussant said, “We have to talk specifically about
what it means to be white. That is, we need more specific research
terms so that we can specifically locate ways in which this visceral
cycle of oppression keeps rearing its head.” Other questions followed
this question statement: “How can we connect with what communities
want from us? How do communities view us? Whom are we serving?”
“How do we do no harm?”

Each of the panelists was then given time to respond to these
contextual questions if they chose to. Carolyn Shields talked about
being in Brunei, where issues of injustice focused on health care
inequities; Jane Wilkinson spoke about young refugees and their
families and the shocking policies in her homeland of Australia. She
located these injustices inside the privileges of white policymakers.
Jeffrey Brooks criticized the efficacy of leadership theories “flying
blindly” in the direction of problems. However, with the effects of
“whitewashing” the situations around the problems, both the theories
and solutions are rendered useless and violent. Anthony Normore
looked to disrupt orthodoxy by developing more critically reflective
identities that could think pluralistically and culturally.

While the panelists and discussants’ comments could be said to
overlap into partial agreements and disagreements, on the whole,
everyone’s concerns stayed locally in place as strongly held ideological
positions. It was assumed that as educational leadership researchers,
we would continue to design theoretical and empirical studies going
forward. But what I took away was that for there to be agreement on
social justice, researchers needed to see themselves in the theories,


                                                                                     190

             Research in Educational Administration & Leadership
                          9(1), March 2024, 179-207.



concepts, or contextual examples presented. It was as if the notion of
recognition as a key aspect of social justice (Fraser, 2014) came alive in
the symposium. That said, the intimacy and immediacy of social justice
as contextualized remained separate and apart from the different
meanings given to educational leadership and social justice.

Extending Diverse and Inclusive Frameworks into Leadership for
Social Justice

The leadership challenge, therefore, is to “see one’s self” inside the
social justice theory. For example, in analyzing data from two school
districts in Ontario, Bogotch and Kervin (2019) noted how the actions
of welcoming Syrian newcomers had elicited two recurring themes:
perceived gifts and being neighbors: specifically, the codes “becoming
neighbors” and “bringing gifts” to their communities in Ontario.
Instead of seeing immigration policies, structures, and practices
around “welcoming” as unidirectional and unidimensional, that is,
moving from a developed nation’s school system to those vulnerable
and forcibly displaced refugees, the actual dynamics of welcoming
were fluid and reciprocal. But in order to make sense of this
reciprocity, the meaning of educational relationships themselves has
to move from “subject/object” (i.e., Canadian citizens welcoming
Syrian newcomers) to Canadians and Syrians as being the gift of good
neighbors. The “and/more” explanation is what Wittgenstein,
Foucault, Fraser, and Crenshaw all had in their minds, that is, moving
beyond a single individual or group identity to a collective social
vision.

As we conduct research, the logical extensions of these philosophical
ideas means that we moving beyond single units of analyses, single
disciplines, single lines of inquiry, and unidimensional definitions.
Metaphorically and graphically, this calls for research to go beyond a


191

                       Bogotch (2024). Educational leadership and social justice: 4.0.
                                  https://doi.org/10.30828/real.1421708



single axis (Fraser, 1989) to disrupt inequities and become inclusive of
marginalized and colonized populations.

According to Capper and Young (2014), studying leadership for social
justice up to now has been a continuous series of self-inflicted
conceptual and methodological limitations by which we have imposed
arbitrary borders to our research, resulting in singular, fragmented,
incomplete,      and      reductive         answers/solutions/interventions                 as
findings. Our next step would be, therefore, to expand intellectually,
morally,   and     politically          using        multi-inter-trans            and    cross-
analyses/syntheses with respect to research on leadership for social
justice. This also means that our research methods should be with, not
on or for, participants (Arar et al., 2024; Schoorman, 2014). Participants’
contexts, values, preferences, and beliefs have to be re-centered in all
of our educational responses/interventions.

First Detour: Process is not a Parenthesis

By definition, “any process must be designed to highlight
relationships, connections, and interdependencies in the phenomenon
of interest” (Weick, 1989, p. 517). As such, all processes take time to
unfold; implementation happens in stages (Fullan, 1993). In education,
processes do not necessarily go according to the lesson plan or an
organizing framework. Learning, along with research, is messy (Odell,
2023)   taking    effort       and      time,       varying        from       individual    to
individual/group to group. This dynamic, understandably, frustrates
educators stuck on efficiency or benchmarks. Sometimes to keep
lessons on track, teachers will say, “That’s not what we are talking
about now” or leaders will say, “We all need to be on the same page.”
I call these phrases parenthesis; they are used to delimit both student’s
and adult’s learning processes, when viewed as digressions. Yet, social
justice is not about “business as usual” or following a script; rather, it


                                                                                           192

             Research in Educational Administration & Leadership
                          9(1), March 2024, 179-207.



is deliberate interruption, for example, seeing a mathematical problem
of the natural distribution of water resources around the globe.
Pedagogically to promote critical thinking in students and adults, there
have to be creative spaces. Not all curricular policies allow for such
spacing as pacing charts more and more dictate national/state directed
instruction. Connecting student learning to real-world issues is a
beyond-school, intersectional challenge. Social justice conceptually
requires   bridges for        connecting lived experiences, concerns,
organizational roles, values and beliefs to the different experiences,
concerns, roles, values, and beliefs of others (Boske, 2011; Weiss & Fine,
2004). Hence, the need for conceptualizing social justice pluralistically,
collaboratively, and relationally – not just in words alone, but through
deliberate actions – in practice and in research (Bogotch, 2023).

Mapping A New Research Agenda: Educational Leadership for
Social Justice 4.0

Pijanowski and Brady (2020) recently concluded that social justice is

       multidisciplinary and multi-action nature’, and further that ‘simply
       dividing complex constructs like education evenly or equitably falls
       short of acknowledging how various oppressive systems heavily
       influenced the design of those same educational goods and how
       systemic oppression has affected the ways in which people access
       education’ (p. 4).

If what is being proposed asserts that multiple dimensions have to be
addressed – whether sequentially and/or concurrently – then we
cannot rely only on ourselves. We are all interdependent upon one
another and, for this reason, our research, too, needs to
interdependent, encompassing ourselves and others, as neighbors and
gifts across diverse political and cultural identities. If we stay with our



193

                     Bogotch (2024). Educational leadership and social justice: 4.0.
                                https://doi.org/10.30828/real.1421708



tribes, our clans, our peoples, then we cannot learn to co-exist across
time and space with others who are different so as to address real-
world issues. This will be extremely difficult, conceptually and
methodologically. According to Ruth Wilson Gilmore (2022),

        …organizations become competitive and use comparisons to create
        distances rather than alliances with other organizations. This is a
        product of many connected practices and the result of specialization
        and professionalization… (p. 429).

Gilmore further explains that differences and disagreements do not
necessarily transcend into solutions. Discussions and debates can be
hostile based on narrow ideological, disciplinary, theoretical, and
conceptual differences among “disparate actors” (Gilmore, 2022, p.
430). In today’s culture wars inside and beyond the academy2,
“divisive concepts” (Eckes & Chestnut, 2023) dominate political
discourses, forcing us in educational leadership to rethink social justice
strategies for research and action. In hostile settings, where I live in
Florida, this means not using the terms diversity, equity, inclusion, or
social justice. How, then, do we bring explicit societal injustices into
educational leadership for social justice discourses as conceptual
frameworks and research methods? In such settings, ideologies, not
facts or data or truth matter (Schoorman, personal communication,
2023). How then do we bring intersections as first suggested by
Crenshaw (1989) and Fraser (1996) into our research?



2 While the following tweeted message was in no way hostile, it does demonstrate
the reflective defensiveness when suggesting an “additional” problem: “Are you
suggesting that discussions of refugee oppression, the global marginalization of
cishet women or the ways in which policy enaction reifies power dynamics … are not
relevant (or irrelevant) to the [culture wars] in Florida (Unnamed educational
leadership journal editor tweet response, July, 15, 2023).



                                                                                       194

               Research in Educational Administration & Leadership
                            9(1), March 2024, 179-207.



Working with communities of difference is more inclusive. It is also
more difficult in today’s dominant specialized research disciplines and
paradigms. While social injustices are felt personally by specific
individuals and groups, our educational leadership for social justice
has be targeted and expansive as it intersects with other historical and
contemporary injustices. The four hypothesized dimensions do not ask
researchers to forego her/his/their specific interests, conceptual
frameworks, or passions. Rather, by making a commitment to
ourselves and others, we would continue along that pathway until we
come into alliances with other researchers from other disciplines. At
first, this may translate more into a version of parallel play; but,
hopefully over time, it evolves into intersectional -multi-inter-trans-
cross- research studies. In the long term, such work would move the
field of educational leadership from publishing works that confirm
again and again what we already know. The four dimensions outlined
below are:

      •   The Primacy of Practice

      •   Educational Research in and out of Communities

      •   Educators as Citizens of the World

      •   In Time and Across Space

Dimension 1 – As Practitioners, The Primacy of Practice

If we agree that as practitioners, the legitimate concern focuses on
specific, often technical, knowledge and skills, then this is logically and
chronologically where the practice-research processes most often
begin. Yet, if the assumptions behind social justice described above as
multi-inter-trans-cross make sense, then the focus on one specific role
(e.g., the principalship) or one organizational level (e.g., the classroom,



195

                       Bogotch (2024). Educational leadership and social justice: 4.0.
                                  https://doi.org/10.30828/real.1421708



the whole school, etc.) comes with both limitations and delimitations
which should be predictable from the beginning of the study. In so
doing, we have mastered the art of “kicking the can down the road,”
calling for further research in other settings without a plan for how.

Research on leadership for social justice is meant to challenge
normative categories of good teaching and good managing, both of
which, as best practices, have tended to reinforce the status quo. For
practice, as Dewey taught us, must go beyond mastering craft
knowledge (moving from apprentice to master) and extend to newly
reconstructed knowledge (Bogotch, 2002) through trial and error
systematically studied as research collaborative projects3.

When these practices are depicted graphically, for example, along the
horizontal x-axis, we can measure indicators that promote, support,
and resource the technical core of our work inside schools. Likewise,
we can plot on the other side of the hypothesized x-axis, the barriers,
both real and hypothesized to achieving equitable opportunities for
students and quality pedagogical and leadership practice. Dimension
one, therefore, is the study of educational leadership for social justice
practices in concert with other researchers studying multi-roles and
organizational levels.

Dimension 2 – As Educational Researchers: In and Out of
Communities

Moving to the hypothesized vertical y-axis begins initially with
leadership researchers choosing a particular conceptual framework.
Some researchers choose their frameworks from particular social
science disciplines; other researchers take a more normative or value-

3Weick, K (1989) refers to this as disciplined imagination (as an alternative to
methodological validation)



                                                                                         196

               Research in Educational Administration & Leadership
                            9(1), March 2024, 179-207.



centered approach; still others focus on a sociological group or setting.
The point is that researchers begin their work inside one particular
space.

Moving from one conceptual framework empirical studies to multiple
frameworks as inter-cross conceptual frameworks represents a major
paradigm shift in the way we conduct research from a single
disciplinary perspective (Kuhn, 1962). Multiple frameworks – for
example, democracy, multiculturalism, critical theory, equality/equity,
accountability, Whiteness, critical race theory, cultural wealth,
culturally relevant leadership, ethno-humanistic leadership, etc. are all
being    published         separately         as     stand-alone     analyses.   But
intersectionality calls for multiple approaches (Crenshaw, 1989) and
postmodern conditions call for studying fragments in relationships to
one another.

We know what we have obtained from decades of single axis studies.
Why not operationalize multiplicities, pluralities, associations,
relationships, family resemblances, conjunctions, and prepositions?

Dimension 3 – As Citizens of the World

With dimension three comes yet a new research question: How do
practitioner roles and responsibilities intersect with researchers’
choices of conceptual frameworks in a complex world? What level of
critical awareness should we be asking of both practitioners and
researchers? The question is not about going outside of these roles, but
rather having knowledge of world events that influence school
curriculum, pedagogies, and leadership. Gert Biesta (2011, 2021) has
been asking educators about their responsibility, responsiveness with
respect to democracy and citizenship. But does leadership for social
justice ask questions beyond critical awareness? Does it ask educators



197

                    Bogotch (2024). Educational leadership and social justice: 4.0.
                               https://doi.org/10.30828/real.1421708



to reflect, react, and/or to engage in solving the world’s problems?
Biesta asks educators to go beyond the borders of learning in schools
to venturing into world affair as subjects of their own lives. In Drago-
Severson et al.’s (2023) view, knowing as self-authoring takes being an
educator to be synonymous with becoming responsible adults with the
full rights and privileges of citizenship.

Real-world issues enter the schoolhouse doors, whether it be the
relationships between student achievement and community health
care, earning a living wage, food insecurity, ending gun violence,
sexual orientations, censorship, creating safe spaces for students who
are different, and/or building sustainable environments, etc. When we
delimit our research to what we already know and do not connect
education to societal problems, then we diminish the role of education
and educators in society.

Real-world issues of social justice also are people’s everyday realities:
With respect to understanding social justice as experiences – those
within and beyond school –

Dimension 4: As Beings In Time and Across Space

The theoretical and political position behind dimension four is the
belief that social justice is both necessary and contingent with respect
to all educational practices; that is, social justice as a normative
commitment can never be guaranteed or sustained without continuous
efforts, including work within difficult – even in undemocratic
circumstances. Further, social justice must be differentiated from best
practices in that it is a deliberate intervention to disrupt “business as
usual” or normative categories even when those categories have been
defined as good teaching and good administrative practices. Such
work takes time, more time than is often given to the conduct of any



                                                                                      198

               Research in Educational Administration & Leadership
                            9(1), March 2024, 179-207.



one empirical study. The work of leadership for social justice does not
follow the rhythm of proposing, writing, and publishing as
productivity measures. Research demands a slow and careful pace not
aligned with many professorial incentives.

Leadership for social justice is a longitudinal process or processes of
challenging normative categories so that researchers can reconstruct or
find that which is good/educative, and differentiate it from what
Dewey called mis-educative practices (1938). As practice, therefore,
leadership for social justice cannot be known a priori, that is,
independent from our actions and the consequences of our actions. As
such, we – participants first, and researchers second - come to know the
consequences of social justice interventions.                        As researchers, we,
therefore, validate post hoc the partial effects of leadership on social
justice as we progress to see more-do more as a continuing research
project.   Leadership for social justice is grounded on actions and
effects: only then do we begin again.

By centering social justice within specific places, its meanings reflect
both the diversity of space contextually. Therefore, what can be
socially just in one context may or may not overlap with how social
justice is conceptualized – spoken and acted upon - at another time or
in a different place, making social justice always a culturally relevant
construct 4.


4After reading Linda Tuhiwai Smith’s (2012) text Decolonizing Methodologies (pp. 52-
59) on the different perceptions of Western and indigenous views of time and space,
dimension 4 needs to be read critically. That is, with respect to space, even the
drawing of maps needs to be cognizant of what is “outside,” beyond the recognized
borders. Words such as empty, uninhabited, unoccupied, background and
hinterlands can make invisible what is outside. With respect to time or more
specifically “points in time,” that which is primitive or labeled “prehistory” in
contrast to Western history which denotes the start of modernism/rationalism and



199

                       Bogotch (2024). Educational leadership and social justice: 4.0.
                                  https://doi.org/10.30828/real.1421708



Not a Conclusion.

If definitive and concrete answers are not the legitimate objectives of
this hypothesized leadership for social justice model, what then might
be the outcomes of a reconceptualization of educational leadership for
social justice as something radically different? To begin, one objective
for educational leadership for social justice would be that it is
conceptualized as intimately personal capturing identities, while
seeking to be inclusive and valid for others. It would ask of us how to
meet the needs of our communities, but not exclusively.

Education encompasses all learning. Nothing is off the table in asking
educational questions. The challenge is to move toward an “and/more”
synthesis rather than conducting the many small-scale stand-alone
studies capturing partial aspects of variables of interest. The
hypothesized multi-dimensional model asks the field of educational
leadership to aim higher, think bigger, and be more aggressive -
theoretically and methodologically. These questions are not about
assimilating new knowledge, new categories, or even new methods
into already existing frameworks. The frameworks and methods
themselves must be challenged.

That said, the hypothesized multi-dimensional model being proposed
asks international researchers from different perspectives to come
together, not in agreement, but as diverse researchers searching for
new educational leadership ideas and practices. This will require
working through tensions and contradictions and keeping the lines of
communication open. Over time, the findings are analyzed, validated,




the classifications of science, creates a hierarchy of knowledge that ignores
indigenous knowledges.



                                                                                         200

             Research in Educational Administration & Leadership
                          9(1), March 2024, 179-207.



and synthesized; and, every so often, ideas will jump together (Gould,
2003) and click into place.

By embracing differences, particularities, and diverse cultural
contexts, the “and-more synthesis” would become a curriculum of
total experiences enacted through research and pedagogies. The result
would not be to bring order, consensus, or cohesion to leadership for
social justice, but rather to reside within dissensus, everyday tensions,
on-going dilemmas, wicked problems, paradoxes, and contradictions.
These are the unchartered waters that Professor Beycioglu wished for
us.

Hence, the reason why this section cannot be framed as a set of
conclusive remarks should be obvious. We are beginning again. And
as we begin again, we take on new synergies and multiplier effects to
disrupt the status quo. But without any social science research
guarantees, the power dynamics within and beyond our educational
institutions could instead lead us towards more systemic injustices.
Hence, a paradigm shift is necessary to move educational leadership
from incremental reformist reforms (Gilmore, 2022) to educational
leadership for social justice. The narratives surrounding leadership for
social justice need radical re-constructions.

No one essay or any one empirical research study will connect all the
dots surrounding the intersectional topic of leadership for social justice
(Capper & Young 2014). But that’s precisely what I am calling for here:
going beyond the study of one role, one responsibility, one
organizational level, one problem, one conceptual framework, one real
world issue, one point in time, and in one specific space. Seeing how
the pathways to leadership for social justice encompasses more than
single-axis studies is our next research agenda. Unless and until
educational leadership researchers dedicate themselves collectively to


201

                     Bogotch (2024). Educational leadership and social justice: 4.0.
                                https://doi.org/10.30828/real.1421708



a comprehensive agenda as opposed to publishing individual projects
documenting humanitarian works, we as a field of study will not bring
about necessary changes within or beyond schools.



                                     References

Arar, K, Bogotch, I., De La Rosa, Y., Guajardo, M., Fong, C., & Mifsud,
        D. (2024). Decolonizing Methods. In A. Lopez, & H. Singh
        (Eds), Decolonizing Knowledges. Palgrave.

Arendt, H. (1963/1994). Eichmann in Jerusalem. Viking Press

Argyris, C, and Schon, D. 1974. Theory in Practice: Increasing Professional
        Effectiveness. San Francisco: Jossey-Bass.

Beycioglu, K (2012). Will Evers and Lakomski be able to find
        leadership’s Holy Grail? KJEP 9, pp. 349-362

Biesta, G. (2021). World-centred education. London/New York:
        Routledge.

Biesta, G. (2011). Citizenship education reconsidered: Socialisation,
        subjectification, and the desire for democracy.
        Bildungsgeschichte. International Journal for the
        Historiography of Education 1(1), 58-67.

Bogotch, I. (2023). Educational leadership research methods: a social
        reconstruction. In P. Woods, A. Roberts, M. Tian, and H.
        Youngs (Eds). Handbook on Leadership in Education, Chapter 28.
        394–409. Elgar Publishing




                                                                                       202

              Research in Educational Administration & Leadership
                           9(1), March 2024, 179-207.



Bogotch, I. & Kervin, C. (2019). Leadership and Policy Dilemmas:
       Syrian Newcomers as Future Citizens of Ontario, Canada. In K.
       Arar, J. Brooks, & I. Bogotch Education, Immigration and
       Migration: Policy, Leadership and Praxis for a Changing World,
       Chapter 2, pp. 33-51. Emerald Publishers

Bogotch, I., & Roy, C. (1997). The contexts of partial truths: An analysis
       of principal's discourse. Journal of Educational Administration.
       35(3), 234-252.

Bogotch, I. (2002), “Educational leadership and social justice: Practice
       into theory”, Journal of School Leadership, Vol. 12 No. 2, pp. 138-
       156.

Boske, C. (2011). Educating Leaders for Social Justice. Counterpoints,
       409, 362–382.

Campbell, D. T. (1971). Reforms as Experiments. Urban Affairs
       Quarterly, 7(2), 133-171.

Capper, C. & Young, M. (2014). Ironies and Limitations of Educational
       Leadership for Social Justice: A Call to Social Justice Educators.
       Theory into Practice 53:158–164

Carlson, R. (1965). Barriers to Change in Public Schools: Change
       Processes in the Public Schools. Eugene: Center for the
       Advanced Study of Educational Administration, University of
       Oregon. Chapter 1, pp. 2-8.

Crenshaw, K. (1989). Mapping the Margins: Intersectionality, Identity
       Politics, and Violence against Women of Color. Stanford Law
       Review, Vol. 43, No. 6 (Jul., 1991), pp. 1241-1299




203

                    Bogotch (2024). Educational leadership and social justice: 4.0.
                               https://doi.org/10.30828/real.1421708



Dewey J. (1938). Experience and Education. Collier-MacMillan

Dewey, J. (1916). ESSAYS IN EXPERIMENTAL LOGIC. University of
        Chicago Press

Dodson, M. (1993). Annual Report of the Aboriginal and Torres Strait
        Islander, Social Justice. https://humanrights.gov.au/our-
        work/projects/foreword

Drago-Severson, E., Blum-DeStefano, J., & Lawrence, D. (2023).
        Growing Justice. Corwin

Eckes, S. & Chestnut, C. (2023) Federal Judge Finds Florida’s Stop
        WOKE Act to be “Positively Dystopian”: A Brief Legal Update.
        Teachers College Record. https://journals.sagepub.com/pb-
        assets/cmscontent/TCZ/Commentaries%20Collection/2023%20
        Commentaries/Eckes%20Chestnut%20Commentary-
        1687816265.pdf

Foucault, M. (1975). The order of things. Routledge

Fraser, Nancy (2014). Justice Interruptus: Critical Reflections on the
        "Postsocialist" Condition. Routledge

Fraser, N. (1996). Social Justice in the Age of Identity Politics:
        Redistribution, Recognition, and Participation. THE TANNER
        LECTURES ON HUMAN VALUES, Stanford University.

Fraser, N. (1989). Talking about Needs: Interpretive Contests as
        Political Conflicts in Welfare-State Societies. Ethics, Vol. 99, No.
        2, pp. 291ff.




                                                                                      204

                Research in Educational Administration & Leadership
                             9(1), March 2024, 179-207.



Fullan, M. (1993). Change Forces: Probing the Depths of Educational Reform
        (School Development and the Management of Change. The Falmer
        Press

Furman, G. C., & Shields, C. M. (2005). How can educational leaders
        promote and support social justice and democratic community
        in schools. A new agenda for research in educational leadership, 119-
        137.

Gould, S.J., (2003) The Hedgehog, the Fox, and the Magister's Pox: Mending
        the gap between Science and the Humanities. Harmony Press

James, W. (1907). The One and the Many. Pragmatism. Pp. 57-72.
        Washington Square Press.

 Jansen, J. (2008). The challenge of the ordinary. In I. Bogotch et al.,
        Radicalizing educational leadership: Dimensions of social Justice.
        Sense Publishing

 Kemmis, S. (1995) Emancipatory Aspirations in a Postmodern Era,
        Curriculum Studies, 3:2,

Kuhn, T. S. (1962). The structure of scientific revolution. University of
        Chicago Press.

Lyotard, J-F. (1984). The postmodern condition: A report on knowledge.
        University of Minnesota Press

Meyer, J., & Rowan, B. (1977). Institutionalized Organizations: Formal
        Structure as Myth and Ceremony. American Journal of Sociology
        Vol. 83, No. 2, pp. 340-363

Odell, S. (2023). “You have an affiliative leadership style. That's going
        to be a problem for you.”: Feminized orientations to school



205

                      Bogotch (2024). Educational leadership and social justice: 4.0.
                                 https://doi.org/10.30828/real.1421708



        leadership and navigating the pipeline
        https://www.frontiersin.org/articles/10.3389/feduc.2023.1009248
        /full

Pijanowski, J., & Brady, K .(2020). Defining social justice in education.
        In R. Papa, Handbook on promoting social justice in education.
        Springer

Rawls J (1971. A theory of justice. The Belknap Press of Harvard
        University Press.

Sarason, S. (1990). The Predictable Failure of Educational Reform.
        Jossey Bass

Schoorman, D. (2014). Reconceptualizing the Role of an Educational
        Researcher:

A Critical Multicultural Educator’s Perspective. In I. Bogotch, & C.
        Shields (Eds). International Handbook of Educational Leadership
        and Social (In)Justice. Springer

Smith, L. (2012/2021). Decolonizing Methodologies (pp. 52-59).
        Bloomsbury

University of Chicago Press.

Sowell, T. (2023). Social Justice Fallacies. Basic Books

Tyack, D., & Cuban, L. (1995). Tyack, D. & Cuban, L. (1995). Tinkering
        toward utopia: A century of public-school reform. Harvard
        University Press.




                                                                                        206

                Research in Educational Administration & Leadership
                             9(1), March 2024, 179-207.



Weick, K (1989). Theory Construction as Disciplined Imagination. The
        Academy of Management Review, Vol. 14, No. 4 (Oct., 1989), pp.
        516-531

Weiss, L. & Fine, M. (2004) Working Method: Research and social justice.
        Psychology Press

Wittgenstein, L. (1953). Philosophical Investigations. Oxford, Blackwell.

Young, I. (1991). Justice and Politics of Difference. Princeton University
        Press



About the author:

Ira Bogotch is a professor of educational leadership at Florida Atlantic
University, Boca Raton, FL. For the past two decades Ira’s scholarship
has focused on leadership for social justice, conceptually and in
specific contexts. Ira has traveled recently to Canada and Germany to
study school integration of Syrian newcomers, the topic of his initial
blog, as well as to Israel, where he spoke at the national conference of
educational leadership programs. He has given papers, invited and
peer-reviewed, in Italy, Ireland, Egypt, Scotland, England, Australia,
and Malaysia. He has co-edited two international handbooks.

E-mail: elifbengu.edd@gmail.com




207