jURNAL dIALOG iSLAM DENGAN rEALITAS

                    Volume 8, Nomor 2, 2023
                                                Katua Penyunting:
                                            Abid rohmanu, IAIN Ponorogo
                                                Dewan Penyunting:
                                              Nur kolis, IAIN Ponorogo
                                           Lukman Hakim, IAIN Ponorogo
                                           Wahid Hariyanto, IAIN Ponorogo
                                             Anis Afifah, IAIN Ponorogo
                                                 Penyunting Ahli:
                                                Aksin, IAIN Ponorogo
                                              Mukhibat, IAIN Ponorogo


       Responsive Islamic Boarding School Management
                                         Abdul Mun’im Saleh, IAIN Ponorogo
                                                  Rusli, IAIN Palu
                                            Umi Sumbulah, UIN Malang
                                            Al Makin, UIN Sunan Kalijaga


       to Environmental Sustainability Through Green
                                         Mujamil Qomar, IAIN Tulungagung
                                                 Penyunting Bahasa:
                                          Prila Rochmawati, IAIN Ponorogo
                                        Rizka Elyana Maslihah, IAIN Ponorogo



                      Pesantren Program
                                           Hawwin Muzaki, IAIN Ponorogo
                                            Ahmad Natsir, IAIN Ponorogo
                                                Penyunting Layout:
                                             Eny Supriati, IAIN Ponorogo
                                                 Alamat Redaksi:
                                     Gedung Pascasarjana IAIN Ponorogo Lt. 1
                                   Jl. Pramuka, 156 Ponorogo, 55221 Indonesia
                                           Phone: +352 481277, Ext: 115
                         Web: http://jurnal.iainponorogo.ac.id/index.php/muslimheritage
                    E-mail: muslim.heritage@iainponorogo.ac.id/hakim@iainponorogo. ac.id

                      Muslim Heritage adalah jurnal dialog Islam dengan realitas
                     diterbitkan oleh Pascasarjana Institut Agama Islam Negeri (IAIN)
                                                                                                      Nur Kasanah
                     Ponorogo, Jawa Timur bekerja sama dengan Asosiasi Dosen Pascasarjana. Pertama


                                                  Institut Agama Islam Negeri Ponorogo, Indonesia
                     kali terbit pada Mei 2016 dan telah terindex di DOAJ, MORAREF, IPI, SINTA, dan
                     lainnya. Penyunting menyambut baik kontribusi artikel dari para ilmuan,
                     sarjana, peneliti, dan peminat studi keislaman untuk mempublikasikan hasil
                     kajian dan penelitiannya sesuai standar penulisan ilmiah, dalam bahasa

                                                          Email: nur.febi@iainponorogo.ac.id
                     Indonesia, Inggris, Arab atau lainnya.




                                                                          Muhammad Husain As Sajjad
                                     Universitas Islam Negeri Walisongo, Semarang, Indonesia
                                         Email: muhammadhusainassajjad44@gmail.com
                                                                   Dawam Multazamy Rohmatullah
                                                                     Utrech University, Utrech, Netherland
                                                                       Email: dwmultazam@gmail.com

Abstract
Indonesia, a country with the highest number of Islamic boarding schools in the world, is inhabited by students, all of whom
carry out activities that are closely related to natural resources and impact the environment. The community as a party in
direct contact should also play an active role in helping Islamic boarding schools become communities and institutions
that are responsive to environmental sustainability so that all parties can realize Islam’s vision, rahmatan lil’alamin. This
qualitative research with a literature study approach and using descriptive analysis methods aims to analyze the efforts
that can be made by Islamic boarding schools in protecting and preserving the environment and describe the role of
government institutions and community organizations in supporting the Green Pesantren program. Data are obtained
from laws and regulations, books, previous research results, and other sources relevant to the research purpose. The results
showed that efforts to realize the Green Islamic boarding school governance regulations are: 1) management of organic
and inorganic waste into goods of economic value, 2) conversion of wastewater into useful resources, 3) the use of energy-
efficient green architecture-based construction, 4) saving water and electricity resources in the daily operationalization
of Islamic boarding schools, and 5) efforts for renewable alternative energy as an energy source in future. The role of
the community in supporting the Green Pesantren program includes 1) the Nahdlatul Ulama Alms Infak Zakat Institute
(LAZISNU), Rabithah Ma’ahid Islamiyah (RMI NU), the Disaster Management and Climate Change Institute (LPBI NU),
and Bank Mega Syariah which initiated seven Islamic boarding schools as pilot projects for the Green Pesantren program,
2) the issuance of a fatwa of the Indonesian Ulema Council Number 41 of 2014 concerning Waste Management to Prevent
Environmental Damage. The results of this study are expected to be policy recommendations for the Ministry of Religious
Affairs and related stakeholders to issue regulations related to the Green Pesantren program.


Abstrak
Indonesia sebagai negara dengan jumlah pesantren terbanyak di dunia tentunya dihuni santri yang kesemuanya tentu
menjalankan aktivitas yang terkait erat dengan sumber daya alam dan berdampak pada lingkungan. Masyarakat sebagai
pihak yang bersinggungan langsung seyogyanya juga berperan aktif membantu pondok pesantren menjadi komunitas dan
lembaga yang responsif pada kelestarian lingkungan sehingga semua pihak dapat mewujudkan visi Islam yang rahmatan
lil’alamin. Penelitian kualitatif dengan pendekatan studi kepustakaan dan menggunakan metode analisis deskripstif ini
bertujuan menganalisis upaya yang dapat dilakukan pondok pesantren dalam menjaga dan melestarikan lingkungan serta
mendeskripsikan peran lembaga pemerintah dan organisasi masyarakat untuk mendukung program Pesantren Hijau. Data
diperoleh dari peraturan perundangan, buku, hasil riset terdahulu dan sumber lain yang relevan dengan tujuan penelitian.
Hasil penelitian menunjukkan upaya untuk mewujudkan regulasi tata kelola Pesantren Hijau adalah: 1) pengelolaan sampah
organik dan anorganik menjadi barang bernilai ekonomis, 2) konversi air limbah menjadi sumber daya yang bermanfaat,
3) penggunaan kontruksi berbasis arsitektur hijau yang hemat energi, 4) penghematan sumber daya air dan listrik dalam

268         Jurnal Muslim Heritage. Vol. 8 No, 2 Juni 2023

operasionalisasi pesantren sehari-hari, dan 5 pengupayaan energi alternatif terbarukan sebagai sumber energi di masa depan.
Peran masyarakat dalam mendukung program Pesantren Hijau diantaranya, 1) Lembaga Zakat Infak Sedekah Nahdlatul
Ulama (LAZISNU), Rabithah Ma’ahid Islamiyah (RMI NU), Lembaga Penanggulangan Bencana dan Perubahan Iklim
(LPBI NU), dan Bank Mega Syariah yang menginisasi tujuh pesantren sebagai pilot project program Pesantren Hijau, 2)
terbitnya fatwa Majelis Ulama Indonesia Nomor 41 Tahun 2014 tentang Pengelolaan Sampah untuk Mencegah Kerusakan
Lingkungan. Hasil dari penelitian ini diharapkan dapat menjadi rekomendasi kebijakan bagi Kementerian Agama dan
stakeholder terkait untuk menerbitkan regulasi terkait program Pesantren Hijau.

Keywords: environment; management; green Islamic boarding school; responsive; sustainable


INTRODUCTION
Environmental conservation is something that is no longer ignored today. Evidence of natural damage
can be found everywhere, including Indonesia. The idiom of Indonesia as a green paradise, like an
equatorial emerald, has begun to be broken by the high rate of deforestation. As quoted katadata.co.id
from the Ministry of Environment and Forestry website in 2015-2020, Indonesia’s total deforestation
reached 2.1 hectares.1 The Environmental Performance Index (EPI) 2022 notes that Indonesia has
a relatively low environmental conservation index worldwide. Based on various indicators such as
water quality, water pollution, waste treatment quality, climate change mitigation policies, greenhouse
gas emissions, ecosystem vitality, biodiversity quality, fisheries sustainability, agriculture, and water
resources, Indonesia is ranked 164th out of 180 countries studied, 22nd out of 25 Asia Pacific countries,
or 8th out of 10 ASEAN countries.2 This situation will be exacerbated if there is no growing awareness
to contribute to a better environment.
     Humans as caliphs on earth are obliged to preserve nature as stated in some verses of the Qur’an
below:
                                                                                                    ْ ْ              َْ        َ ْ َ َ ُ ْ َ َ َّ                َ َ َ
                                                                                               ۚ ‫اس اشيَا َۤءه ْم َول تعث ْوا ِف ال ْر ِض ُمف ِس ِدي َن‬ ‫َول تبْخ ُسوا انل‬
      “And do not harm man by diminishing his rights, and do not cause mischief on the earth.” (QS. al-Shuara’
      [26]: 183)
                                         َ                     َّ َ ُ               َّ َ ْ َ ْ ُ َ ْ   َّ ‫ت اَي ْ ِدى‬                ْ َ ْ َ ِّ َ ْ
                                                                                                                    ْ َ‫حر ب َما َك َسب‬              ُ َ َْ َ َ َ
                                        .‫ال ْي َع ِمل ْوا ل َعل ُه ْم يَ ْر ِج ُع ْون‬
                                                                                   ِ ‫اس ِلُ ِذيقهم بعض‬
                                                                                                     ِ ‫انل‬                        ِ ِ ‫ظهر الفساد ِف الب وال‬
      “It has been seen that the works of human hands cause corruption on land and at sea; God wants them to
      feel part of what they have done so that they may return (to the right path).” (QS. Al-Rum [30]: 41)

    At the formal legal level, there is a fatwa of the Indonesian Ulema Council (MUI) Number 41 of
2014 concerning Waste Management to Prevent Environmental Damage which contains four legal
provisions, namely: 1) every Muslim is obliged to maintain the cleanliness of the environment, avoid
tabzir and israf acts, 2) prohibition of throwing objects that are still useful, 3) the government and
entrepreneurs are obliged to manage waste, and 4) recycle legal waste fraud kifayah.3 Islamic boarding
school is one of the institutions that play a significant role in improving the quality of human resources
and preparing a generation of Muslims who maintain cleanliness as a manifestation of their faith.4
Indonesia, a country with the largest Muslim population in the world, has tens of thousands of Islamic



1
    Hanna Farah Vania, “Hutan Indonesia Berkurang 2,1 Hektar Sepanjang 2015-2020,” 2021, https://databoks.katadata.
    co.id/datapublish/2021/06/03/hutan-indonesia-berkurang-21-hektar-sepanjang-2015-2020.
2
    Adi Ahdiyat, “Pelestarian Lingkungan Indonesia Tergolong Buruk Di Asia Pasifik,” 2022, https://databoks.katadata.
    co.id/datapublish/2022/07/25/pelestarian-lingkungan-indonesia-tergolong-buruk-di-asia-pasifik.
3
    Komisi Fatwa MUI, “Fatwa MUI Nomor 41 Tahun 2014” (2014).
4
    Shinfi Wazna Auvaria, Widya Nilandita, and Sulistiya Nengse, “Perencanaan Sistem Manajemen Lingkungan Pada
    Aspek Air Bersih, Limbah, Energi, Dan Penghijauan Di Pondok Pesantren (Studi Kasus: Pondok Pesantren An-Najiyah
    Surabaya),” Jurnal Teknik Lingkungan 4, no. 2 (2019): 36–45.

                         Nur Kasanah dkk / Responsive Islamic Boarding School Management                   269

boarding schools, either traditional, modern or a combination of both. As the data released by the
Ministry of Religious Affairs in 2022, we can read from the table below:5




     Meanwhile, data on the number of students who are mukim or not mukim can be seen in the
following table:




    Green Pesantren is a term that refers to a process carried out by Islamic boarding schools as an
effort to preserve the Islamic boarding school environment with various efforts ranging from waste
management, wastewater management, and alternative energy efforts that aim to create pesantren
and students who are sensitive to environmental crises. 6 The EMIS report noted that 50% of Islamic
boarding school are located in residential areas.7 This data is reinforced by the table above that 80%
of Islamic boarding school are located in Java Island, which is very densely populated. This means
that the community and residents outside the pesantren are also in direct contact with the behavior
and lifestyle of the students, so that support and active role of the community and other elements are
needed to support this program. Behind the fact that the geographical condition of the majority of
Islamic boarding school in the area is most likely to cause environmental damage, there is also great
potential to make Islamic boarding school as conservation agents and centers of ecological movements
because religious institutions such as Islamic boarding school are involved in many environmental
education approaches.8
    Research that specifically mentions the term Green Pesantren does not yet exist. The similarity of
research with several previous studies is a theme relevant to the concept of Green Pesantren but only
partially studied, for example, about green architecture, spatial planning, green energy, green building,
energy, waste, and environmentally friendly Islamic boarding school. However, this study examines a
comprehensive Islamic boarding school governance concept ranging from waste management, waste,
energy saving, and environmentally friendly spatial planning to alternative energy efforts to maintain

5
    Kemenag, “Statistik Data Pondok Pesantren,” 2022, https://ditpdpontren.kemenag.go.id/pdpp/statistik.
6
    LPBI NU, Menuju Pesantren Hijau (Jakarta: LPBI NU, 2019).
7
    Ahsin Sakho Muhammad et al., “Fiqih Lingkungan,” Jakarta: Conservation International Indonesia, 2006.
8
    Fachruddin Majeri Mangunjaya, Ekopesantren: Bagaimana Merancang Pesantren Ramah Lingkungan? (Yayasan Pustaka
    Obor Indonesia, 2014).

270      Jurnal Muslim Heritage. Vol. 8 No, 2 Juni 2023

environmental sustainability. Ultimately, the findings can be used as recommendations for the Ministry
of Religious Affairs and related parties to issue Green Pesantren governance regulations.
     Some of the latest studies on issues relevant to Green Pesantren include those written by Shinfi et al.
This research designed a filling environmental management system in Islamic educational institutions.
The research method is qualitative, with environmental aspects studied: clean water, waste, energy, and
greening, focusing on planning an environmental management system from clean water, waste, energy,
and greening at An-Najiyah Islamic Boarding School Surabaya.9 Faaris and Rahmat discussed Solar
Panels as Green Energy Education in the Islamic Boarding School Environment. This research aims
to build a simple power generation system sourced from solar energy as an alternative if the electricity
goes out in the Prambanan Muhammadiyah Boarding School.10 Isro and Hestin studied the Redesign
of the Putra Anwarul Falah Islamic Boarding School in Banyuurip District, Purworejo Regency, with a
Green Architecture Approach. The study’s results explain the urgency of redesign to minimize damage
to the surrounding environment and realize buildings that have environmental quality and create a
better and sustainable life through the application of green architecture in Ponpes Putra Anwarul
Falah Purworejo.11 Susanti et al. examined ablution water waste for freshwater fisheries cultivation and
hydroponic plants in Ponpes Al Khoiriyah, Sumbergempol-Tulungagung. This community service-
based research records the efforts to utilize ablution water waste as a medium for cultivating catfish
and hydroponic plants.12 Zulfa et al. wrote Organic and Inorganic Waste Management to Empower
Santri at Al-Mustaqim Islamic Boarding School. This study presents the findings of training in waste
management to select waste according to its organic and non-organic types. Where organic waste is used
as compost and inorganic waste is used as a creative product.13 From several predecessor studies of this
research that will be carried out, efforts are offered more comprehensively while involving community
participation and government support so that later, they can issue regulations that accommodate the
management of an Islamic boarding school to be more responsive to environmental sustainability.
     Departing from the above framework, the author examines how Green Pesantren can be a
concept of Islamic boarding school governance responsive to environmental sustainability with a
library research approach, which is a type of research that collects information and data in depth from
literature, books, notes, magazines, other references, as well as relevant previous research results, to
get answers and theoretical foundations regarding the issue to be researched.14 This research data is
taken from books, the Qurán, laws and regulations, fatwas, articles, documentation, official websites,
previous research results, and other sources relevant to discussions related to Green Pesantren.

MANAGEMENT OF ORGANIC AND INORGANIC WASTE INTO GOODS OF
ECONOMIC VALUE
The majority of human activities usually produce waste materials. Excessive waste production can cause
environmental problems, especially inorganic waste. This type of waste poses a major challenge because
it has a prolonged degradation period and a lack of natural ability to decompose in the environment.
The waste problem is a classic thing that has been around for decades. Waste management is an issue

9
   Auvaria, Nilandita, and Nengse, “Perencanaan Sistem Manajemen Lingkungan Pada Aspek Air Bersih, Limbah, Energi,
   Dan Penghijauan Di Pondok Pesantren (Studi Kasus: Pondok Pesantren An-Najiyah Surabaya).”
10
   Faaris Mujaahid and Rahmat Susanto, “Panel Surya Sebagai Edukasi Energi Hijau Di Lingkungan Pondok Pesantren,”
   in Prosiding Seminar Nasional Program Pengabdian Masyarakat, 2019.
11
   Isro Megantara and Hestin Mulyandari, “Redesain Pondok Pesantren Putra Anwarul Falah Di Kecamatan Banyuurip
   Kabupaten Purworejo Dengan Pendekatan Arsitektur Hijau” (University of Technology Yogyakarta, 2020).
12
   Diah Susanti et al., “Pemanfaatan Limbah Air Wudhu Untuk Budidaya Perikanan Air Tawar Dan Tanaman Hidroponik
   Di Ponpes Al Khoiriyah, Sumbergempol-Tulungagung,” Sewagati 6, no. 3 (2022): 367–74.
13
   Muhammad Choiru Zulfa, Agus Subhan Akbar, and Noor Nailie Azzat, “Pengelolaan Sampah Organik Dan Anorganik
   Dalam Upaya Pemberdayaan Santri Di Pondok Pesantren Al-Mustaqim,” Jurnal Penelitian Dan Pengabdian Kepada
   Masyarakat UNSIQ 9, no. 2 (2022): 167–72.
14
   M Zed, Metode Penelitian Kepustakaan (Yayasan Obor Indonesia, 2004).

                         Nur Kasanah dkk / Responsive Islamic Boarding School Management                     271

in developing countries and requires planning from design and management to the final stage.15 The
types of waste are:
a. The type of waste specifications include waste containing materials, toxic and hazardous waste,
    waste arising from disasters, and demolition debris.
b. From the characteristics of waste in waste management, organic and inorganic waste are
    distinguished. Organic waste comes from living bodies that easily decompose, for example, the rest
    of kitchen ingredients, fruits, vegetables, rice, fish, meat, and pieces of leaves/branches/branches.
    Inorganic waste comes from natural materials and industrial preparations that do not decompose,
    such as plastic, old tires, metal, glass, etc.
     The issue of waste management has an important meaning in the environmental field, and some
people take advantage of this difficulty to generate household income. Given the large economic value
associated with waste utilization, it is important to apply management science in waste management.16
Plastic and fabric waste can be effectively converted into a wide array of products of economic value,
thus reducing household waste. In addition, this also has the potential to increase public awareness
about environmental issues. The processing of plastic and fabric waste has the potential to produce a
variety of fashion and souvenir products.17
     The Islamic boarding school is a large house with many members. Of course, daily activities
that consume natural and processed materials that use packaging will cause residues of organic and
inorganic waste18. The waste widely found in Islamic boarding school is the leftover food of students,
packaging (snacks, soap, shampoo), sanitary napkins, remnants of building materials, and water and
electricity installations. In this period, Islamic boarding school are also synonymous with institutions
that still carry out traditional waste management by collecting, drying, and burning. Some are even
directly thrown into rivers or seas.19
     Traditional waste management will cause an increase in soil, water, and water pollution. For this
reason, it is necessary to instill good habits in the students to be more concerned with preserving the
environment. Some things that can be done include:
a.	Sorting waste by type, hazardous or not, organic or inorganic waste, by providing a reservoir for
     each type. If the waste is not processed further, this activity will help the final processing at the
     Landfill (TPA) or Temporary Disposal Site (TPS).20
b. Recycling (reuse) is utilizing inorganic waste from food packaging, beverages, and other handicrafts
     of economic value, such as bags, tissue holders, trash cans, chairs, etc. 21
c.	They make waste products as raw materials for other useful products (recycling). Livestock manure
     can be used as compost and biogas for organic waste such as food waste, leaves, and twigs. 22
     Inorganic waste, such as plastic, can be used as raw material for fuel oil using pyrolysis techniques.23
15
   Ana Pires, Graça Martinho, and Ni-Bin Chang, “Solid Waste Management in European Countries: A Review of Systems
   Analysis Techniques,” Journal of Environmental Management 92, no. 4 (2011): 1033–50.
16
   Fahmi Fauziah, Andi Hamzah, and Ahmad Rozy, “Implementation of Management in Waste Banks to Increase
   Economic Value,” Jurnal PKM Manajemen Bisnis 1, no. 1 (2021): 37–43.
17
   Maharani Conilie, Umi Farihah, and Nanda Eska Anugrah Nasution, “Utilization of Plastic and Fabric Waste into
   Economic Valued Products to Minimize Household Waste,” in IOP Conference Series: Earth and Environmental
   Science, vol. 747 (IOP Publishing, 2021), 12107.
18
   Eka Putra Romadona, “Konsep Pendidikan Pembiasaan Perspektif Ibnu Miskawaih,” Muslim Heritage 6, no. 2 (2021):
   277–302, https://jurnal.iainponorogo.ac.id/index.php/muslimheritage/article/view/3308.
19
   Shinfi Wazna Auvaria, “Perencanaan Pengelolaan Sampah Di Pondok Pesantren Langitan Kecamatan Widang Tuban,”
   Al-Ard: Jurnal Teknik Lingkungan 2, no. 1 (2016): 1–7.
20
   Auvaria.
21
   Zulfa, Akbar, and Azzat, “Pengelolaan Sampah Organik Dan Anorganik Dalam Upaya Pemberdayaan Santri Di Pondok
   Pesantren Al-Mustaqim.”
22
   Auvaria, “Perencanaan Pengelolaan Sampah Di Pondok Pesantren Langitan Kecamatan Widang Tuban.”
23
   Fadli Kasim, Mohammad Kholid Ridwan, and M Yayan Adi Putra, “Pengolahan Sampah Plastik Memakai Teknologi
   Pirolisis Untuk Pembelajaran Dan Konservasi Lingkungan Di Pondok Pesantren Al-Anwar Sarang Rembang, Jawa

272        Jurnal Muslim Heritage. Vol. 8 No, 2 Juni 2023

CONVERSION OF WASTEWATER INTO USEFUL RESOURCES
Water use for domestic purposes causes wastewater in the form of household waste. Water pollution
is one of the most common forms of pollution in Indonesia, with household waste being the main
contributor. Industrial and household activities can cause sources of water pollution. As a result, the
result of water pollution is a decrease in overall water quality that is suitable for human use.24 A
comprehensive understanding of the various treatment technologies available is essential for wastewater
treatment and disposal or reuse of treated waste. Considering the existing circumstances, this knowledge
will allow identifying the most appropriate method for a particular location. In addition, it is important
to ascertain whether treated wastewater can be legally disposed of or reused following established rules
and regulations while ensuring the safety of the practice.25
     Islamic boarding school is an institution whose daily activities are closely related to worship that
demands sanctity from hadas, large and small. Directly related activities are bathing and ablution. You
can imagine how many cubic meters of water are produced as waste from the two activities, especially
if the number of students reaches thousands. If it is just thrown away and flows into the sewer or river,
of course, this will be a bigger problem in the future. As a solution, several models can be done to
manage and utilize this wastewater by:
a. We use wudu wastewater as plant sprinklers, freshwater fish farming media, and hydroponic plants.
      26

b.	They treat ablution water as a solution for providing clean water through aeration and adsorption.
   Aeration aims to add oxygen to wastewater, while adsorption is carried out by separating wastewater
   and pollutants. If the conditions after treatment are close to the initial conditions, it can be used
   as clean water; if the results are poor, it can be used as water for agriculture, industry, and power
   generation.27
c. It uses wudu waste as a pico hydro power plant that can be used for simple electrical equipment. 28
d. Collecting ablution waste into the ground that can be used as a convergence and groundwater
   supply for the community.29

USE OF ENERGY-EFFICIENT GREEN ARCHITECTURE-BASED CONSTRUCTION
One of the efforts to preserve the environment is to provide green open space and design
environmentally friendly building layouts, better known as green architecture or green building. Green
architecture can minimize global warming and carbon dioxide emissions. Points to be considered in
green architecture include building envelopes, electrical and lighting systems, water efficiency, water
conditioning and ventilation, and landscape treatment.30 Another model that can be developed is
redesign using the principles of conservation, efficient energy use, and preservation of the surrounding
natural environment. The design of the building is adapted to the surrounding conditions through
   Tengah,” Jurnal Bakti Saintek: Jurnal Pengabdian Masyarakat Bidang Sains Dan Teknologi 2, no. 2 (2018): 57–63.
24
   Siko Fadil Muhamad, Fenti Prihatini Dance Tui, and Yacob Noho Nani, “Strategi Kebijakan Sistem Pengelolaan Air
   Limbah Domestik: Studi Kasus Di Desa Tunggulo Kecamatan Tilongkabila Kabupaten Bone Bolango,” ULIL ALBAB:
   Jurnal Ilmiah Multidisiplin 2, no. 8 (2023): 3535–43.
25
   Miquel Salgot and Montserrat Folch, “Wastewater Treatment and Water Reuse,” Current Opinion in Environmental
   Science & Health 2 (2018): 64–74.
26
   Susanti et al., “Pemanfaatan Limbah Air Wudhu Untuk Budidaya Perikanan Air Tawar Dan Tanaman Hidroponik Di
   Ponpes Al Khoiriyah, Sumbergempol-Tulungagung.”
27
   Eko Prabowo Hadisantoso et al., “Pengolahan Limbah Air Wudhu Wanita Dengan Metode Aerasi Dan Adsorpsi
   Menggunakan Karbon Aktif,” Al-Kimiya: Jurnal Ilmu Kimia Dan Terapan 5, no. 1 (2018): 1–6.
28
   Cut Taffazani Fithrian Nazlaa and Syafrina Sari Lubisa, “Potential Analysis Of Mosque Wudhu Waste As A Picohydro
   Power Plant,” 2021.
29
   Nita Noriko, Andi Mukramin Yusuf, and Elma Alfiah, “Gerakan Masyarakat Sedekah Air Wudhu (GM-SAW) Sebagai
   Upaya Konservasi Air Bersih,” 2022.
30
   Wowo Adhizar Darwin, “Implementasi Konsep Arsitektur Hijau Pada Gedung Pesantren Modern ‘Minha,’” Jurnal
   Arsitektur Archicentre 2, no. 1 (2019): 1–5.

                          Nur Kasanah dkk / Responsive Islamic Boarding School Management                        273

the shape of the façade, mass layout, use of materials, energy-saving technology, and building utility
systems that follow the local climate.31
     Based on the principle of saving resources and energy, environmental differences in different
regions should be considered in designing energy-efficient green buildings. Combined with the
characteristics of the outside natural environment, the characteristics of the territory, and the customs
of people’s social life, green buildings must conform to the local construction style and make the most
of local resources and environment.32 Another model that can be adopted is that tropical boarding
schools can be realized by applying the principles of a tropical architectural approach that provides
wider green open space and buildings using cross-ventilation water flow to get the desired amount of
water flow to make shade with roof oversell, sun shading, and curtains.33

SAVING WATER AND ELECTRICITY RESOURCES IN THE DAILY
OPERATIONALIZATION OF ISLAMIC BOARDING SCHOOL
Indonesia’s energy consumption as of 2021 is equivalent to 909.24 million barrels. Energy sources can
also be separated from natural resources. Electricity and water resources are also among the biggest
needs spent in the daily operational activities of Islamic boarding school. If not anticipated, it will be
ensured that there will be scarcity and depletion of energy reserves. Energy efficiency practices benefit
both environmental preservation and personal financial savings. Considering the above, simple methods
are needed to reduce electricity use to reduce costs and contribute to environmental preservation.34
The portion of national energy consumption in 2021 can be seen in the following diagram.35




                                Diagram Konsumsi Energi Nasional Tahun 2021

     The concept of green building, green architecture, and tropical architecture is the first step
towards saving electrical energy. Wasteful buildings not only consume energy sources but also cause
a greenhouse effect. The problem, in general, is that buildings in tropical countries such as Indonesia
use the most energy for water systems, around 45-70%, lighting systems, around 10-20%, and elevators
and escalators, around 2-7%. And office equipment and electronics around 2-10%. By utilizing the
layout of ventilation and lighting, the need for air conditioning, both air conditioning and fans, can be
minimized. The open space rich in trees also provides cool and clean water.36
31
   Megantara and Mulyandari, “Redesain Pondok Pesantren Putra Anwarul Falah Di Kecamatan Banyuurip Kabupaten
   Purworejo Dengan Pendekatan Arsitektur Hijau.”
32
   Xiao-guang Zhao and Chun-Ping Gao, “Research on Energy-Saving Design Method of Green Building Based on BIM
   Technology,” Scientific Programming 2022 (2022): 1–10.
33
   Aida Fitriana, “Perancangan Pondok Pesantren Roudlotut Tullab Di Kabupaten Pasuruan Dengan Pendekatan Arsitektur
   Tropis” (Universitas Islam Negeri Maulana Malik Ibrahim, 2022).
34
   G Paromow, M Jumadurdyyew, and T Gurbanow, “Save Electricity and Save the World,” 2022.
35
   Viva Budy Kusnandar, “Ini Sektor Dengan Konsumsi Energi Terbesar Di RI Pada 2021,” 2022, https://databoks.katadata.
   co.id/datapublish/2022/06/10/ini-sektor-dengan-konsumsi-energi-terbesar-di-ri-pada-2021#:~:text=Konsumsi
   energi Indonesia mencapai 909,LPG%2C biogas%2C dan biomassa.
36
   Muhammad Ridho, “Pondok Pesantren Modern Dengan Konsep Green Building Di Pekalongan,” Journal of Economic,
   Business and Engineering (JEBE) 2, no. 1 (2020): 195–205.

274       Jurnal Muslim Heritage. Vol. 8 No, 2 Juni 2023

     Water is a primary need on earth, especially in Islamic boarding schools whose activities use
ablution water a lot. So efforts should be made to save ablution water because population growth is
not proportional to water availability. If by 2025, it is estimated that Indonesia’s population reaches
321 million, it will cause water scarcity. For this reason, it is necessary to apply the sunnah of the Holy
Prophet (peace be upon him) in ablution to save water. If 3,759,198 students apply this pattern, savings
will occur that can save 8,693,145 liters of water and if in rupiah of Rp. 45,239,129.37 In addition to the
manual method, ablution water can be saved using an automatic wudu faucet system such as the one in
Ponpes Al-Karim Sayung. The ablution faucet has automatic proximity sensors for detecting (reading)
dy movements and solenoid valves to open and close.38

STRIVING FOR RENEWABLE ALTERNATIVE ENERGY AS AN ENERGY SOURCE
IN THE FUTURE
An alternative to conventional energy sources, renewable energy sources can be a sustainable solution
for energy security. To reduce the electricity supply crisis, lack of infrastructure, and conventional
energy sources, there is a need for renewable energy sources to meet electricity needs.39 Nonfossil
energy has become a big issue today. Using energy derived from solar, wind, geothermal, and other
renewable energy is necessary in several countries, including Indonesia. Some alternative energy sources
that can be utilized by Islamic boarding school include:
a.	The use of solar energy for power generation is simple. This effort is useful if there is a PLN
     electricity disruption and student learning materials. Using off-grid solar schemes not connected
     to PLN’s electricity network can produce power that can be used for LED lights.40 If the average
     use of lights is 12 hours of electricity, one-third of the cost of electricity can be reduced by solar
     cells.
b. Using water energy with a pico hydro model by utilizing ablution, water waste can also be used in
     simple electronic equipment.41
c. Utilization of organic manure as biogas. The study’s results showed that from the total organic
     manure from humans and cows, 1.3 m 3 / day with a methane content of 52.5% can produce an
     input power of 5,251.4 watts.42

THE ROLE OF THE COMMUNITY TO SUPPORT THE GREEN ISLAMIC BOARDING
SCHOOL PROGRAM
The issue of environmental sustainability has become a shared property and responsibility. Although
the idea of Green Pesantren specifically refers to the Islamic boarding school community. In
handling environmental issues for the preservation of nature, both the government, Islamic mass
organizations, MUI, and other communities are expected to play a role in providing theological
principles and foundations so that Islamic boarding school residents are more aware and concerned
about the surrounding environment because in Islamic teachings caring for and preserving nature is
one part of man’s duty as a caliph on earth.43 The involvement and active participation of the Islamic
boarding school community, the surrounding community, and related institutions aim to transform
37
   M Ariesman, “Efisiensi Air Di Pesantren Melalui Penerapan Sunnah Nabi Dan Teknologi Terapan,”
   NUKHBATUL’ULUM: Jurnal Bidang Kajian Islam 4, no. 1 (2018): 40–50.
38
   Muhammad Arifin, “Keran Wudhu Otomatis Hemat Air Untuk Masjid Di Pondok Pesantren Al-Karim Sayung Berbasis
   Arduino Uno” (Universitas Islam Sultan Agung Semarang, 2020).
39
   Ferdous Ahmed et al., “Alternative Energy Resources in Bangladesh and Future Prospect,” Renewable and Sustainable
   Energy Reviews 25 (2013): 698–707.
40
   Mujaahid and Susanto, “Panel Surya Sebagai Edukasi Energi Hijau Di Lingkungan Pondok Pesantren.”
41
   Nazlaa and Lubisa, “Potential Analysis Of Mosque Wudhu Waste As A Picohydro Power Plant.”
42
   Riki Arnando, Syahrial Syahrial, and Waluyo Waluyo, “Studi Analisis Daya Pembangkit Listrik Biogas Dari Kotoran Sapi
   Dan Manusia Di Pondok Pesantren Baiturrahman Jawa Barat,” REKA ELKOMIKA 3, no. 2 (2015).
43
   NU, Menuju Pesantren Hijau.

                         Nur Kasanah dkk / Responsive Islamic Boarding School Management                       275

moral and religious values within the Islamic boarding school into a moral framework that prioritizes
environmental awareness44. The approach used is the project approach and the motivational approach,
or it could be that both approaches are integrated. Both require persuasive durations and stages.45
Community participation in supporting the eco-Islamic boarding school program can be done by
building an eco-Islamic boarding school program as a form of environmental education based on
Islamic boarding schools.46
     Real support for the Green Pesantren program is carried out by the Nahdlatul Ulama Alms Infak
Zakat Institute (LAZISNU), Rabithah Ma’ahid Islamiyah (RMI NU), the Disaster Management and
Climate Change Institute (LPBI NU), and Bank Mega Syariah which on September 3, 2022, initiated
seven Islamic boarding schools, namely: 1) Mathlaul Anwar Linahdlatil Ulama Islamic Boarding School
(MALNU), Pandeglang Banten, 2) Zainul Hasan Genggong Islamic Boarding School, Probolinggo
East Java, 3) Islamic boarding school Al Kinaniyah Jakarta, 4) Islamic boarding school Mahasina
Bekasi, 5) Islamic boarding school Al-Mubarok Mranggen, Demak Central Java, 6) Islamic boarding
school Al-Hamidiyah, Depok West Java, and 7) Pondok Islamic boarding school Al-Hamid Cilangkap,
Jakarta as a pilot project for the Green Pesantren program.47 Although it does not directly mention
environmental sustainability, the Indonesian Ulema Council (MUI) also plays an active role by issuing
Fatwa No. 41 of 2014 concerning Waste Management to Prevent Environmental Damage.48

CONCLUSION
Environmental sustainability is our future responsibility to our children and grandchildren. As part
of the community, Islamic boarding school is also inseparable from this responsibility. As a religious
institution with Islamic values, rahmatan lil’alamin should start improving from traditional governance
towards responsive environmental sustainability. Some things need to be addressed, among others: 1)
organic and inorganic waste management, 2) wastewater management, 3) green architecture, 4) energy
saving, and 5) alternative energy efforts. The community as a group in direct contact with Islamic
boarding school life should also support Islamic boarding school activities through philanthropic
programs, empowerment, training, and mentoring. As a policyholder, the government should also
immediately issue regulations so that green Islamic boarding school governance can be immediately
implemented through legal signs that may contain rewards and sanctions.


                                               REFERENCES

Ahdiyat, Adi. “Pelestarian Lingkungan Indonesia Tergolong Buruk Di Asia Pasifik,” 2022. https://
   databoks.katadata.co.id/datapublish/2022/07/25/pelestarian-lingkungan-indonesia-tergolong-
   buruk-di-asia-pasifik.




44
   Mukhibat Mukhibat and Ainul Nurhayati Istiqomah, “Analisis Implementasi Kebijakan Pengelolaan Data Pendidikan
   Islam Berbasis Education Management Information System,” Muslim Heritage 6, no. 2 (2021): 345–58, https://jurnal.
   iainponorogo.ac.id/index.php/muslimheritage/article/view/3098.
45
   Herdis Herdiansyah, Trisasono Jokopitoyo, and Ahmad Munir, “Environmental Awareness to Realizing Green Islamic
   Boarding School (Eco-Pesantren) in Indonesia,” in IOP Conference Series: Earth and Environmental Science, vol. 30
   (IOP Publishing, 2016), 12017.
46
   Sri Rahayu Pudjiastuti, Herinto Sidik Iriansyah, and Yuliwati Yuliwati, “Program Eco-Pesantren Sebagai Model
   Pendidikan Lingkungan Hidup,” Jurnal Abdimas Prakasa Dakara 1, no. 1 (2021): 29–37.
47
   Aru Lego Triono, “Luncurkan Program Pesantren Hijau, Ketua LAZISNU: Alam Raya Saudara Kita,” 2022, https://
   www.nu.or.id/nasional/luncurkan-program-pesantren-hijau-ketua-lazisnu-alam-raya-saudara-kita-mWidZ.
48
   Komisi Fatwa MUI, Fatwa MUI Nomor 41 Tahun 2014.

276     Jurnal Muslim Heritage. Vol. 8 No, 2 Juni 2023

Ahmed, Ferdous, Abul Quasem Al Amin, M Hasanuzzaman, and R Saidur. “Alternative Energy
   Resources in Bangladesh and Future Prospect.” Renewable and Sustainable Energy Reviews 25
   (2013): 698–707.
Ariesman, M. “Efisiensi Air Di Pesantren Melalui Penerapan Sunnah Nabi Dan Teknologi Terapan.”
    NUKHBATUL’ULUM: Jurnal Bidang Kajian Islam 4, no. 1 (2018): 40–50.
Arifin, Muhammad. “Keran Wudhu Otomatis Hemat Air Untuk Masjid Di Pondok Pesantren Al-
     Karim Sayung Berbasis Arduino Uno.” Universitas Islam Sultan Agung Semarang, 2020.
Arnando, Riki, Syahrial Syahrial, and Waluyo Waluyo. “Studi Analisis Daya Pembangkit Listrik
   Biogas Dari Kotoran Sapi Dan Manusia Di Pondok Pesantren Baiturrahman Jawa Barat.” REKA
   ELKOMIKA 3, no. 2 (2015).
Auvaria, Shinfi Wazna. “Perencanaan Pengelolaan Sampah Di Pondok Pesantren Langitan Kecamatan
   Widang Tuban.” Al-Ard: Jurnal Teknik Lingkungan 2, no. 1 (2016): 1–7.
Auvaria, Shinfi Wazna, Widya Nilandita, and Sulistiya Nengse. “Perencanaan Sistem Manajemen
   Lingkungan Pada Aspek Air Bersih, Limbah, Energi, Dan Penghijauan Di Pondok Pesantren
   (Studi Kasus: Pondok Pesantren An-Najiyah Surabaya).” Jurnal Teknik Lingkungan 4, no. 2
   (2019): 36–45.
Conilie, Maharani, Umi Farihah, and Nanda Eska Anugrah Nasution. “Utilization of Plastic and Fabric
   Waste into Economic Valued Products to Minimize Household Waste.” In IOP Conference Series:
   Earth and Environmental Science, 747:12107. IOP Publishing, 2021.
Darwin, Wowo Adhizar. “Implementasi Konsep Arsitektur Hijau Pada Gedung Pesantren Modern
   ‘Minha.’” Jurnal Arsitektur Archicentre 2, no. 1 (2019): 1–5.
Fauziah, Fahmi, Andi Hamzah, and Ahmad Rozy. “Implementation of Management in Waste Banks
   to Increase Economic Value.” Jurnal PKM Manajemen Bisnis 1, no. 1 (2021): 37–43.
Fitriana, Aida. “Perancangan Pondok Pesantren Roudlotut Tullab Di Kabupaten Pasuruan Dengan
     Pendekatan Arsitektur Tropis.” Universitas Islam Negeri Maulana Malik Ibrahim, 2022.
Hadisantoso, Eko Prabowo, Yuna Widayanti, Vina Amalia, and Gina Giftia A Delilah. “Pengolahan
   Limbah Air Wudhu Wanita Dengan Metode Aerasi Dan Adsorpsi Menggunakan Karbon Aktif.”
   Al-Kimiya: Jurnal Ilmu Kimia Dan Terapan 5, no. 1 (2018): 1–6.
Herdiansyah, Herdis, Trisasono Jokopitoyo, and Ahmad Munir. “Environmental Awareness to
   Realizing Green Islamic Boarding School (Eco-Pesantren) in Indonesia.” In IOP Conference
   Series: Earth and Environmental Science, 30:12017. IOP Publishing, 2016.
Kasim, Fadli, Mohammad Kholid Ridwan, and M Yayan Adi Putra. “Pengolahan Sampah Plastik
    Memakai Teknologi Pirolisis Untuk Pembelajaran Dan Konservasi Lingkungan Di Pondok
    Pesantren Al-Anwar Sarang Rembang, Jawa Tengah.” Jurnal Bakti Saintek: Jurnal Pengabdian
    Masyarakat Bidang Sains Dan Teknologi 2, no. 2 (2018): 57–63.
Kemenag. “Statistik Data Pondok Pesantren,” 2022. https://ditpdpontren.kemenag.go.id/pdpp/
   statistik.
Komisi Fatwa MUI. Fatwa MUI Nomor 41 Tahun 2014 (2014).
Kusnandar, Viva Budy. “Ini Sektor Dengan Konsumsi Energi Terbesar Di RI Pada 2021,” 2022.
   https://databoks.katadata.co.id/datapublish/2022/06/10/ini-sektor-dengan-konsumsi-energi-
   terbesar-di-ri-pada-2021#:~:text=Konsumsi energi Indonesia mencapai 909,LPG%2C biogas%2C
   dan biomassa.

                     Nur Kasanah dkk / Responsive Islamic Boarding School Management           277

Mangunjaya, Fachruddin Majeri. Ekopesantren: Bagaimana Merancang Pesantren Ramah Lingkungan?
   Yayasan Pustaka Obor Indonesia, 2014.
Megantara, Isro, and Hestin Mulyandari. “Redesain Pondok Pesantren Putra Anwarul Falah Di
   Kecamatan Banyuurip Kabupaten Purworejo Dengan Pendekatan Arsitektur Hijau.” University
   of Technology Yogyakarta, 2020.
Muhamad, Siko Fadil, Fenti Prihatini Dance Tui, and Yacob Noho Nani. “Strategi Kebijakan Sistem
   Pengelolaan Air Limbah Domestik: Studi Kasus Di Desa Tunggulo Kecamatan Tilongkabila
   Kabupaten Bone Bolango.” ULIL ALBAB: Jurnal Ilmiah Multidisiplin 2, no. 8 (2023): 3535–43.
Muhammad, Ahsin Sakho, Husein Mumammad, K H Roghib Mabrur, Ahmad Sudirman Abbas,
   Amalia Firman, Fachruddin Majeri Mangunjaya, Kamal I B Pasha, and Martha Andriana. “Fiqih
   Lingkungan.” Jakarta: Conservation International Indonesia, 2006.
Mujaahid, Faaris, and Rahmat Susanto. “Panel Surya Sebagai Edukasi Energi Hijau Di Lingkungan
   Pondok Pesantren.” In Prosiding Seminar Nasional Program Pengabdian Masyarakat, 2019.
Mukhibat, Mukhibat, and Ainul Nurhayati Istiqomah. “Analisis Implementasi Kebijakan Pengelolaan
   Data Pendidikan Islam Berbasis Education Management Information System.” Muslim Heritage
   6, no. 2 (2021): 345–58. https://jurnal.iainponorogo.ac.id/index.php/muslimheritage/article/
   view/3098.
Nazlaa, Cut Taffazani Fithrian, and Syafrina Sari Lubisa. “Potential Analysis Of Mosque Wudhu Waste
   As A Picohydro Power Plant,” 2021.
Noriko, Nita, Andi Mukramin Yusuf, and Elma Alfiah. “Gerakan Masyarakat Sedekah Air Wudhu
   (GM-SAW) Sebagai Upaya Konservasi Air Bersih,” 2022.
NU, LPBI. Menuju Pesantren Hijau. Jakarta: LPBI NU, 2019.
Paromow, G, M Jumadurdyyew, and T Gurbanow. “Save Electricity and Save the World,” 2022.
Pires, Ana, Graça Martinho, and Ni-Bin Chang. “Solid Waste Management in European Countries: A
    Review of Systems Analysis Techniques.” Journal of Environmental Management 92, no. 4 (2011):
    1033–50.
Pudjiastuti, Sri Rahayu, Herinto Sidik Iriansyah, and Yuliwati Yuliwati. “Program Eco-Pesantren
   Sebagai Model Pendidikan Lingkungan Hidup.” Jurnal Abdimas Prakasa Dakara 1, no. 1 (2021):
   29–37.
Ridho, Muhammad. “Pondok Pesantren Modern Dengan Konsep Green Building Di Pekalongan.”
    Journal of Economic, Business and Engineering (JEBE) 2, no. 1 (2020): 195–205.
Romadona, Eka Putra. “Konsep Pendidikan Pembiasaan Perspektif Ibnu Miskawaih.” Muslim Heritage
   6, no. 2 (2021): 277–302. https://jurnal.iainponorogo.ac.id/index.php/muslimheritage/article/
   view/3308.
Salgot, Miquel, and Montserrat Folch. “Wastewater Treatment and Water Reuse.” Current Opinion in
    Environmental Science & Health 2 (2018): 64–74.
Susanti, Diah, George Endri Kusuma, Yoga Fredi Arisko, Meril Lia Priday Riskiana, Adinda Fitria
    Hidayati, and Fischa Indaya Bathari. “Pemanfaatan Limbah Air Wudhu Untuk Budidaya Perikanan
    Air Tawar Dan Tanaman Hidroponik Di Ponpes Al Khoiriyah, Sumbergempol-Tulungagung.”
    Sewagati 6, no. 3 (2022): 367–74.

278     Jurnal Muslim Heritage. Vol. 8 No, 2 Juni 2023

Triono, Aru Lego. “Luncurkan Program Pesantren Hijau, Ketua LAZISNU: Alam Raya Saudara
    Kita,” 2022. https://www.nu.or.id/nasional/luncurkan-program-pesantren-hijau-ketua-lazisnu-
    alam-raya-saudara-kita-mWidZ.
Vania, Hanna Farah. “Hutan Indonesia Berkurang 2,1 Hektar Sepanjang 2015-2020,” 2021. https://
   databoks.katadata.co.id/datapublish/2021/06/03/hutan-indonesia-berkurang-21-hektar-
   sepanjang-2015-2020.
Zed, M. Metode Penelitian Kepustakaan. Yayasan Obor Indonesia, 2004.
Zhao, Xiao-guang, and Chun-Ping Gao. “Research on Energy-Saving Design Method of Green
   Building Based on BIM Technology.” Scientific Programming 2022 (2022): 1–10.
Zulfa, Muhammad Choiru, Agus Subhan Akbar, and Noor Nailie Azzat. “Pengelolaan Sampah Organik
    Dan Anorganik Dalam Upaya Pemberdayaan Santri Di Pondok Pesantren Al-Mustaqim.” Jurnal
    Penelitian Dan Pengabdian Kepada Masyarakat UNSIQ 9, no. 2 (2022): 167–72.