The Role of Transformational Educational
   Leadership in Developing the Saudi University
                      System
           (Hail University as a Model)

                       Dr. Sylvia Ismail Mohammad Bani Hani
   Associate professor, Department of Self-Development Skills, University of Hail, Saudi
                                          Arabia
                            Email: sylviabanihani@gmail.com




ABSTRACT
The research's goal was to determine the transformational educational leadership’s role in
developing the Saudi university system through an applied study on the University of
Hail. The study relied on the survey method, Due to its relevance to the topic and
objectives of the current study. The study sample consisted of (48) educational leaders at
the University of Hail who constitute the study population. The Chris and Morgan table
was used to determine the size of the study sample members, The study was based on the
questionnaire to identify the role of transformational educational leadership in developing
the Saudi university system. Finally, the study found that three dimensions of the study
(ideal influence, inspirational motivation, and empowerment) had a high degree of
impact, and they had a mathematical mean of (3.90, 3.97, 3.79) respectively.
Accordingly, it was found that there is a high role for transformational educational
leadership at the University of Hail.

Keywords: Educational Leadership, Transformational Leadership, Saudi University
System, University of Hail.




 139
DOI: https://doi.org/10.33193/eJHAS.7.2023.244

Introduction
        The success of universities lies in the extent to which they achieve their goals and
mission; in addition to how educational leaders manage universities, the leadership styles
they practice, and the successful leadership qualities that are represented in their
personalities, and their abilities to employ their capabilities towards constructive work.
        Grunefeld et al (2017) indicated that educational leadership is a major work that
will create repercussions on the behavior of its members on the one hand, and on the
other hand, its ability to raise the level of flexibility and effectiveness of universities and
improve their system. In the same context, Grunefeld (2020) indicated that educational
leadership includes communication skills, decision-making, inspiration, time
management, self-management, and commitment. Thus, universities need to be led
rationally and effectively by practicing transformational leadership behaviors that
enhance communication and interaction processes, as well as planning and participation
in decision-making (Matos & Kasztelnik, 2021). Nicdao (2019) indicated that one of the
leadership styles produced by scientific progress and technical development is the
transformational leadership style, which is distinguished by its high ability to lead
universities in the face of modern challenges and developments by influencing the
development of their system and increasing the organizational creativity of
transformational leaders.
        In the same context, transformational leadership is what goes beyond providing
incentives for desired performance to improving the university system through innovation
in performance and transforming self-interests to be an essential part of the higher
mission of these universities (Baba, 2019).
        Based on the previous considerations, the aspirations of the Kingdom of Saudi
Arabia represented a historical challenge for building and developing educational leaders.
Therefore, Cabinet Resolution No. (556) dated 25/12/1437 AH was issued to establish a
Center for the Preparation and Development of Educational Leaders. Council of
Ministers Resolution No. (103) dated 20/2/1441 AH was also issued, changing the name
of the Center for the Preparation and Development of Educational Leaders to "The
Academy for the Development of Educational Leaders", to support and achieve the
leading role entrusted to the Academy in developing national leaders. This great support
will advance the Academy's journey towards broader horizons and greater national
ambitions (Institute of Public Administration, 2019).
        Based on the foregoing, the research on the role of transformational educational
leadership in developing the university system, in Saudi Arabia, through applied research
on the University of Hail has its justifications. Among these justifications is the need to
adopt a creative leadership model such as transformational leadership, which is
characterized by certain specifications that enable the development of universities. One of
the justifications is also the need to contribute to the development of appropriate
strategies, processes, and plans in an attempt to positively influence the development of

 140
DOI: https://doi.org/10.33193/eJHAS.7.2023.244

universities and the employment of transformational leadership and the adoption of this
type of leadership by educational leaders in Saudi Arabia.

Problem Statement
         Transformational educational leadership represents a new intellectual framework.
Among the most crucial outcomes is the development of the skills and capabilities of
educational leaders in universities and the improvement of their performance (Salim &
Rajput, 2021). However, the principles of this new trend are reflected in the ability of
transformational leaders to communicate the university’s message and future vision by
showing high ethical behaviors and building trust and respect to achieve its goals (Eroje
et al, 2021).
         The results of the study by Bin Bakr & Alfayez (2022) indicated that there is a
clear role for transformational leadership in positively affecting the performance of
university employees. Alghamdi's study (2020) also found that transformational
leadership’s dimensions (ideal influence, inspirational motivation, intellectual
stimulation, individual consideration, and empowerment) affect university employees’
performance.
         It is important to note here that transformational leadership has a crucial part in
the developing the university system. There are also continuous demands to continue the
approach of development and modernization in the Kingdom of Saudi Arabia according
to its vision 2030, because it gives special attention to enabling educational leaders to
develop their leadership capabilities, and this in turn will affect the work of university
systems positively (Alessa, 2021).
         According to the previous considerations, the study problem was embodied by the
researcher’s observations of the working environment conditions at the University of
Hail, and the university’s need for advanced mechanisms and strategies to achieve long-
term goals related to transformational leadership and to find transformational leaders who
contribute to the university’s development process. Hence, the researcher had a
preliminary perception that the need to research how Saudi universities may develop their
work through transformative educational leadership in line with the requirements of
employing this type of leadership, by defining plans.

Questions of the study
   1. How does ideal influence relate to the role of transformational educational
      leadership in the growth of the University of Hail?
   2. How does inspirational motivation relate to the role of transformational
      educational leadership in the growth of the University of Hail?
   3. How does empowerment relate to the role of transformational educational
      leadership in the growth of the University of Hail?
Purpose
 141
DOI: https://doi.org/10.33193/eJHAS.7.2023.244

        The purpose of this research was to investigate the role of transformational
educational leadership in the development of the University of Hail in relation to the
transformational leadership’s dimensions (ideal influence, inspirational motivation, and
empowerment). The study sought to identify the level of improvement of the Hail
University system through the work of transformational educational leaders. Finally, it
sought to reveal whether the replies from the transformational educational leaders
differed substantially at the level of significance (0.05) towards the role of
transformational leadership in its dimensions due to the study variable (training courses).
Significance
        The theoretical significance of this study lies in the way it clarifies the
transformational leadership style and the relationship between it and the growth of
university systems. While the applied importance is evident through the help of this study
for leaders at the University of Hail to choose appropriate leadership styles and its
contribution to the benefit of decision makers and policy makers in the Ministry of
Education in Saudi Arabia in taking procedures and methods that enhance the processes
of improvement and modernization of the university management system, in particular
the University of Hail.
Delimitations
        The study was applied on educational leaders in the University of Hail in the
Kingdom of in 2022. The study's scope was restricted to identifying how transformational
educational leadership contributed to the development of the University of Hail's
systems, through the transformational leadership’s dimensions (ideal influence,
inspirational motivation, empowerment).

Terms
Transformational Leadership
        Alquhaiz (2020) defines it as the ability of educational leaders to communicate
the university's mission, vision, and goals, and to motivate workers to practice high
ethical behaviors. Bunaiyan (2019) also indicated that transformational leadership is a
style of leadership through which educational leaders seek to reach the underlying
motives of their subordinates, then work to satisfy their needs, and invest their maximum
energies, with the aim of achieving an intended change.
        It is defined in this study as the ability of transformational educational leaders to
develop the Hail University system, through the scale prepared for this study.

Transformational educational leaders
        Educational leaders are defined as individuals who are distinguished by leadership
qualities and practical skills, which qualify them to lead a group of educators who work
to apply the principles of education and raise a new generation and represent the elements

 142
DOI: https://doi.org/10.33193/eJHAS.7.2023.244

of sustainable development for any ambitious society, and work in educational
departments in the regions affiliated with the Ministry of Education (Radwan et al, 2019).
       Alalshaikh (2020) indicated that educational transformational leaders are the
educational leaders who are able to lead the workforce in the educational process, in an
educational institution, and direct it towards educational goals, and improve interaction
between workers in effective ways that achieve their cooperation and raise their level of
performance.
       The researcher defines the educational transformational leaders in this current
study as the leaders who can employ the development processes in the university by
adopting the transformational leadership mechanisms at the University of Hail.

Methodology
        The survey methodology was used for the investigation. This strategy relies on
observing reality and precisely characterizing the phenomenon to be examined by
gathering, arranging, and categorizing information because it is pertinent to the topic and
the current study's objectives.
Sample
       All (48) of the University of Hail's educational administrators made up the study's
population, and the Krejcie & Morgan tables were used to determine the size of the study
sample.
Instrument
        The researcher employed the questionnaire as an instrument to gather data from
the study participants to determine, through an applied study on the University of Hail,
the role of transformational educational leadership in growing the Saudi university
system. Accordingly, the study included three dimensions of transformational leadership
represented in (ideal influence, inspirational motivation, and empowerment). The final
version of the study instrument had (21) items, where the five-point Likert scale (strongly
agree, agree, neutral, disagree, strongly disagree) was chosen. This was done after the
study instrument was arbitrated by a group of arbitrators, and their observations were
taken into consideration.
Validity
        A pilot sample of (17) academic leaders at the University of Hail received the
questionnaire to check the questionnaire's internal consistency. Their answers were
transcribed into (SPSS 20). Then, using the degrees of significance for the values of
coefficients, the correlation coefficients between the overall scores among all dimensions
of the study were determined as illustrated bellow:

                       Table (1) Pearson Coefficients of Correlation
                       Correlation Value              Dimensions
                           **5849.0                 Ideal Influence
 143
DOI: https://doi.org/10.33193/eJHAS.7.2023.244

                                  **584000              Inspirational Motivation
                                  **5849.0                   Empowerment

               Table No. 1 clearly shows that the correlation coefficients of the study's
      dimensions tool related to the reality of transformational educational leadership at the
      University of Hail were high and ranged between (0.9485) and (0.9682), and they are
      statistically significant at the level of significance (0.01). This indicates that all these
      domains genuinely enjoy internal consistency.
      Reliability
            The following table demonstrates that the researcher used the Cronbach's Alpha
      method for the study's dimensions to assess the reliability of the questionnaire. This
      method involves figuring out how closely related items are to one another.
                                      Table (2) Cronbach's Alpha
                           Cronbach's Alpa      No. of items    Dimensions
                                58.4                  7       Ideal Influence
                                                               Inspirational
                                5840                  7
                                                                Motivation
                                584.                  7       Empowerment
                                5844                 02            Total

      The overall reliability coefficient for the dimensions, which can be shown in Table No. 2,
      was (0.99), which is high and shows has the high level of the questionnaire’s
      dependability that can be trusted in the study's field application.


      Results and Discussion

      Q1: How does ideal influence relate to the role of transformational educational leadership
      in the growth of the University of Hail?
      The sample responses on the ideal influence dimension were analyzed to determine their
      arithmetic means and standard deviations in order to provide an answer for this question.

                                          Table (3) Ideal Influence
                                                                               Standard
No.                               Items                               Means              Degree Rank
                                                                              Deviations
        The transformational educational leader understands the
 0                                                                    9854         2855   High       2
        latent needs of the administrative staff in the university
        The transformational educational leader is concerned with
 0      the outcomes of decisions affecting the values of work at     9857         5849   High       0
        the university.
 9      The transformational educational leader possesses             9852         5840   High       0
       144
      DOI: https://doi.org/10.33193/eJHAS.7.2023.244

        leadership skills in preparing university plans.
        The transformational educational leader transcends his or
 9      her personal interests with the goal of achieving the general    084.      5842     High      9
        interest of the university.
        The transformational educational leader acts in a manner
 2      that commands the respect and appreciation of the                0845      2820     High      0
        administrative staff at the university.
        The transformational educational leader demonstrates a
 0      sense of self-confidence in front of the administrative staff    0879      2850     High      9
        in the university
        The transformational leader enhances work productivity in
 7                                                                       0894      2829     High      7
        the university system.
                           Weighted Mean                                 0845      5897     High

               Table No. (3) shows the reality of the responses of educational leaders at the
      University of Hail in relation to the ideal influence dimension. It was found that the
      general mean was (3.90), with a standard deviation of (0.67), and their agreement was
      generally very high. This is because the educational transformational leaders act in a
      respectful manner with the administrative staff at the university through their possession
      of interaction and communication skills. At the university, they possess leadership skills
      in preparing university plans, and they prefer the public interest of the university over any
      other consideration.
      Q2: How does inspirational motivation relate to the role of transformational educational
      leadership in the growth of the University of Hail?
      The sample responses on the inspirational motivation dimension were analyzed to
      determine their arithmetic means and standard deviations in order to provide an answer
      for this question.

                                     Table (4) Inspirational Motivation
                                                                                  Standard
No.                                 Items                                Means              Degree Rank
                                                                                 Deviations
        The transformational educational leader participates in
 9                                                                       9854      5847     High      2
        building the vision and mission of the university.
        A transformational educational leader works passionately
 0      about the important issues that need to be accomplished in       985.      58.7     High      0
        the university
        A transformational educational leader is optimistic about
 7                                                                       9859      58.9     High      0
        the desired future of the university in fulfilling its mission
        The transformational educational leader enhances the
 2      administrative staff's sense of the university's goals and       9859      5849     High      9
        objectives.

       145
      DOI: https://doi.org/10.33193/eJHAS.7.2023.244

        A transformational educational leader is committed to the
 0                                                                     08.9      2850     High       0
        university's goals and vision for the future.
        The transformational educational leader strives to achieve
 9                                                                     08.0      5840     High       9
        the goals set according to well-defined plans and strategies
        A transformational educational leader is concerned with
 0                                                                     08.2      5849     High       7
        the success of the university's mission and goals.
                          Weighted Mean                                0847      58.5     High

              Table No. (4) descriptively shows the reality of the responses of the educational
      leaders at the University of Hail in relation to inspirational motivation, as it was found
      that the general mean was (3.97), with a standard deviation of the dimension (0.80), and
      their agreement was generally very high. This result is due to the fact that the educational
      leaders at the University of Hail participate in building the vision and mission of the
      university, especially with regard to the important issues that must be accomplished. In
      addition, educational leaders enhance the sense of the university's goals, objectives, and
      future vision in order to achieve the goals set according to well-defined plans and
      strategies.
      Q3: How does empowerment relate to the role of transformational educational leadership
      in the growth of the University of Hail?
      The sample responses on the empowerment dimension were analyzed to determine their
      arithmetic means and standard deviations to provide an answer for this question.



                                           Table (5) Empowerment
                                                                                Standard
No.                                Items                               Means              Degree Rank
                                                                               Deviations
        The transformational educational leader is concerned with
 0      empowering and developing human competencies at the            08.4      5840     High       2
        university
        The transformational educational leader focuses in his
 7      empowerment programs on developing the attitudes of the        08.9      2854     High       0
        administrative staff at the university
        The transformational educational leader encourages
 9      initiatives expressing new cultural values in all university   08.5      2850     High       0
        events
        The transformational educational leader works to provide
 9      the administrative staff with the necessary skills to carry    087.      2859     High       9
        out the development process in the university.
        The transformational educational leader provides a model
 2                                                                     0879      2859     High       0
        for teamwork and team collaboration within the university

       146
      DOI: https://doi.org/10.33193/eJHAS.7.2023.244

      system.
      The transformational educational leader is keen to follow
      up on administrative developments by following up on
0                                                                   0879   2829    High         9
      conferences and workshops with the aim of improving the
      university system.
      A transformational educational leader gives university
      workers broader authority to exercise oversight, take
0                                                                   0870   2822    High         7
      responsibility, and use their abilities by encouraging them
      to make decisions.
                        Weighted Mean                               0874   58.4    High

           Table No. (5) descriptively shows the reality of the responses of the educational
    leaders at the University of Hail in relation to empowerment, as it was found that the
    general mean was (3.79), with a standard deviation of the dimension (0.89), and their
    agreement was generally to a large degree. This is because the educational leaders at the
    University of Hail pay attention to the importance of employing transformational
    leadership and focus on empowering and developing human competencies in the
    university. They are also working to achieve this through team spirit and collective
    cooperation and keenness to follow up on administrative developments by following up
    on conferences and workshops with the aim of improving the university system.

    Summary of the statistical analysis results
       1. The University of Hail places a high value on educational transformative
          leadership, as seen by the ideal influence dimension's arithmetic mean of 3.90 and
          standard deviation of 0.67.
       2. The University of Hail places a high value on educational transformative
          leadership, as seen by the inspirational motivation dimension's arithmetic mean of
          3.97 and standard deviation of 0.80.
       3. The University of Hail places a high value on educational transformative
          leadership, as seen by the inspirational motivation dimension's arithmetic mean of
          3.79 and standard deviation of 0.89.

    Recommendations
       1. Raising administrative awareness inside the institution by creating a number of
          administrative and organizational frameworks that guarantee the successful
          implementation of the transformational leadership.
       2. Increasing the awareness of educational leaders at the university of the
          importance of practicing transformational leadership, by holding seminars and
          lectures explaining the importance of its practice and its importance in developing
          educational work within the university.

     147
    DOI: https://doi.org/10.33193/eJHAS.7.2023.244

   3. Giving the university an opportunity to self-manage itself by granting it more
      powers with the aim of reform through the participation of all individuals in this
      reform.
   4. The need for a transformational leadership in the university with experience and
      awareness of the components, demands and capabilities of the academic and
      administrative staff.
   5. Working on preparing training programs that contribute to increasing the degree
      of leaders' practice of transformational leadership.
   6. Holding specialized training courses to prepare educational leaders and train them
      on modern administrative methods and university leadership in light of the
      successive technical developments.

References
   1. Alalshaikh, S. A. (2017). Leadership styles in Saudi Arabian universities:
      Comparison based on educational background [Doctoral dissertation].
      Pepperdine University.
   2. Alessa, G. (2021). The dimensions of transformational leadership and its
      organizational effects in public universities in Saudi Arabia: A systematic review
      article. Frontiers in psychology, 12, 682092.
   3. Alghamdi, A. M. (2020). Transforming into Entrepreneurial Universities: EU-
      OECD as a Framework for Saudi Universities. Journal of Educational Leadership
      and Policy Studies, 4(1), n1.
   4. Alquhaiz, K. (2020). Academic Leadership Styles and Faculty Members’ Job
      Satisfaction at the King Saud University [Doctoral dissertation]. Concordia
      University Chicago.
   5. Baba, M. M. (2019). Transformational approach to higher educational
      leadership. International Journal on Leadership, 7(1), 22-34.
   6. Bin Bakr, M., & Alfayez, A. (2022). Transformational leadership and the
      psychological empowerment of female leaders in Saudi higher education: an
      empirical study. Higher Education Research & Development, 41(6), 1805-1820.
   7. Bunaiyan, W. A. (2019). Preparing the Saudi educational system to serve the
      2030 vision: a comparative analysis study [Doctoral dissertation]. University of
      Denver.
   8. Eroje, E. I., Appiah, E. K., Eroje, A. B. I., Zakirulla, M., Kunjappu, J. J., &
      AlShahrani, I. (2021). The relationship between transformational leadership and
      job satisfaction in selected colleges at King Khalid University. Journal of
      Research in Medical and Dental Science, 9 (2), 341-353.
   9. Grunefeld, H. (2020). Developing expertise in leadership for educational change
      in research-intensive universities [Doctoral dissertation]. Utrecht University.

 148
DOI: https://doi.org/10.33193/eJHAS.7.2023.244

   10. Grunefeld, H., Prins, F., Tartwijk, J. V., van der Vaart, R., Loads, D., Turner, J.,
       ... & Wubbels, T. (2017). Faculty development for educational leadership. (eds)
       Strengthening Teaching and Learning in Research Universities. Palgrave Macmillan,
       Cham. https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-319-56499-9_4.
   11. Institute of Public Administration. (2019). Administrative Development
       Conference in the Light of the Kingdom’s Vision 2030. https://2u.pw/9SI3Z.
   12. Matos, L., & Kasztelnik, K. (2021). Transformational Educational Leadership and
       the Innovative Strategies Engaging Online Faculty for the Excellent Teaching
       Performance in the United States. Business Ethics and Leadership 5(1),6-21.
   13. Nicdao, R. C. (2019). Transformational leadership and its beneficial influence on
       state universities. Management Research and Practice, 11(4), 53-62.
   14. Radwan, O., Razak, A. Z. A., & Ghavifekr, S. (2019). The mediating effect of
       organizational culture on academic leadership skills and students’skill-based
       learning outcomes in Saudi higher education. Malaysian Online Journal of
       Educational Management (Mojem), 8(1), 39-57.
   15. Salim, A., & Rajput, N. A. R. (2021). The relationship between transformational
       leadership, prosocial behavioral intentions, and organizational performance. The
       Journal of Asian Finance.Economics and Business, 8(1), 487-493.




 149
DOI: https://doi.org/10.33193/eJHAS.7.2023.244