26th International Scientific Conference
                                            Strategic Management and Decision Support Systems
                                            in Strategic Management



                                            21st May, 2021, Subotica, Republic of Serbia




Dinko Jukić, Ph.D.
Trade and Commercial School “Davor Milas”
Osijek, Croatia
dinkojukic.phd@gmail.com


THE IMPORTANCE OF ORGANIZATIONAL CULTURE IN SCHOOL
                   MANAGEMENT

Abstract: The paper discusses and analyses the importance of the influence of organizational culture in school
management. The construct of organizational culture is viewed from an interdisciplinary approach: pedagogy,
psychology, and economics. School culture is the way employees work, and the school climate represent perception
and encompasses all aspect of the school environment. The role of school culture and climate is very important for
building the reputation of the school, identity, and image of the organization. In this paper, the construct of school
culture and climate are analysed in accordance with corporate marketing, education, and brand theory. The role of
employees in school management creates a corporate brand and it is crucial in creating relationship with employees,
customers and management. The paper concludes that employees are the most important strategic resource of any
organization and that the right relationship with employees creates more motivated employees, better service,
corporate brand and creates a favourable school climate.

Keywords: brand, culture, employee, image, school management



1. INTRODUCTION
The phenomenon of organizational culture allows management to influence it and thus increase the efficiency of the
corporation. Organizational culture is a factor that contributes to the progress of any corporation. The importance of
organizational culture in contemporary management has been much debated (Deshpande & Webster, 1989, p. 4; Slater
et al, 2001, p. 229; Song, Kim & Kolb, 2009, p. 162) and there are numerous definitions of organizational culture.
Common to all definitions of organizational culture refers to a set of assumptions, customs, and beliefs of employees of
an organization and their pattern of behaviour. Organizational culture is a central concept around which corporate
marketing is created in non-profit organizations. It is a relatively permanent and specific system of employee behaviour.
However, in organizational culture, very often the emphasis is placed on the organization itself and the analysis of the
employee's work. From the aspect of non-profit marketing (Andreasen & Kotler, 2008, p. 42-51) and educational
management (Bush, 2003, p.37-38), organizational culture represents the starting point of strategic employee analysis.
The paper asks questions about the importance of employees, culture and creating identity in school management. The
economic aspects of management, the psychological constructs of employee identity and their reflection on the quality
of service are examined, and finally, the pedagogical aspects of the impact of school culture on employees are explored.
Why is marketing important in school management? Can employees influence the quality of service in school
management? What makes elements of the school culture? How relevant are employees in creating an organizational
culture? What makes a desirable organizational culture in school management? Is the identity of the employee identical
to the identity of the school? What makes the identity of the organization? What makes the identity of a school
employee? How does school culture affect the functioning of the organization and school management? Can the culture
and climate of an organization change? Does the employee make a school brand? These are questions simple to ask, but

not so simple to answer. Therefore, the paper discusses two key issues: why school culture is important and why
teachers are important in school management.
The topic of this paper is a review and analysis of school culture, school climate, employees and their importance in
school management and corporate marketing. However, the aim of the paper is not to answer questions about the
importance of school culture and employees, but to offer a framework for further interdisciplinary analysis and
discussion. There is no simple answer because the question of school culture depends on the context of the research.
The answers will be different from a psychological, pedagogical, anthropological or economic aspect. The paper
consists of two parts. The first part discusses organizational culture and its impact on the strategic development of the
school. The impact of school culture and school management is analysed. The second part analyses the school climate
and employee identity. Employees are presented as the most important factor in school management because they are
key for two reasons: they create school culture and climate, but at the same time promote the identity of the
organization and thus create the image of the school. The paper connects the influence of organizational culture,
climate, and employees with corporate marketing, with the help of which we present and analyse corporate identity.

2. ORGANIZATIONAL CULTURE AND SCHOOL MANAGEMENT
Organizational culture is a key concept in contemporary management. The very notion of culture alludes to a complex,
multidimensional, and holistic phenomenon. The phenomenon of organizational culture is not new in management, but
the approach to understanding the factors that affect the success of the corporation, employees and service quality is
becoming relevant, especially in the field of school management. Some authors (Parker, 2000, p. 187-189) hold that
organizational cultures reflect a long-standing tension between the cultural and structural versions of what organizations
are. Organizational culture can also be understood as a metaphor of the corporation (Alvesson, 2002, p. 38) in which a
place is opened for the analysis of the corporate image.
Organizational culture occupies a central place in contemporary management (Huczynski & Buchanan, 2007, p. 623)
for several reasons: a) the interdependence of organizational performance and employee behaviour, b) a unique and
strong culture that can provide a competitive advantage and c) management that can consciously manage culture to
achieve organizational goals. The organizational culture itself is permeated in all aspects of school management. It
affects the type of corporation structure, the way it is organized, the type of power, the way it is decentralized, the way
it controls, the strategy of the organization, human resource management, and resource allocation.
School culture plays an important role in the development of an organization. Even though managers pay attention to
the formal, organizational, and structural changes of a non-profit organization, school culture as an "informal"
dimension is extremely important. The processes that each school goes through in search of effectiveness presents the
organization as a cultural and educational institution. Understanding organizational culture is a vital part of improving
school quality (Stoll & Fink, 1996, p. 116). Table 1. shows specific characteristics of school culture.

Table 1. Specific functions of school culture
  Area                                              Impact
  School Performance                                Employees
  Instrument of realization                         School management
  Control system                                    Principal
  Psychological space                               Corporate brand
  Identity of the school                            Identity of the employee
  Employee motivation                               Principal
  Employee identity                                 Organizational culture
Source: author

As can be seen from Table 1, the specific functions of school culture can be observed through the areas in which they
occur and through the impact on the organization. It is interesting that the identity of employees is at the same time an
area that is related to school culture, but also has an impact on organizational culture. This means that the connection
between behaviour and culture is two-way, i.e., that it appears as a cause, but also as a consequence. The overall
efficiency of a school influences the decisions and behaviour of management and the entire corporation. School culture
is an instrument for implementing the strategy. The control system is a specificity of organizational culture and
represents the strongest and largest model of control (Mullins, 2006, p. 474) implemented by the principal in school
management. A specific distinctive, psychological space ensures the integrity and determines the identity of the
organization, but also opens the way to the development of the school's corporate brand (Jukić, 2017, p. 15). The school
identity also realizes the identity of the employee. It is also a very complex construct because the identity of the teacher
is closely linked to school culture (Flores & Day, 2006, p. 230) and school identity. The dimensions of the school, in the
context of cultural management and the influence on the creation of needs (Jukić, 2019, p. 16), are also related to the
identity of the corporation, but also to the identity of the employee. Ultimately, employee motivation is a specific area
of organizational culture because it acts as a catalyst and initiates employee activity.


                                                                                                                         35

School culture is difficult to define because it encompasses: the value of the organization, employee behaviour, rituals,
norms, common attitudes, philosophy, and overall perception of the organization. However, such attitudes and beliefs
are subconscious (Schein, 1985, p. 6), which means that organizational culture represents the way employees work. In
essence, school culture is intertwined with employees, organization, and school identity. Therefore, metaphors,
symbols, rituals, customs, and myths create school culture. From such an aspect, the only thing that is important is to
understand the importance of school culture and to know how to manage it (Schein, 1985, p. 2). From a managerial
perspective, the most important function of organizational culture stems from raising individual and organizational
performance. Cultural values can motivate employees and direct their behaviour toward common goals.
There is a two-way connection between school management and organizational culture. Managers are an important and
decisive factor in the development of a specific school culture. But organizational culture also influences management
through the performance of all other functions. From this point of view, school culture is the basis of strategic school
management because through it, it allows all attention to be focused on the key factors of school success as a non-profit
organization. Organizational culture affects management by increasing its authority and power because it identifies the
principal with the school and motivates teachers to achieve school goals. This is confirmed by managerial decisions and
functions (Robbins & Coulter, 2005, p. 59), i.e., planning, organizing, leading, and controlling.
Finally, school culture can be viewed as a teacher workplace environment that is formulated from interactions with
other employees. Does this mean that the school culture is determined by the continuous negotiation of values and rules
between employees? The complexity of school culture is indicated by many elements, as well as the fact that there are
differences from organization to organization. The intensity of the presence of organizational culture dimensions
(Robbins & Coulter, 2005, p. 52) can be rated from low to high. However, in school management, evaluating school
culture is very ungrateful. Schools may emphasize an innovative approach to teaching or service quality, some seek to
maintain a stable reputation by avoiding change or risk, some may foster a team approach, promote collaboration with
other cultural institutions, and some may be employee-oriented and considered central to school culture.
That is why the school culture is a group of elements of visibility. The model of culture (Schein, 1985, p. 14)
encompasses three cognitive levels that differ in their visibility and accessibility: a) external manifestations of culture,
b) values of school culture, and c) fundamental assumptions of school culture. Table 2 shows the levels of school
culture.

Table 2. Levels of school culture
  Cognitive level             School culture
   Events                        School products (trophies, commendations, library)
   Values                        Teacher's relationship (rituals, myths, ceremonies)
   Assumptions                   Core value (norms, values, identity)
Source: author

The first level of school culture constitutes the external manifestations of culture and refers to the visible “products”
that the school has. Specifically, these are: offices, equipment, furniture, symbols, and the way employees communicate
with each other. These are "products" that convey the message of school culture and at the same time, the most
accessible form of school culture. The notion of product should be understood here conditionally because schools
provide service, and through their tangible elements they manifest products. Of course, school products then
communicate on an integrated marketing communication, on symbols, metaphors, and the way they interact with each
other. The second level, which is less visible, makes values that create a broad framework of employee behaviour that
reveals the preferences of certain solutions and attitudes within the school. These values can be implicit or explicit. And
finally, the third level represents the deepest, fundamental assumption of school culture. These are unwritten rules,
norms, and values that employees are usually not aware of, but respect and accept as given values of the school itself.
These invisible, deeply hidden values represent the paradigms of school management because they act as a filter that
influences the way employees observe and behave. Simply put, it is the core of school culture and affects all perceptions
of employees, stakeholders, and society.
Having in mind the components of school culture and its causal relationship to the teacher's job satisfaction, as well as
to school efficiency, school culture, simplified, can be viewed as a positive and negative culture. A positive
environment reflects employee participation in joint activities, appreciation, sharing of responsibilities, and a shared
vision of the school. We can present a negative environment as an unhealthy climate, non-acceptance of new methods
of work, tendency to criticize, incompetence and avoidance of responsibility. In the following, we present school
culture according to Peterson and Costner components (2006, p. 250), and they are visible in Table 3.

Table 3. Components of school culture
         Frames                 Products                                Expressions               Activity
   Norms (dress code,       Trophies (school competitions)     Stories (remembrance of   Rites (school routines)
   collegiality)                                               school success)

                                                                                                                         36

   Values (student             Commendations (research       Myths (idealization of      Rituals (marking specific
   achievement, expertise)     achievements)                 school success)             events)

   Certificates (success at    Library (services)            Alumni (contact)            Ceremonies (events)
   graduation, final theses)

Source: Adapted according to Peterson & Costner, 2006, p. 250

According to them, school culture consists of frameworks, products, expressions, and activities. The frameworks
encompass the norms and beliefs of the school and are integrated into the values of the school itself. From a symbolic
point of view, the products represent the value of the school. This specifically means that the school uses a variety of
artefacts in the form of trophies, awards, medals, and even a library to show the school culture. This is a classic hybrid
view of service marketing in which the intangibility of school service is displayed through elements of school culture.
And finally, two components remain: expressions and activities. The terms encompass school beliefs that are deeply
interwoven with tradition and school success stories. This is especially evident in the realization of school ceremonies
when the myth of the school and positive cases that serve as employee motivation are considered. Finally, there are
activities that represent school rituals. Rituals can be understood as a school routine that accompanies appropriate
ceremonies. Also, all forms of ceremonies, performances and events are part of school culture.
Why is corporate marketing important in school management? School management starts from two key elements: the
manager and the employee. The school principal represents a manager who decides, leads, and organizes everything
related to the economics of education, such as funding, administrative work, enforcement of pedagogical standards,
compliance with the law, employee education, service delivery and impact on school development in the broadest sense.
As can be seen, employees are a key element in corporate marketing, especially in creating positive impressions
towards the services provided, the identity of the organization and the overall image. Employees are the main service
providers and the first, initial stage of the organization. They represent, symbolize, and promote school, service, and
ultimately, education.
School culture, once formed, is “petrified” (Stoll & Fink, 1996, p. 119). In the broadest sense of the word, school
culture, once formed, becomes the production process of the school. However, school culture is also a paradoxical
phenomenon because, once created as a process, it is in constant change. This means that with the arrival of new
employees, it gradually changes, because employees change as well as opportunities in society. Thus, school culture is a
long process of producing the image of the organization. It is a process of evolution which, despite its peculiarities,
components and levels, represents a static and dynamic phenomenon.

3. SCHOOL CLIMATE AND EMPLOYEES
Organizational climate is a segment of organizational culture that includes forms of behaviour, communication, and
perception of employees. School culture is a property of the organization to which employees adapt. Organizational
culture in this context can be understood as the invisible consciousness of an organization projected through the school
climate. We understand the school climate as a way for an employee to perceive everything that happens at school. The
school climate plays a very significant role in shaping employee behaviour and influencing their attitudes about
knowledge management. Therefore, the importance of the school climate is twofold: on the one hand it encourages an
innovative atmosphere and thus becomes part of the internal processes of the organization, and on the other hand, by
creating employee identity, allows creating a school identity, i.e., creating a corporate brand.
School climate and school culture constitute an important segment of the psychosocial functioning of the school. The
school climate represents the totality of employee togetherness (Schneider et al, 2000, pp. 21-34) in their aspirations,
the sense of belonging to the teaching council, all the way to the motivational components. If, from the aspect of
affiliation, we look at the relationship between school culture and school climate, we look at school culture from a
sociological and anthropological aspect because it questions deeper teacher relationships, while school climate belongs
to the field of psychology because it represents its manifestation on individuals. It is interesting to note that the role of
school culture is closely related to the managerial skills of the school itself. Organizational culture has been shown to
affect employee performance which is reflected in their satisfaction and efficiency (Morris & Bloom, 2002, p. 71-83).
According to a study of the relationship between school culture by teacher satisfaction and school efficiency (Duan &
Du & Yu, 2018, p. 15-25), the results confirm the correlation between school culture, satisfaction, and efficiency.
Regression analysis confirms that teacher satisfaction plays a mediating role in the relationship between school culture
and school efficiency. School culture has been shown to form a collective relationship, ceremonies and events form an
integral part of school effectiveness (Duan & Du & Yu, 2018, p. 21).
Principals have an important part in building school culture as well as creating an organization’s identity. Their impact
strongly influences employee motivation and efficiency (Kington et al, 2006, p. 605). Also, principals who support their
employees build an environment for a favourable climate and culture. Employees who work in schools where they are
supported and encouraged by principals show positive attitudes toward teaching (Flores & Day, 2006, p. 230), but also
greater loyalty to the organization. However, to be able to talk about the identity of the school at all, we must first
briefly explain the identity of the teacher.
                                                                                                                          37

The identity of the teacher can be most simply presented as the teacher's sense of self-worth and reflection on those
values. The identity of the teacher is not a constant and stable phenomenon and, in addition to its characteristics,
depends on the work, life context and relationships with others. The key questions that arise in defining a teacher’s
identity are: who am I as a teacher and what kind of teacher do I want to be? The beliefs and values of the teacher
develop from his personal attitudes, experiences, social environment, and the environment in which he lives. Teacher
beliefs are acquired at an early age and they are deeply rooted. Korthagen (2004, p. 80) argues that professional identity
is made of unconscious needs, feelings, values, role models, previous experiences, and behaviours, which together
create a sense of identity.
Employees are in the constant dynamics of school events, and by interacting with the environment, they actively
participate in the process of shaping and self-shaping. However, the teacher's identity can be viewed from the
perspective of the employee, but also from the perspective of the stakeholders. Teachers define and realize their identity
through self-image, attitudes, relationships with other employees, school culture and the service provided. From the
perspective of stakeholders, we look at the teacher's identity from the perspective of service quality, behaviour, and
pedagogical competencies. Therefore, to better understand employee identity (Holland & Lachicotte, 2007, p. 123) in
school management, it is crucial to encompass the context of society, organization, and culture.
Learning to become an effective teacher is a long and complex process (Flores & Day, 2006, p. 219). The school
climate affects the emotional state of employees. Teachers feelings of vulnerability engendered when identity is
questioned by policy changes, inspectors or colleagues (Kelchtermans, 1996, p. 321). The shape and reshape teacher’s
identity study presented three influences (Flores & Day, 2006, p. 223): a) past experience, b) motivation and c) school
culture. It was confirmed that school culture and climate play an important role in creating the identity of the employee
and affect his quality of service and job satisfaction. Being a proper teacher implies the social recognition of both, one’s
technical skills and competencies and one’s moral integrity (Kelchtermans, 1996, p. 318).
Interestingly, most employees describe their first experience within school management as stressful (Flores & Day,
2006, p. 225), and the difficulties they cite are a bureaucratic burden and an overload of responsibilities. The impact of
the school climate plays a key role in employee reshaping. Consequently, self-knowledge is an important element in the
way employees perceive their role. The teacher's identity is not only created by the technical and emotional aspect of
teaching, but also as a result of fan interaction personal experience, school culture and school climate. The employee 's
identity can be observed through five categories (Kelchtermans, 1993, p. 449) which we show in Table 4.

Table 4. Teacher identity self
  The image of the employee        Impact on school management
  Self-image                       Employee image
  Self-esteem                      Quality of service provided
  Job-motivation                   Loyalty to the organization
  Task perception                  Satisfaction with the organization
  Future perception                Expectations from the organization
Source: Adapted according to Kelchtermans, 1993, p. 449-450

In this context, we understand the self-image as the perception of employees that manifests itself through their work. It
is a psychological construct that shows the employee's attitude towards work, but, from the aspect of the employee, also
his identification at work. Self-esteem represents the perception of the employee as a teacher (his quality), while job-
motivation represents the degree of loyalty to the organization. In other words, we can analyse self-esteem from the
aspect of school management and analysis of the service provided, i.e., the perception of quality. Of course, job
motivation in the context of brand management (Kapferer, 2008, p. 171-197) can also be interpreted as loyalty to the
organization. It is this loyalty to the organization that is outlined in satisfaction, expectation, sacrifice and motivation.
Task perception represents how teachers define their jobs. This means that satisfaction with the organization makes a
very similar construct to the brand attachment because it shows managers two key determinants: the degree of loyalty
and satisfaction. An employee does not have to be loyal to be satisfied and vice versa. An employee may be dissatisfied
with the job for various reasons such as salary, working conditions, but also loyal to the organization because he still
works and does not endanger the image. And finally, the future perspective makes the employee’s expectations. The
construct of his expectations is a turning point that separates motivation from satisfaction because expectations are a
consequence of the school climate. As can be seen, the employee's self in school management, but also in corporate
marketing, can serve as an analytical model.
From the above, we can present two key hypotheses of employee identity in school management: stability and
vulnerability. Stability at work depends on loyalty to the organization, satisfaction with the organization and
expectations from the organization. Vulnerability at work depends on the first two categories of employee identity
(Table 4), i.e., how satisfied the employee is with his reputation in the school, society, working conditions, service
provided and all stakeholders of the organization. Obviously, the architecture of employee identity is not a stable
construct (Day et al, 2006, p. 613). An analysis of the organization’s climate will show whether the school’s climate
needs to change or fit into the organization’s existing culture. According to Stacey (1993, p. 41-45) the nature of an
organization’s culture can be analysed through the power structure of the organization. Power comes from the
relationships that emerge over time between individuals and groups. The source of power is related to the form it takes.
                                                                                                                          38

Power in school management takes the form of authority because it is exercised hierarchically. From a pedagogical
point of view, power in school management should come from influence because the principal is the leader of the
school. After analysing the source and form of power in school culture, its dominant coalitions in the organization must
be identified. In school, these are employees because they work together and have a lot of influence, even though they
don’t have much authority. In other words, employees are potential allies in the school management coalition.
Since the psychosocial climate refers to the perception of specific sets of events, procedures, and rules of organization,
the role of the teacher’s identity is extremely important. But, as can be seen from Table 1, the functions of
organizational culture and climate are two-way, the role of teacher identity is correlated with the identity of the
organization. The teacher's image depends on the values and assumptions within the school (Table 2), as well as on the
teacher's identity (Table 4). This identity construct was created in interaction with other employees of culture, climate,
and management. And it is precisely this causality of employee identity and school identity that leads to a holistic way
of looking at school management.
The identity of an organization depends on employees, which is especially evident in non-profit organizations such as
schools. Employees stand out here because they are the most important segment and include the first contact with
service users. Employees in non-profit organizations, such as schools, find themselves in a conflict situation, torn
between the desire to provide quality services and their own perception of management. If there is a lack of
management support in building and strengthening the service climate, it will have a negative impact on teachers, and
ultimately on the service itself. It is obvious that managerial support is a precondition for teacher satisfaction and
motivation, and its absence cannot be hidden from users and directly affects the dissatisfaction of all stakeholders.
Since the culture of the organization is deeply rooted in the employee's perception, it is necessary to develop brand
identity on cultural reputation, on the coherence between the brand of promise and the performance that employees
provide (Jukić, 2018, p. 39). Corporate identity is important for several reasons: it enables the creation of a corporate
brand and image, but also because of the strategic dimension of brand positioning in the minds of consumers. The
notion of corporate identity can be most simply presented as the brand characteristics that the organization represents.
Corporate identity is the foundation for building the corporate image of a school. Given that services in the school are
characterized by indivisibility, the presence of users at the place of service, a high level of perceived risk and several
other activities that affect the amount of stress among teachers, these services need a management concept based on
management support. School management must pay attention to employee satisfaction and motivation, providing
support, clear communication, and proper delegation of responsibilities. In this way, management can create a
favourable work climate and the overall environment. Corporate identity is a multidimensional construct because it
encompasses different aspects of the organization, such as: strategy, corporate image, corporate culture, and corporate
personality of the brand, all of which interact together.
Let’s show the behaviour of principals and teachers from the aspect of school management and climate. The importance
of employees in school management is unquestionable. Teachers are the most important resource of the school. Their
role, in addition to educational and social, stems from the creation of a cultural community. Providing the service
creates positive impressions on users and all stakeholders. Satisfied customers, stakeholders, employees thus promote
their organization. As a result, the school becomes recognizable by teachers rather than by equipment, computers, or
other technical aids. Teachers are the most important component of school management.
Also, such an understanding of school management creates the image of a corporation. However, image as a perceptual
creation (Keller et al, 2008, p. 42-56) depends on identity. Corporate identity is created by employees. If their identity is
positive, then it will be reflected in positive images in the consumer. Employees build a corporate identity through their
work, quality of service, CRM, and organizational culture. According to Balmer, this identity can be represented by the
acronym AC2ID Test (Table 5). The distinctions between identities presented by the AC2ID Test model are designed to
enable strategic leadership and management of the corporate brand and at the same time as a diagnostic of planning and
analysing existing segments of identity.

Table 5. AC2ID Test in School Management
  Identity                Impact on school management                  Influence on the teacher
  Actual                  School structure                             Employee self-image
  Communicated            School competitions                          Service quality
  Conceived               School image                                 Employee reputation
  Ideal                   School culture                               Employee motivation
  Desired                 School personality                           Employee loyalty
Source: author

As can be seen from Table 5, the dissonance between corporate identity leads to potential risk. If actual identity reflects
internal stakeholders, the principal’s style, and the structure of the school, it manifests itself in employees and self-
image. It can also affect the communicated identity as it is reflected in the quality of the service which, consequently,
calls into question competition with other schools which, in line with corporate marketing, we view as an advertising
model. Of course, the image of the school is projected on the reputation of the employees and vice versa. Therefore, the
employee's relationship within the collective depends on school management, but also on the development of
organizational culture. The AC2ID Test model serves as a strategic mechanism by which different identities within a
                                                                                                                          39

corporation can be detected. However, for management to be successful, a synergy between employees, management,
and school culture is needed.

4. CONCLUSON
Employees are the most important resource of any non-profit organization, especially when it comes to school
management. School is, conditionally speaking, a living organism. The same methods of education are not always
effective, just as the same approaches to employee motivation are not effective. Teachers depend on the time-of-service
delivery and their service is a performance that depends on several factors, such as school culture, climate, identity, and
reputation. Employee satisfaction, teacher identity, society perception and organizational culture are important elements
of successful school management. The phenomenon of organizational culture enables management to influence, form
and lead it towards the goals of the organization. The school as a non-profit organization is a specific social
environment in which there is an integration of various internal and external experiences. To apply corporate marketing,
two changes are needed: developing employee identities and developing a school culture.
Employee identity is a psychological construct that in the context of school management can be viewed as the
employee's attitude towards work. This is, with corporate marketing, the starting point for building a corporation’s
reputation. A satisfied employee increases loyalty, quality of service and the image of the school. We can conclude that
the identity of employees is realized in correlation with the school culture and climate. Principle’s that support their
employees create a positive climate. Thus, a satisfied employee projects satisfaction onto the school’s identity, and
positive associations create the school’s image. In other words, the teacher's image is correlated with school culture.
Culture provides the employee with an environment in which he fulfils his role, and a climate of identification with the
school.
To build a corporate brand, school management can take on corporate marketing strategies and view employees as
bearers of school image, reputation, and identity. If he looks at them that way, then they synergistically create a positive
school culture and climate. On the other hand, if school management starts from restrictive and direct measures, the
probability of a non-engaged and frustrated employee increases. Management in other organizations may not always
apply to non-profits, such as schools. School service must be viewed in the context of the moment, like a theatrical
performance. The provision of such a service depends on psycho-social factors and their service depends on the
moment. It is unrepeatable and never the same. Therefore, after the service is provided, the employee must have a
positive environment because it determines him, defines him and ultimately, makes him what he is.

REFERENCES
Andreasen, A. R. & Kotler, P. (2008). Strategic Marketing for Non-Profit Organizations. London: Pearson, Prentice Hall
Alvesson, M. (2002). Understanding Organizational Culture. London: Sage
Balmer, J. M. (2001a). Corporate identity, corporate branding and corporate marketing, seeing through the fog.
   European Journal of Marketing, 35 (3/4), 248-291.
Balmer, J. M. T. (2001b). The three virtues and seven deadly sins of corporate brand management,
Journal of General Management, 27 (1), 1-17.
Balmer, J. M., & Gray, E. R. (2003). Corporate brands: what are they? What of them? European Journal of Marketing, 37
   (7-8), 972-997.
Bolam, R. (1999). Educational Administration, Leadership and Management: Towards a Research Agenda. In Bush, T. &
   Bell, L. & Bolam, R. & Glatter, R. Ribbins, P. (Eds), Educational Management: Redefining Theory, Policy, and
   Practice (pp. 193-205). London: Sage
Bush, T. & Bell, L. & Bolam, R. & Glatter, R. Ribbins, P. (1999). Educational Management: Redefining Theory, Policy
   and Practice. London: Sage
Bush T 2003. Theories of Educational Management. London: Sage.
Bush, T. (2007). Educational leadership and management: theory, policy, and practice. South African Journal of
   Education, 27 (3), 391-406
Day, C. Kington, A. Stobart, G. & Sammons, P. (2006). The personal and professional selves of teachers: stable and
   unstable identities. British Educational Research Journal, 32(4), 601-616
Deshpande, R., & Webster, F. (1989). Organizational culture and marketing: Defining the research agenda. Journal of
   Marketing, 53(1), 3–15.
Deshpande, R., Farley, J., & Webster, F. (1993). Corporate culture, customer orientation, and innovativeness in
   Japanese firms: A quadrat analysis. Journal of Marketing, 57(1), 23–37.


                                                                                                                         40

Deshpande, R., & Farley, J. (2004). Organizational culture, market orientation, innovativeness, and firm performance: An
    international research odyssey. International Journal of Research in Marketing, 21 (1), 3–22.
Duan, X. J., Du, X. Y. & Yu, K. (2018). School Culture and School Effectiveness: The Mediating Effect of Teachers’ Job
    Satisfaction. International Journal of Learning, Teaching and Educational Research, 17 (5), 15-25,
Flores, M. A., & Day, C. (2006). Contexts which shape and reshape new teachers’ identities: A multi-perspective
    study. Teaching and teacher education, 22(2), 219-232.
Holland, D., & Lachicotte, W. (2007). Vygotsky, Mead, and the new sociocultural studies of identity. In Daniels, H. &
    Cole, M. & Wertsch, J. (Eds)The Cambridge Companion to Vygotsky (101-135). Cambridge: Cambridge University
    Press
Huczynski, A. A. & Buchanan, D. A. (2007). Organizational Behaviour. Harlow: Prentice Hall Financial Time
Jukić, D. (2017). The Importance of Corporate Branding in School Management, International Journal of Strategic
    Management and Decision Support Systems in Strategic Management, 22 (4), 11-18
Jukić, D. (2018). Ekvilibrij korporativne marke: analiza identiteta, Oeconomica Jadertina, 8 (2), 34-47
Jukić, D. (2019). Strategic Analysis of Corporate Marketing in Culture Management, International Journal of Strategic
    Management and Decision Support Systems in Strategic Management, 24 (1), 10-18
Kapferer, J. (2008). The New Strategic Brand Management. London: Kogan Page
Kelchtermans, G. (1993). Getting the story, understanding the lives: from career stories to teachers’ professional
    development, Teaching and Teacher Education, 9 (5/6), 443-456.
Kelchtermans, G. (1996). Teacher vulnerability: Understanding its moral and political roots. Cambridge Journal of
    Education, 26 (3), 307-324.
Keller, K. L. & Aperia, T. & Georgson, M. (2008). Strategic Brand Management. London: Pearson
Korthagen, Fred A. J. (2004), In search of the essence of a good teacher: towards a more holistic approach in teacher
    education, Teaching and Teacher Education, 20, 77–97
Morris, A. & Bloom, J. R. (2002). Contextual factors affecting job satisfaction and organizational commitment in
    community mental health centres undergoing system changes in the financing of care. Mental Health Services
    Research, 4(2), 71-83
Mullins, L. J. (2006). Essentials of Organizational Behaviour. Harlow: Prentice Hall Financial Time
Parker, M. (2000). Organizational Culture and Identity. London: Sage
Peterson, K. D. & Costner, S. (2006). Encyclopedia of Educational Leadership and Administration. In English, F. W. (ed),
    Encyclopedia of Educational Leadership and Administration (249-50). London: Sage
Robbins, S. P. & Coulter, M. (2005). Management. New Jersey: Upper Saddle River, Pearson Prentice Hall
Slater, S.F., Olson, E.M. & Finnegan, C. (2011). Business strategy, marketing organization culture, and
    performance. Mark Lett 22, 227–242
Schein, E. H. (1985). Organizational Culture and Leadership. San Francisco: Jossey-Bass
Song J.H, Kim H.M., Kolb J.A. (2009), The effect of learning organization culture on the relationship between
    interpersonal trust and organizational commitment, Human Resource Development Quarterly, 20 (2),147-167.
Stacey, D. R. (1993), Strategic Management and Organizational Dynamics. Harlow: Prentice Hall Financial Time
Stoll, L., & Fink, D. (1996). Changing our schools: Linking school effectiveness and school improvement: Open
    University Press
Wallace, M. & Weindling, D. (1999). Overview of a Group of Research Project with Relevance to School Management. In
    Bush, T. & Bell, L. & Bolam, R. & Glatter, R. Ribbins, P. (Eds). Educational Management: Redefining Theory, Policy
    and Practice, (206-218). London: Paul Chapman Publishing




                                                                                                                     41