DiA: Jurnal Administrasi Publik, 2023 Juni Vol. 21 No. 1, e-ISSN: 2615-7268



  ANALYSIS OF SCHOOL MANAGEMENT IN REALIZING QUALITY
                 CULTURE IN MADIUN CITY

                                    Lismawati
                      Fakultas Ilmu Sosial dan Ilmu Politik,
                      Universitas 17 Agustus 1945 Surabaya,
                             lismaninda@gmail.com;

                                  Rudi handoko
                      Fakultas Ilmu Sosial dan Ilmu Politik,
                      Universitas 17 Agustus 1945 Surabaya,
                               rudi@untag-sby.ac.id

                              Rachmawati Novaria
                       Fakultas Ilmu Sosial dan Ilmu Politik,
                          Universitas 17 Agustus 1945,
                              nova@untag-sby.ac.id

                                   ABSTRACT

The implementation of the school management system has a strategic role in
supporting the implementation of public services at the education unit level. The
role and function of supervision are needed to monitor, foster, assess, and provide
professional guidance to principals, teachers, and education personnel in their target
schools. The phenomenon in the field shows a gap in the quality standards of
education set by the government and its implementation. No school has met the
SNP of the 71 primary schools in Madiun City. This research was conducted
because elementary schools in Madiun City do not yet have a quality culture
according to the standards set by the government. This study aims to: a. Describe
and analyze school management in realizing a quality culture. b. Analyze the factors
inhibiting and supporting school management in realizing a quality culture. c.
Develop a management model that can encourage a quality culture. The study was
conducted qualitatively. The results of the study are as follows; a. The management
of elementary schools in Madiun City has met the criteria for quality culture, but at
the implementation level, it is not optimal. It can be seen that school management
is not optimal, so the quality culture has not been realized as expected by the
government. b. Supporting factors, schools are committed to implementing SPMI
towards quality cultured schools following applicable regulations, supported by
educators and education staff who have the appropriate qualifications. Provisions,
a management information system, and the availability of special officers. The
inhibiting factor is the low achievement value of implementing curriculum aspects
that do not follow the provisions because of the application of local content
curriculum aspects. The regulation of learning load based on the form of material
deepening is still low, and the implementation of the learning and assessment
process is not following the provisions. c. school management model to make
school management more effective requires maximum stakeholder involvement


                                         52

DiA: Jurnal Administrasi Publik, 2023 Juni Vol. 21 No. 1, e-ISSN: 2615-7268



through the Development of All Schools.

Keywords: School Management, Quality Culture, Elementary School

A. INTRODUCTION
       According to the Law of the Republic of Indonesia Number 25 of 2009
concerning Public Services that the government is obliged to provide quality public
services. Standard public service is needed to achieve quality public service. The
implementation of the school management system has a strategic role in supporting
the implementation of public services in the field of education at the education unit
level. In order to improve the quality of the school as a whole, a unique approach is
needed so that all components of the school together have a quality culture.
       School management is needed to ensure that education management is
carried out with quality standards under government policies. The quality of
primary and secondary education in question is the level of conformity between
primary and secondary education implementation with the National Education
Standards (SNP) in schools. The quality of education in schools tends not to
improve without being accompanied by a quality culture.
       The quality culture of primary education is essentially a unity of elements
consisting of integrated organizations, policies, and processes that regulate all
activities to improve quality systematically, planned, and sustainably. Quality
culture aims to ensure the fulfillment of standards in education units in a systemic,
holistic, and sustainable manner. So quality assurance is needed that spurs the
growth and development of a quality culture in the education unit independently
and functions as a controller of the implementation of education by the education
unit in realizing quality education.
       On the other hand, as one of the critical pillars in improving the quality of
education in the education unit, the school superintendent has the function, duty,
and responsibility to participate in realizing quality education actively. Based on
the Permenpan and RB RI Number 14 of 2016, which is an amendment to the
Permenpan and RB RI Number 21 of 2010, one of the primary duties of school
supervisors is to monitor the implementation of national education standards.
       The phenomenon in the field is that the quality standards of education set by
the government are different from those implemented by schools. So that most of
the quality produced has not met the expected standards, and the quality of
educational results has not been commensurate with the desired quality, so the
market does not absorb graduates. The weak managerial competence of education
managers in education units impacts the quality of education services that have
not been standardized.
       Schools as formal educational institutions should be managed
professionally, so it is necessary to use modern educational management theories.
Modern management theory considers that the organization as an open system,
based on conceptual analysis and empirical data, is systemically and integratively.
The school's commitment to realizing a quality school is an absolute requirement
in carrying out comprehensive, continuous, and forward-oriented school
development. The achievement of quality culture is indicated by the quality report


                                         53

DiA: Jurnal Administrasi Publik, 2023 Juni Vol. 21 No. 1, e-ISSN: 2615-7268



card, which reflects the achievement of 8 (eight) National Education Standards.
       Out of 71 elementary schools in Madiun City, no school has met the SNP.
However, on the other hand, public services in education, which are part of the
quality culture, have had proud results. In 2016, it became the first national-level
rank in public service through the DOPARI SAKATU program (Fairy Tales on
Tuesdays, Thursdays, and Saturdays). Even as a follow-up, a Mayor Regulation
(Perwali) was made regarding the obligation to implement DOPARI SAKATU for
all schools in Madiun City.
       Data on quality achievements support the non-achievement of SNP. It can
be informed that the quality achievements in 2016 are: Graduate Competency
Standard 5.98 towards SNP 4; The Content Standard reached 5.31 towards SNP 4;
Process Standard 5.66 towards SNP 4; Assessment Standard 5.04 towards SNP 4;
Standards of Educators and Education Personnel 4.05 towards SNP 3; Sarpras
standard 5.17 towards SNP 4; Management Standard 5.46, towards SNP 4;
Financing Standard 4.37 towards SNP 3. The achievement of the quality of
education in 2016 shows that no school has met the SNP.
       The quality achievements in 2017 are: Graduate Competency Standards 6.11
towards SNP 4; The Content Standard reached 5.81 towards SNP 4; Process
Standard 6.60 towards SNP 4; Assessment Standard 6.17 towards SNP 4; Standards
of Educators and Education Personnel 4.54 towards SNP 3; Sarpras standard 4.26
towards SNP 3; Management Standard 6.01, towards SNP 4; Financing Standard
5.71 towards SNP 4. This data shows that in 2017 no school reached the SNP.
       The quality achievements in 2018 are Graduate Competency Standard 6.39
towards SNP 4; The Content Standard reached 6.17 towards SNP 4; Process
Standard 6.69 towards SNP; Assessment Standard 6.44 towards SNP 4; Standards
of Educators and Education Personnel 4.37 towards SNP 3; Sarpras standard 4.19
towards SNP 3; Management Standard 6.23, towards SNP 4; Financing Standard
5.90 towards SNP 4. The quality achievements in 2018 show that no school has
reached SNP. Based on this data, it is indicated that elementary schools in Madiun
City do not yet have a quality culture according to the standards set by the
government.
       The realization of a quality culture at the elementary school level in Madiun
City is interesting to study. It is suspected to be able to provide the color of
education in Madiun City. This research focuses on analyzing school management
in realizing a quality culture.
       Based on the description of the data presented in both theoretical aspects
and empirical phenomena, it is considered necessary to analyze school
management to realize quality culture, supporting factors, and obstacles and find a
quality management model that can encourage quality culture.
       The concept of New Public Service (NPS), as introduced by Janet V.
Denhardt and Robert B. Denhardt, brings a new paradigm of public service,
namely public service, that pays attention to and focuses on the interests of
citizens. Provision of services that are more responsive to service users. The needs
and interests of service users should be the primary considerations in the overall
process of providing public services. Schools, as public institutions, should
provide excellent service by providing quality education. To realize quality


                                        54

DiA: Jurnal Administrasi Publik, 2023 Juni Vol. 21 No. 1, e-ISSN: 2615-7268



requires quality management through the application of school-based
management.
      School-based ManagementSchool-based management is an idea that places
the authority of school management in a whole system entity. According to Finn,
effective school and school-based management can be observed as follows: "The
improvements in student achievement are most likely to be gained their problem
and in which strong leadership, particularly by the principal, is a characteristic."
      To build an overview of effective school and school-based management,
Brown mentioned several elements of the characteristics that must be possessed:
(1) autonomy, flexibility, and responsiveness; (2) planning by the principal and
school community; (3) adduction of neurons by the principal; (4) a participatoring
school environment; (5) collaboration and collegiality among staff; and (6) a
heightened sense of personal efficacy for principals and teacher.
      School-based management is also a concept that offers autonomy to schools
to improve the quality, efficiency, and equity of education to accommodate the
local community's interests and establish close cooperation between schools,
communities, and the government. School-based management provides broad
opportunities for principals, teachers, and students to innovate and improvise in
schools related to curriculum, learning, managerial and other issues.
      Implementing school-based management requires a healthy process to
develop professional skills and culture. Therefore, it is necessary to know the
components of the "school-based", Namely management, learning process, human
resources, and resources and administration.
      If school-based education management in Indonesia can be seen as a new
concept and paradigm in its implementation, it must start in various stages.
Because it is a new paradigm, its implementation certainly needs to pay attention
to the possibilities for schools to be willing to adopt it. Thus, the implementation
of school-based management can be categorized as a process of educational
innovation, where the success of its implementation is still largely determined by
various factors.
      In the new paradigm of education management, a principal must at least be
able to function as an educator, manager, administrator, supervisor, leader,
innovator, motivator, figure, and mediator. The concept of school-based
management has become part of government policy. Therefore, Thomas L.
Wheeler argues that achieving practical change goals requires clarity of
objectives, both those concerning processes and developments by involving
internal and external aspects to be taken into consideration. Individuals, principals,
teachers, employees, and the condition of the school itself are dotted with goals,
mastery of skills, attitudes, self- concept, habits of results, and processes. Agents
of change are teachers and principals, while the objects of change are institutions,
curriculum, learning, et cetera.
      School-based management embodied in developing school independence
demands the creation of a new institutional order and culture. School-based
management is intended to include: (1) the establishment of a school headmaster
board that serves as a forum to accommodate the aspirations and needs of school
stakeholders, as well as a body that functions to help schools to abandon their


                                         55

DiA: Jurnal Administrasi Publik, 2023 Juni Vol. 21 No. 1, e-ISSN: 2615-7268



performance for the realization of quality educational services and learning
outcomes; (2) development of school strategic planning that describes the
direction of school development in the perspective of the next 3-4 years. This
planning is formulated the vision and mission of the school, analysis of the
school's institutional position (strengths, weaknesses, opportunities, and
challenges), the study of strategic issues faced, formulation of school priority
programs, formulation of school development goals, achievement of goals,
control, and evaluation of the achievement of development goals. School strategy
planning is carried out with the school committee; (3) the development of an
annual school plan that describes the operational activities of the school
accompanied by the planning of the school financing budget. The school's annual
planning is drawn up with the school committee; (4) conduct internal monitoring
and self-assessment, which is carried out regularly, and report the results in the
school committee forum. What aspects are of concern, what the format or
instruments are, and who or how task forces do so need to be discussed further.
The results of this internal monitoring and self-assessment are significant as
material to find out the progress of the school, the results of achievements achieved,
and what obstacles and serious problems the school faces; and (5) to report an
annual report describing the implementation of the school's annual planning.
      Quality Culture. According to the Ministry of National Education (2010),
school quality culture is defined as the entire system of thinking, values, morals,
norms, and human beliefs. Human life continues to develop, so what develops is
the social system, the economic system, the belief system, science, technology, and
art. Education is a planned effort to develop students' potential to have a system of
thinking, values, morals, and beliefs inherited by their society and develop that
legacy in a direction appropriate for present and future life. According to Husaini
Usman (2006: 407), quality is the suitability of market needs and how far a product
has met the requirements that have been set. It was further explained that the quality
aspects include: (1) excellent service to customers, high social responsibility, and
customer satisfaction; (2) the customer is numbered together, and the learner is the
center of attention.
      Quality in education includes inputs, processes, outputs, and outcomes.
Input is declared quality if it is ready for processing. The quality education
process can create an atmosphere of Innovative Active Learning Kreatif, Effective
and Fun. Output is declared quality if the student's academic and non-academic
learning outcomes are high. Outcomes are declared quality if graduates are
absorbed in the world of work. Quality characteristics include (1) good teacher
performance; (2) be punctual; (3) long-lasting excellent service; (4) the school has
good endurance; (5) beautiful and attractive schools; (6) school residents have
moral values and professionalism; (7) facilities and infrastructure are available
and easy to use; (8) the school has an SPM; (9) consistency; (10) able to serve. In
TQM, philosophically, the concept of quality emphasizes the constant search for
continuous improvement to achieve customer needs and satisfaction. Some of these
opinions can be concluded that the school quality culture is the entire thinking
system, values, morals, norms, beliefs (belief), thinking systems, values, morals
norms which are substantial for excellent service to customers (students).


                                         56

DiA: Jurnal Administrasi Publik, 2023 Juni Vol. 21 No. 1, e-ISSN: 2615-7268



       Improving the quality of education depends on the paradigm used in
developing schools and the commitment of each component of education to carry
out quality education. According to Jerome S. Arcaro (2007:10-11), quality
schools begin with formulating and developing a vision and mission. The quality
vision and mission focus on the community's total needs in the program,
developing a system of measuring the value of education, supporting the critical
systems, staff, and students to manage change and continuous improvement by
always striving to make educational products better. This process is established in
five quality education options: focus on customers, total engagement,
measurement, commitment, and continuous improvement (Arcaro, 2007: 12-13).
       According to Diagram Pillars of the School of Total Quality (Arcaro, 2007:
15), these five pillars are considered a strong foundation for managing the
education and quality variables.
       The challenge of continuous quality improvement is a quickly satisfied
attitude towards something that has been achieved. Educational professionals do
not know the comfort zone to improve the quality of education. The intended
comfort zone is that people do not want to be creative anymore to achieve higher
achievements (Chatib, 2011: 13). Mt. Edgecumbe High School in Alaska, as a
model school, has implemented 15 principles of TQM (Total Quality
Management) that are considered suitable to be modeled or a model of education
management in the country. The fifteen principles are (1) maintain goals towards
the advancement of learners and the continuous improvement of services; (2)
apply the latest philosophy; (3) strive to eliminate the ratings and harmful effects
of human classifications; (4) stop relying on exams to achieve quality; (5)
cooperate with educational institutions where learners come from; (6)
continuously develop a student engagement system and service system to improve
quality and productivity; (7) conduct education and job training for learners,
teachers, staff and administrators; (8) build leadership; (9) eliminate fear; (10)
break down barriers between departments/programs; (11) eliminate slogans,
demands and targets for teachers and learners in order to achieve perfect
performance and productivity levels; (12) eliminate targets for teachers and
learners, for example a 10% increase in test scores and a 15% reduction in dropout
rates, replacing them with leadership targets; (13) eliminate obstacles that can
undermine the pride and work of teachers, students and management; (14)
organize quality education and self-development programs for everyone; and (15)
involve everyone in the school in an effort to make a transformation (Dryden and
Vos, 1999: 408)
       The mindset of the education reform movement is oriented towards a quality
culture. The macro context of quality culture begins with political decisions,
regulatory formulation, and policies. Furthermore, in the micro context, the quality
of education begins with formulating the vision and mission of the institution,
management, and participation. Formulating the institution's vision, mission, and
management policies lead to school quality behavior. In that context, Iryanto (2008)
offers five ideas of quality and excellence that should be possessed by all
components of the school, especially educational executors, such as school leaders,
teachers, students, and parents of students. The five ideas he intended were to think


                                         57

DiA: Jurnal Administrasi Publik, 2023 Juni Vol. 21 No. 1, e-ISSN: 2615-7268



and act to produce the best, be oriented to the future, be open and adaptive to
change, make continuous improvements, and change the way things are viewed.
       The secretary's commission on achieving necessary skills in the United
States, as cited by Dryden and Vos (1999: 276), found three keys to a quality
school future: (1) a well-developed mind; (2) high passion for learning; and (3)
the ability to combine knowledge with work a well-developed mind, a passion for
learning, and the ability to put knowledge to work). According to Sutarto (2015:
115), the ability to adapt to changes or even become an agent of change is the key
to success. Mt. Edgecumbe-Alaska High School is a model school that Gordon
Dryden and Jeannette Vos exemplify as a school that consistently maintains
quality amid changing times. The school maintains quality because it carries out
modern educational management by basing itself on the following twelve beliefs
(Dryden and Vos, 1999: 406): (1) human relations are the foundation for all
quality development; (2) all components in our organization can be continuously
improved; (3) solving the source of the problem inside the system will inevitably
lead to the improvement of the system; (4) the person who performs a job is the
one who knows the most about the work; (5) everyone wants to be involved and
wants to do their job well; (6) everyone wants their role to be appreciated; (7)
working in a team is more able to develop the system than working individually;
(8) a problem-solving process structured with problem-solving techniques through
statistical graphs allows you to know your position, where the variations are, the
priority of the problem to be solved, and whether the changes made have the
desired influence; (9) unhealthy relationships are unproductive and outdated; (10)
each organization has hidden gems that must be unearthed and found; (11)
removing barriers to work pride and learning is the valid key to unlocking the
potential of organizations that have not been touched so far; (12) continuous
training, learning and experimentation are the key to sustainable growth.
       Furthermore, Dryden and Vos (1999: 433,452, 456) mention twelve steps
towards a superior school system: (1) plan schools as lifelong centers of
community resources; (2) ask your customers, especially students and their
parents; (3) guarantee customer success and satisfaction; (4) serve all kinds of
intelligence and learning styles of learners; (5) use the best teaching method; (6)
invest in your primary source, the teacher as a facilitator; (7) be all teachers and
students at the same time; (8) plan a four-part curriculum (personal growth
curriculum, life skills curriculum, learning to learn and learning to think
curriculum, content curriculum); (9) change the grading system (50% self-
assessment, 30% friend assessment, 20% teacher/supervisor assessment); (10) use
future technologies; (11) utilize community members as resources; and (12)give
everyone the right to vote.
       The Quality Assurance System for Primary and Secondary Education has
two main objectives in its implementation. The first objective of the Primary and
Secondary Education Quality Assurance System is to control the education
organized by the education units in primary and secondary education so that
quality education is realized. Second, the Quality Assurance System for Primary
and Secondary Education aims to provide guarantees for the fulfillment of
standards in academic units systematically, holistically, and sustainably to grow


                                        58

DiA: Jurnal Administrasi Publik, 2023 Juni Vol. 21 No. 1, e-ISSN: 2615-7268



and develop a quality culture in education units independently. The objectives of
the second Primary and Secondary Education Quality Assurance System reflect
the expectations for the implementation and development of a quality culture in
the educational environment.
      The success of the best achievements in the implementation of SPMI is
inseparable from the cooperation of all school residents, so a robust internal
commitment is needed to implement SPMI on an ongoing basis to realize the
desired school Quality Culture. For schools to realize a quality culture, it is
necessary to build a school commitment to running SPMI according to its cycle.
The SPMI cycle is described as follows:




       Source : https://www.mediaeducations.com/2021/08/dokumen- spmi-
       sistem- penjaminn-mutu.html

The SPMI cycle consists of (1) Quality mapping, (2) Preparation of quality
fulfillment plans, (3) Implementation of quality fulfillment, and (4)
Evaluation/quality audit. The cycle must be orderly and continuous, (5) Quality
Determination. Thus, implementing the quality assurance system aims to improve
quality by the SNP and encourages the creation of a quality culture education where
all components in schools have a learning spirit and continuously develop
themselves under the times.

B. METHOD
      This research examines school management in realizing a quality culture. It
is suspected that there has not been only one school that has realized quality
culture for three years. Therefore, researchers need to dive into the experiences of
educational actors based on reality so that this study follows an interpretive
paradigm with a qualitative approach. The interpretive paradigm focuses on the
subjective nature of the social world. The interpretive approach aims to analyze
social reality and how it is formed. The researcher must dive into the subjective
experiences of the perpetrators in order to understand the specific social
environment. Interpretive research does not place objectivity as the most important
thing, but to obtain a deep understanding, the subjectivity of the perpetrator must
be dug deeper to allow a trade-off between objectivity and the depth of research
findings (Efferin et al., 2004).


                                        59

DiA: Jurnal Administrasi Publik, 2023 Juni Vol. 21 No. 1, e-ISSN: 2615-7268



      The data processed in this study are primary data and secondary data.
Primary data is data obtained directly in the field through in-depth interviews and
observations made by researchers, and secondary data is data that has been
officially published and obtained from the media, documentation, and archives
from related agencies. Reduction, display, and concluding drawing/verification.

C. RESULTS AND DISCUSSION
       The Education Quality Map (PMP) at the Madiun City level provides an
overview of the quality of Madiun City education. Based on the available data and
information, it is expected to be an input for the Madiun City Regional Education
Quality Assurance Team (TPMPD) to develop a strategic plan to improve the
quality of education in the work area in the following year.
       The SNP achievement score is in the range of values between 0 (zero) to 7.
In this case, the range of value scores is divided into five categories that describe
the achievement category of the National Education Standards (SNP). The SNP
achievements obtained by each education unit describe the actual condition of the
quality map of primary and secondary education achieved by the education unit.
Each national education standard achievement category group lies between the
lower and upper threshold. Meanwhile, to find out and interpret the quality
achievements of primary and secondary education using the guidelines for
interpreting SNP achievements as discussed in Chapter 6, namely, a score of 0.00
to 2.04 means: M1; a score of 2.05 to 3.70 means: M2; a score of 3.71 to 5.06
means: M3; a score of 5.07 to 6.66 means: M4; a score of 6.67 to 7.00 means: SNP.
Graduate Competency Standards (SKL): Low achievement of scores on the student
skills dimension (score 6.2), due to low collaborative thinking and acting skills
(value 5.94), the availability of various infrastructures according to the provisions
is still low (achievement value 1.32) and the implementation of comprehensive,
authentic assessments is still not well implemented (achievement value 5.90). Thus,
teachers conducting assessments are less than optimal and have not followed the
realm that should be measured. Teachers still conduct assessments in the same way
on knowledge, attitudes, and skills. Teachers still often use non-homemade
instruments. Regarding assessment facilities, teachers can maximize existing
facilities in addition to submitting through the school budget. However, the Madiun
City Education Office has facilitated each student/teacher with one laptop regarding
learning facilities.
       Content Standards: The low achievement of the value of implementing
curriculum aspects that are not following the provisions (value 4.79) is caused by
the implementation of curriculum aspects on local content (achievement value
4.65) and the regulation of learning load based on the form of material deepening
is still low (achievement value 4.71), and the implementation of the learning
process has not been following the provisions, especially in obtaining evaluations
from school principals and school supervisors (achievement value 2.02) so that
the competence of graduates achieved students when exploring these subjects are
less than optimal. This data shows that the involvement of the curriculum
development team is not optimal, and the curriculum developed must be
socialized. This is also due to the lack of optimal assistance from the


                                         60

DiA: Jurnal Administrasi Publik, 2023 Juni Vol. 21 No. 1, e-ISSN: 2615-7268



superintendent of schools. Ideally, a school superintendent accompanies ten
primary school institutions. Nevertheless, in reality, a school superintendent must
accompany 35-36 elementary school institutions, so the duration of assistance per
3-4 hours visit is reduced because they have to share it with other elementary
school institutions.
       Process Standards: The analysis results show that the low achievement of
learning process planning according to the provisions (achievement value 5.15) is
caused by the implementation of evaluations from school principals and school
supervisors that have not been carried out correctly (achievement score 2.02). The
implementation of periodic assessment reporting has not been carried out optimally
(achievement value 5.59), so student learning activities are less directed to
achieving essential competencies, and the development of RPP lacks a reference.
Thus, it can be seen that the supervisor's role is less than optimal in assisting the
target schools and the less than optimal learning and learning process from the
school superintendent and principal. Moreover, they were triggered by the heavy
workload of teachers because, in addition to teaching, there are still additional tasks
in the school innovation team that demand teachers' time, energy, and thinking.
Teachers have to divide their time between their primary and additional duties due
to the limited number of educators at the Primary School level and the absence of
administrative personnel precisely, while in elementary schools, there are only
OPS.
       Education Assessment Standards: The low achievement of the assessment
instrument that adjusts the aspects (the achievement of the value of 6.57) is caused
because the use of the attitude aspect assessment instrument has not been
implemented optimally (achievement value 5.73), and the implementation of the
learning process has not been following the provisions, especially in obtaining
evaluations from the principal and school supervisors (achievement value 2.02), so
that the assessment instrument cannot be used as a control of the assessment quality
standards; The level of achievement of student competencies cannot be
appropriately measured, and the learning process is not following the established
standards. This is supported by suboptimal supervision from the principal and the
assistance of the school superintendent, who is less than optimal in assisting the
target school. As discussed earlier, the workload of the superintendent of schools is
hefty because the number of Superintendents is not equal to the number of schools
that must be fostered, so the superintendent of schools must divide as efficiently as
possible in carrying out the duties of mentoring the fostered teachers.
       Management Standards: The low achievement of management programs
implemented following the provisions (achievement value 6.0) is caused by the
implementation of student service activities (achievement value 5.1) and in carrying
out student self-development activities is less than optimal (achievement value
5.31), so that the vision, mission, and goals of the school cannot be achieved
optimally, the quality improvement of graduates cannot be achieved optimally, the
empowerment of school resources is not optimal as well.
       Financing Standards: The low achievement of schools managing funds
properly (achievement value 5.86) is caused by the school in regulating the
allocation of funds derived from the APBD / APBN / foundation / other sources


                                          61

DiA: Jurnal Administrasi Publik, 2023 Juni Vol. 21 No. 1, e-ISSN: 2615-7268



less than optimally (achievement value 5.21) and in increasing the usefulness of
educators and education personnel is less than optimal (achievement value 5.96)
so that schools cannot carry out educational activities regularly and sustainably
optimally according to national education standards; some costs do not get
funding allocations. The principal and the school treasurer, who are sometimes
involved in OPS, socialization of financial management issues were followed by
the principal and the school treasurer. While there are often changes in the
treasurer or OPS, it is suspected that they are service personnel and have to replace
administrative duties because there is no administrative personnel in elementary
schools. Even teachers also get additional tasks related to administration, in
addition to OPS. This happens in elementary schools, and there is limited
availability of educational personnel. It was also found that the need for educators
was still limited and insufficient to meet the available classes, and schools were
forced to find service personnel.
       School Management Analysis: the data explored related to school
management consists of several indicators, namely: (1) curriculum and learning
management; (2) student management; (3) management of educators and
education personnel; (4) management of facilities and infrastructure; (5) financing
management; (6) school- based public relations management; (7) school-based
cultural and environmental management.
       Curriculum and Learning Management: The low achievement of the value
of implementing curriculum aspects that are not following the provisions is due to
the implementation of curriculum aspects on local content, and the regulation of
learning loads based on the form of deepening the material is still low. Teachers
allocate time for structured assignments and unstructured independent activities to
students a maximum of 40% of the time allocation for each subject, but those who
apply according to the rules are only about 29 schools (40%) out of 71 schools in
Madiun City. The school develops the curriculum using the principles of KTSP
development, even though the involvement of the school curriculum development
team is less than optimal.
       The implementation of the learning process has not been following the
provisions, especially in getting evaluations from school principals and school
supervisors so that the competence of graduates achieved by students when
exploring these subjects is not optimal. This shows that if the involvement of the
curriculum development team is not optimal, and the curriculum developed must
be socialized, this is also due to the lack of optimal assistance from the school
supervisor. Ideally, a school superintendent accompanies ten primary school
institutions. However, in reality, a school superintendent has to accompany 35-36
primary school institutions. Furthermore, data was obtained that the school has not
compiled a syllabus of local content subjects while still using the syllabus made by
the Madiun City-level development team.
       Student Management: Concerning the results of research on the student
management component, it was found that the school carried out student activities
which included: (1) data collection of prospective students; (2) admission of new
learners (PPDB); (3) school introduction/student orientation; (4) implementation of
the learning process; (5) character building of learners; (6) the provision of


                                         62

DiA: Jurnal Administrasi Publik, 2023 Juni Vol. 21 No. 1, e-ISSN: 2615-7268



particular services; (7) supervision, evaluation, and reporting. However, the
grouping of students, which is generally not carried out, is not done only
incidentally because of a need, such as coaching activities facing competitions.
       Management of Educators and Education Personnel: Administrative
personnel have minimum academic qualifications in secondary education or
equivalent. The school has more administrative personnel than one who has
secondary education qualifications or equivalent, has an educational background
following their duties, and has more administrative personnel than one whom all
have an educational background according to their duties. Minimum library
personnel has secondary education academic qualifications or equivalent. The
school has more libraries than one that all have secondary education qualifications
or equivalent. Library personnel has a letter of assignment as the person in charge
of the library.
       According to the provisions, OPS in Madiun City has qualifications, 60%
linearity, 90% competency fulfillment, and already has an assignment letter.
Meanwhile, library personnel of academic quality is met, linearity is 50%,
competency fulfillment is 60%, and they already have an assignment letter. The
special personnel for academic qualifications is met, the linearity is met, the
fulfillment of competencies is 90%, and an assignment letter. This is related to
fulfilling the lowest competence and linearity in OPS and library personnel. These
two types of staff are all wiyata bakti workers with heavy loads.
       Facilities and Infrastructure Management: The quality of education in
educational facilities and infrastructure standards has increased, from 4.19 in 2018
to 5.05 in 2019. The score of 5.05 is in the M3 category. Meanwhile, in 2019-
2020 it experienced a decrease, namely from a score of 5.05 in 2019 to 4.78 in
2020. The score of 4.78 is in the M3 category.
       Indicators of adequate school capacity: the achievement of the quality of
education in the capacity of adequate school capacity has increased, namely from
a score of 4.55 in 2018 to 5.21 in 2019. The score of 5.21 is in the M4 category.
Meanwhile, in 2019-2020 it experienced a decrease, namely from a score of 5.21
in 2019 down to 4.4 in 2020. The score of 4.4 is in the M3 category.
       Indicators of schools having complete and decent learning facilities and
infrastructure: the achievement of the quality of education in schools has complete
and feasible learning facilities and infrastructure, namely from a score of 2.72 in
2018 increased to 4.67 in 2019. The score of 4.67 is in the M3 category. Meanwhile,
in 2019-2020 it experienced an increase, namely from a score of 4.67 in 2019 to 5.8
in 2020. The score of 5.8 is in the M4 category.
       Indicators of schools having complete and decent supporting facilities and
infrastructure: the achievement of the quality of education in schools has complete
and feasible supporting facilities and infrastructure, namely from a score of 2.79 in
2018 increased to 4.72 in 2019. The score of 4.72 is in the M3 category. Meanwhile,
in 2019-2020 it experienced an increase, namely from a score of 4.72 in 2019 to 5.6
in 2020. The score of 5.6 is in the M4 category. Although the availability of
facilities has not reached the SNP, there has been an increase in the SNP score due
to both improvements and procurement. Especially in learning, the government has
facilitated 1 (one) student/teacher 1 (one) laptop, which is carried out to continue


                                         63

DiA: Jurnal Administrasi Publik, 2023 Juni Vol. 21 No. 1, e-ISSN: 2615-7268



developing a quality culture following the current situation.
       Financing Management: In general, the school has formulated and set the
institution's vision, is easy to understand, and is often socialized. The school has
formulated and established the institution's mission, is easy to understand, and is
often socialized. The school has formulated and set the goals of the institution.
Formulate and set goals; it is easy to understand and often socialized. The school
has a medium-term work plan (four-year) and an annual work plan. Have a medium-
term work plan and an annual work plan and have been socialized.
       The school has financial management guidelines as a basis for the
preparation of RKAS. Have financial management guidelines for the last four
years in a row. The school has bookkeeping of operating expenses. Have thorough
bookkeeping of operating costs for the last three years. The school makes a
financial management accountability report and submits it to the government or
foundation. Make a financial management accountability report and submit it to
the government or foundation for the last four years.
       Based on the findings, it is known that the school formulates its vision,
mission, and objectives to compile the RKS does not charge tuition fees and has
guidelines for financial management. The school prepares financial reports in a
transparent and accountable manner.
       School-Based Public Relations Management: The school engages the
community and builds partnerships with other relevant institutions in education
management. Have four or more documents supporting community involvement
and building partnerships with other relevant institutions in education
management.
       School-based public relations management in elementary schools involves
various elements: principals, educators, education staff, parents/guardians of
students, school committees, and other stakeholders. In the implementation of
education in schools, schools can collaborate with: (1) community leaders; (2)
parents of students; (3) civic institutions; (4) local governments; and (5) the
business world and the industrial world.
       Based on the research findings, the school involves community-building
partnerships. The lowest achievement of public relations in elementary schools
involves education providers, principals, teachers, staff, and school committees. So
it can be said that the involvement of public relations in realizing a school quality
culture is still low.
       School-Based Cultural and Environmental Management: Based on the
study's findings, it is known that schools create a conducive environment guided
by the principles of sustainability, integrated, consistent implementation, fun
coaching, and development of school culture reflected in habituation schools
socialize school cultural programs. The school formed the school cultural team.
The team compiles, implements, and evaluates school cultural programs. The
lowest achievement in school culture management is that the school involves the
principal, teachers, OPS, staff, committees, and other stakeholders, and the highest
in forming the school culture team. So it can be said that the school has a high
commitment to realizing the school culture.
       Quality Culture Analysis: The quality culture referred to in this study is a


                                         64

DiA: Jurnal Administrasi Publik, 2023 Juni Vol. 21 No. 1, e-ISSN: 2615-7268



culture of independently carrying out the cycle of the Internal Quality Assurance
System (SPMI) to achieve SNP. So that the scope of this quality culture is related
to the SPMI cycle. So that the research findings presented in this part include: (1)
quality mapping; (2) quality fulfillment planning; (3) implementation of quality
fulfillment; (4) internal quality audit; (5) the determination of new qualities.
       Quality Mapping: Quality mapping begins with forming a School Quality
Assurance Team (TPMPS). The establishment of TPMPS is carried out in order to
implement the Internal Quality Assurance System (SPMI). The portrait of TPMPS
on the implementation of PMP. TPMPS consists of 2 parts: the school development
team and the internal auditor team. This team involves school superintendents,
principals, teachers, education staff, and school/community committees.
       Based on the research findings, all schools have formed TPMPS; it is just
that the TPMPS at the elementary school level in Madiun City cannot be
adequately empowered because of the many duplicate tasks carried out by team
members. Currently, many teams are formed within the school and work partially,
thus causing the enormous workload of the school and the process of managing
the school to overlap, ineffective and inefficient—the role of TPMPS in the
implementation of SPMI following the SPMI cycle.
       Quality mapping of elementary schools in Madiun City, starting with
reviewing SNP, is an essential part of quality mapping. All school residents
should read and review the SNP as the first step in quality assurance. There are
two essential things in reviewing the results of the EDS (Quality Report Card),
namely, printing a quality report card and analyzing the quality report card.
       Quality Fulfillment Plan: Schools conduct EDS; this is supported by data
from all elements stating 100%, EDS uses a quality report card, from the
supervisor 90%, teachers 85%, OPS 70%, school committee 80%, school
supervisor 70% and TPMPD 100%, achievement 82.5%. Analysis of quality data
from principals 70%, teachers, TPMPD 65%, OPS, school committees 60%,
school supervisors 55%, achievements 62.5%. Root cause analysis, from the
principal and TPMPD elements 70%, OPS and school superintendents 65%,
teachers and school committees 60%, achievement 65%. Develop quality planning
from principals and teachers 80%, OPS and school superintendents 70%, TPMPD
75%, committees 60%, achievement 72.5%. The lowest achievement of quality
data analysis and root cause analysis is suspected to be less than optimal
supervisory assistance because the proportion of the number of school supervisors
and teachers is not balanced. The suboptimal assistance of the superintendent
makes the school less than optimal in preparing a quality fulfillment plan. This is
still found in schools that carry out quality fulfillment planning not based on the
results of EDS.
       Implementation of Quality Fulfillment Planning: TPMPS's commitment to
quality fulfillment has been prepared with activities to implement education
quality fulfillment planning. The activity did not run optimally considering that
the database is in the OPS, where the OPS does not handle only one team but
many teams, so the OPS is overwhelmed with its responsibilities. Furthermore,
make the ops burden heavy. The result is that the fulfillment of quality is less than
optimal. Evaluation Monitoring: Internal quality evaluation monitoring is carried


                                         65

DiA: Jurnal Administrasi Publik, 2023 Juni Vol. 21 No. 1, e-ISSN: 2615-7268



out to ensure continuous quality improvement. Based on the document
observations, the school's internal evaluation monitoring schedule is at least once
a semester. Based on the research findings, this internal monitoring and evaluation
activity has not been carried out optimally due to the limited availability and
ability of the internal audit team. As a result of the large number of teams formed
by schools, many tasks are duplicated.
       Determination of B are Quality Standards: At this stage, the school sets new
quality standards as a benchmark for the following year's program. The new
quality may be a standard above the SNP if, based on the quality audit results, the
previous year's achievements have met the SNP or even exceeded the SNP. In
addition, at this stage, schools also need to establish new strategies for quality
fulfillment at standards that obtain moderate and insufficient grades. The
establishment of new quality standards beyond the SNP will be an extra capital for
schools to obtain the best accreditation status. Similarly, establishing a new
strategy for the fulfillment of quality that has not met the SNP is a curative action
for schools to continuously strive to improve themselves and improve their
quality. This will maintain the consistency of improving the quality achievement
of each SNP standard from year to year until the school/islamic school
accreditation assessment period arrives. Based on the quality report card,
elementary schools in Madiun City are achieving SNP because the achievements
in the previous year were towards (M4).
       The result of the Internal Quality Assurance System is that there is an
improvement in the quality of education at the school level from time to time-
based on the indicators set related to quality culture, namely: (1) Schools
implement SPMI, so not all criteria have been met, meaning that there are still
schools that have not implemented the quality assurance cycle independently,
have a quality assurance team in schools, have not reached SNP; (2) The school
has some superiority, which school-based management has not achieved; (3) as a
learning resource center for surrounding schools, it has not been achieved,
especially many of the schools that are fostered.
       The following is an analysis of the factors inhibiting school management in
realizing a quality culture: (1) The results of the analysis of the low value
achievement of implementing aspects of the curriculum that are not in accordance
with the provisions, (2) The lowest achievement in school culture management in
involving principals, teachers, OPS, staff, committees and other stakeholders; (3)
Currently, many teams are formed within the school and work partially, causing the
enormous workload of the school and the school management process to overlap,
ineffective and inefficient, (4) Related to the role of implementing the role of
TPMPS in realizing a quality culture is still less than optimal, because TPMPS
members are also members of other teams who work partially, so that the focus on
TPMPS becomes divided, (5) When the school has obtained a quality report card,
a valid quality report card is carried out, some schools submit it to the OPS, this
makes the task of the OPS heavy The result of meeting the quality is less than
optimal, (6) Low competence in analyzing quality data and the root of the problem,
(7) The school has implemented a quality fulfillment plan that is not in accordance
with the previously prepared plan and the schedule prepared. (8) Monitoring the


                                         66

DiA: Jurnal Administrasi Publik, 2023 Juni Vol. 21 No. 1, e-ISSN: 2615-7268



internal evaluation is not carried out optimally, (9) Supervision here tends to be
administrative, so it is said that the implementation of learning supervision is less
than optimal. (10)Primary Schools in Madiun City have not yet reached SNP, and
(11) Schools are less than optimal in involving the community in building
partnerships.
       The following is informed of the analysis results of factors supporting
school management in realizing a quality culture. (1) Schools are aware of the
content of KTSP, (2) All schools in the area of the Madiun City Education Office
form TPMPS. (3) Schools are committed to implementing SPMI in realizing a
quality culture. (4) Schools conduct EDS using quality mapping instruments
(quality report cards) and conduct quality data analysis and root causes. ( 5) The
school has implemented school-based management. (6) The school has a complete
document of school-based management and SPMI, and (7) The school can
increase SNP scores each year. they are managing learning facilities and
infrastructure. (8) The school has a management information system to support
education administration. (9) All teachers and education personnel have the
qualifications following the provisions.
       As previously explained, to reduce the massive burden on schools, the
integration of existing teams in schools is carried out various quality improvement
efforts and to empower TPMPS and other stakeholders using the whole school
development approach, which is a comprehensive school development approach
that involves all school residents (education leaders, principals, teachers, staff, and
parents in order to achieve commonality. Vision and mission to realize a quality
culture that is effective and efficient.
       Meanwhile, Karen Taylor, a Senior Education Adviser (Whole School and
district Development) at the Managing Contractor Program Management -
Australia Indonesia Basic Education Program (MCPM AIBEP), asked what is
meant by the Whole School Development Approach:
       In simple terms, Whole School Development is a mechanism used to
improve and uplift schools' academic, infrastructural, social, and security
environments. WSD aims primarily to ensure that schools have the necessary
resources to support an environment conducive to excellence in teaching and
learning in every school the Adopt-a-School Foundation works in. In simple
terms, the whole school development approach is used to improve and elevate
schools' academic, infrastructure, social, and environmental security fields. WSD
aims primarily to ensure that schools have the necessary resources to support an
environment conducive to excellence in each school's teaching and learning
process.
       The whole school development approach aims to increase learning
opportunities for children through increasing the capacity of essential people in
schools/islamic schools, the family, and the community. The whole school
development approach refers to improving the quality of School-Based
Management (SBM) and focuses on planning and developing educational units
according to national education standards (SNP)
       The concept of school-based management has become part of government
policy. Therefore, Thomas L. Wheeler argues that achieving practical change


                                          67

DiA: Jurnal Administrasi Publik, 2023 Juni Vol. 21 No. 1, e-ISSN: 2615-7268



goals requires clarity of objectives, both those concerning processes and
developments by involving internal and external aspects to be taken into
consideration. Individuals, principals, teachers, employees, and the condition of
the school itself are dotted with goals, mastery of skills, attitudes, self-concept, and
habits of results and processes. Agents of change are teachers and principals,
while the objects of change are institutions, curricula, learning, and the like.

      Figure: Proposed School Management Model in Realizing a Quality culture




      Source: Modified model La Ode Rahmat Putra Rustaman ST

D. CONCLUSION
      On the results of research on school management analysis in realizing
culture in elementary schools in Madiun City, it can be concluded as follows: (1)
School management in Madiun City Elementary Schools has met the criteria of
quality culture, namely implementing SPMI, having various advantages, and
becoming a learning resource for surrounding schools. The criteria for
implementing SPMI have not been achieved because elementary schools in
Madiun City have not reached SNP, school management has not been running
according to standards and not all of them have become learning resources for
surrounding schools, so that it can be informed that school management is not
optimal, so that the quality culture has not been realized in accordance with
government expectations; (2) Success factors, thereare several factors that
support the success of school management in realizing a quality culture, namely
the school is committed to implementing SPMI towards a quality cultured school
in accordance with applicable regulations, supported by educators and education
personnel who have qualifications according to the provisions, the existence of a
management information system and availability of special officers; (3) The
inhibiting factor is the low achievement value of the implementation of
curriculum aspects that are not in accordance with the provisions because the
application of local content curriculum aspects and the regulation of learning load
based on the form of material deepening is still low and the implementation of the
learning and assessment process is not in accordance with the provisions.c. school
management model to make school management more effective requires
maximum stakeholder involvement through the implementation of the learning
and assessment process is not following the provisions. The school management
model to make school management more effective requires maximum stakeholder
involvement through a Whole school development approach.



                                          68

DiA: Jurnal Administrasi Publik, 2023 Juni Vol. 21 No. 1, e-ISSN: 2615-7268



REFERENCES
Abdul Hadi (2018). Konsepsi Manajemen Mutu dalam Pendidikan Universiatas
           Nurul Jadid Paiton Probolinggo. Jurnal Idaarah, Vol. II, No. 2,
           Desember 2018.
Abdulloh Hadziq (2016). Implementasi Manajemen Berbasis Sekolah (School
           Based Management) Dalam Mewujudkan Sekolah Efektif (Studi Kasus
           Di MTs NU Sabilul Muttaqin Jepang Mejobo Kudus). Jurnal
           QUALITY Vol. 4, No. 2, 2016: 351-371 p-ISSN: 2355-0333, e-ISSN:
           2502-8324.
Ahmad, Dzaujak. “Penunjuk Peningkatan Mutu pendidikan di sekolah Dasar.”
           Jakarta: Depdikbud, 1996.
Ahmad Darmadji (2015). Pengembangan Madrasah Berbasis Manajemen Mutu
           Total Untuk Meningkatkan Moral Bangsa. Jurnal Pendidikan Islam El
           Tarbawy.ISSN:       1979998-5      [Halaman      1    -   18]    DOI:
           http://dx.doi.org/10.20885/El Ttarbawi.vol8.iss1.art1.
Amir (2019) Membangun Budaya Mutu Pada Lembaga Pendidikan Islam Menuju
           Madrasah Unggul.Institut Agama Islam Negeri, Jember, ndonesia Al-
           Tanzim: Jurnal Manajemen Pendidikan Islam E-ISSN: 2549-5720 P-
           ISSN: 2549-3663 Vol. 03 No. 02 (2019) : 1-12
Anang Dwi Putransu Aspranawa (2015). Memahami Quality Anssurance
           Menjadikan Budaya Mutu Perguruan Tinggi Universitas Islam Blitar,
           Blitar AN-NISBAH, Vol. 01, No. 02, April 2015- 111
Asrohah, Hanun. “Manajemen Mutu Pendidikan.” Surabaya: UIN Sunan Ampel
           Surabaya, 2014.
Ascaro, Jerome S. “Quality in Education: An Implementation Handbook”
           (alihbahasa: Yosal Iriantara, “Pendidikan Berbasis Mutu: Prinsip-
           Prinsip Perumusan dan Tata Langkah Penerapan.” Yogjakarta:
           Pustaka Pelajar, 2007.
Kaisya Azzahra Kadar Sarifan Dan Rasto (2017) Keterampilan Manajerial Kepala
           Sekolah Dan Budaya Mutu Sebagai Determinan Kinerja Guru
           (Principal's Managerial Skills And Quality Culture As Determinants
           Of Teacher Performance) Jurnal Pendidikan Manajemen Perkantoran
           Vol. 2 No. 2, Juli 2017, Hal. 137-147
Barbara S. Hawley (2019), How Principals Enact Instructional Leadership In K–5
           Urban Schools. Disertation. Kent State University College.
Benjamin Kutsyuruba (2017). Creating Supportive School Cultures for Beginning
           Teachers: Mitigating the Cultural Contextual Faktors. Article in
           International Journal of Educational Organization and Leadership ·
           May 2017 DOI: 10.18848/2329-1656/CGP/v24i02/1-18.
Budimansyah, Dasim. “Peningkatan Mutu Pendidikan Melalui Penguatan
           Partisipasi Masyarakat.” Educationist, 2, 2008. Bugin, Burhan.
           “Analisis Data Penelitian Kualitatif.” Jakarta: Raja Grafindo Persada,
           2003.
Depdiknas. “Manajemen Peningkatan Mutu Berbasis Sekolah.” Jakarta:
           Depdiknas. 2004.
Deming, W. Edwards. “Out of the Crisis.” Cambridge: Cambridge University Press,


                                       69

DiA: Jurnal Administrasi Publik, 2023 Juni Vol. 21 No. 1, e-ISSN: 2615-7268



           1986,     dalam     Anonim,     “Manajemen      Mutu     Pendidikan”
           http://guruidaman. blogspot.com.
Dian Sari (2019). Analisis Inovasi Pelayanan Publik “KELAS PERAHU”
           Kabupaten Pangkajene dan Kepulauan. Jurnal SAP Vol. 3 No.3 April
           2019 p-ISSN: 2527-967X e-ISSN: 2549-2845
Dirjed Pendidikan Dasar dan Menengah. 2017. Indikator Mutu dalam Budaya
           mutu Pendidikan Dasar dan Menengah.Dirjend Dikdasmen: Jakarta.
Dirjed Pendidikan Dasar dan Menengah. 2017. Petunjuk Pelaksanaan Budaya mutu
           Pendidikan Oleh Satuan Pendidikan. Dirjend Dikdasmen: Jakarta.
Dit. PSMA Ditjen. Pendidikan Dasar dan Menengah. 2017. Implementasi
           Pengembangan Kecakapan Abad 21 Dalam Perencanaan
           Pelaksanaan Pembelajaran (RPP). Dit. PSMA Ditjen. Pendidikan
           Dasar dan Menengah: Jakarta.
Dragana Glušac, at all (2015) Study Of Impact Of School Culture On The Teaching
           And Learning Process In Serbia Based On School Evaluation. Jurnal
           UDK - 373.31(497.11) 37.014:006 DOI: 10.5937/nasvas1502255G
           НВ год. LXIV 2.2015.
Fattah, Nanang. “Landasan Manajemen Pendidikan.” Bandung: Remaja Rosda
           Karya, 1996.
Gaspersz, Vincent. “Total Quality Management.” Jakarta: Gramedia
           PustakaUtama, 2001.
Hamdan Husein Batubara (2017) Implementasi Manajemen Berbasis Sekolah Di
           SDN Sungai Miai 5 Dan SDN Surgi Mufti 4 Di Banjarmasin. Article
           In AL- ULUM Jurnal Ilmu Sosial Dan Humaniora· April 2018 DOI:
           10.31602/Alsh.V3i2.1196AL-Ulum: Jurnal Ilmu Sosial Dan
           Humaniora ISSN: 2476-9576 Volume 3 Noor 2, Oktober 2017.
Hendrikus Midun (2017). Membangun Budaya Mutu Dan Unggul Di Sekolah.
           Universitas Negeri Malang. Jurnal Pendidikan Dan Kebudayaan
           Missio, Volume 9, Nomor 1, Januari 2017, Hlm. 50-59.
Hendro Widodo (2019) Revitalisasi Sekolah Berbasis Budaya Mutu. Universitas
           Ahmad Dahlan Yogyakarta, Indonesia Jurnal Administrasi
           Pendidikan 26 (1) (2019) 57-71ISSN: P.1412-8152 E.2580-1007 |
Instruksi Presiden Nomor 4 Tahun 1995 tentang Gerakan Nasional
           Memasyarakatkan dan Membudayakan Kewirausahaan.
Khadiyanto, Parfi. “Partisipasi Masyarakat dalam Pembangunan Unit Sekolah
           Baru.” Penerbit: Badan Penerbit Universitas Diponegoro Semarang,
           (2007).
Kemendikbud. “Panduan Pelaksanaan Pemetaan Mutu Pendidikan Tahun 2013.”
           Jakarta: Badan Pengembangan SDM dan Penjaminan Mutu
           Pendidikan Kemendikbud, 2013.
Moh.Zaini (2016). Manajemen Peningkatan Mutu Berbasis Madrasah.Desertasi
           Universitas Islam Negeri Maulana Malik Ibrahin Malang.
Muhamad Khoirul Umam (2020). Dinamisasi Manajemen Mutu Persfektif
           Pendidikan Islam. Jurnal Al-Hikmah Vol 8 Maret 2020| 61~74.
Małgorzata Dzimi ( 2018) Trust-Based Quality Culture Conceptual Model
           forHigher Education Institutions, University of Social Sciences, 9


                                      70

DiA: Jurnal Administrasi Publik, 2023 Juni Vol. 21 No. 1, e-ISSN: 2615-7268



            Sienkiewicza Street, 90-113 Łód´z, Polandia Sustainability 2018, 10,
            2599; doi:10.3390/su10082599.
Nasrul Amin,dkk (2018)Membangun Budaya Mutu yang Unggul Dalam Organisasi
            lembaga Pendidikan Islam. Universitas Nurul JadidPaiton Probolinggo
            Jawa Timur Jurnal Al TanzimVolume 2 Nomor 1 2018ISSN: 2549-
            3663
Nurhayati, dkk (2018). The Principal’s Leadership Strategy in Improving Quality:
            A Study at Aron State Elementary School Pidie Aceh Indonesia.
            Advances in Sosial Science, Education and Humanities Research,
            volume 269.
Nurmaini MY(2019).Meraih Mutu Sekolah Melalui Data Mutu: Suatu Tinjauan.
            Jurnal Ilmiah Universitas Batanghari Jambi, 19(2): 347-352 DOI
            10.33087/jiubj.v19i2.677 ISSN 1411-8939 (Online) | ISSN 2549-4236
            (Print)
Rais Hidayat, dkk (2018) Optimalisasi Budaya Mutu Sekolah Untuk
            meningkatkan Komitmen Guru. Jurnal Manajemen Pendidikan Vol.6,
            No.2, Juli 2018 P- ISSN 2302-0296 E-ISSN 2614-3313.
Reckson Kamusoko& Raphael Jingura (2019) A competency framework for
            internal quality assurance in higher education. Article in International
            Journal of Management in Education· January 2019 DOI:
            10.1504/IJMIE.2019.10018030
Riyanta,Teguh (2016) Mengembangkan Budaya Mutu Sekolah Melalui
            Kepemimpinan Transformasional. Jurnal manajemen pendidikan Vol.
            12, No. 2, Oktober 2016.
Rais Hidayat,Dkk (2018) Optimalisasi Budaya Mutu Sekolah Untuk Peningkatkan
            Komitmen Guru. Jurnal Manajemen Pendidikan Vol.6, No.2, Juli
            2018 P- ISSN 2302-0296 E-ISSN 2614-3313.
Robi Cahyadi Kurniawan (2016) Tantangan Kualitas Pelayanan Publik Pada
            Pemerintah Daerah. Jurnal Ilmiah Administrasi Publik dan
            Pembangunan, Vol. 7 No. 1, Januari-Juni 2016 ISSN: 2087
Senggo dan Abdul Kadir ( 2016) Budaya Organisasi Dalam Pelayanan Publik
            (Studi Pada Badan Penyelenggara Pelayanan Perizinan Kota
            Kendari) e- Journal - Publica, PPS AP-UHO, ISSN: 2502-5589 Edisi
            Januari 2016, Volume I No 1
Siti Aminah & Ari Dwi Widodo (2019), Membangun Budaya Mutu Di Madrasah
            Unggul (Studi Kasus di MAN 1 Jember Dan MA).
Undang-Undang Nomor 20 Tahun 2003 tentang Sistem Pendidikan Nasional.




                                        71