Available online at http://ijite.jredu.id
                                                               International Journal
      PUBLISHED BY
                                                               of Information
     JR
                                                               Technology and
 EDUCATION International Journal of Information Technology and Education (IJITE)
           Education (IJITE) 2 (4), (September 2023) 142-152

                                                                                              http://ijite.jredu.id


Implementation of School Management Information Systems
          at Vocational School State I Tomohon
        Israel Yonatan Fredrik Kamu1*, Parabelem Tinno Dolf Rompas1, Mario Tulenan Parinsi1

 1Technology and Vocational Education Study Program Postgraduate of Universitas Negeri Manado,
                                          Indonesia

                              *Corresponding author: isseryonatan@gmail.com

                                                     ARTICLE INFO
                                                     Article history:
           Received: July 20, 2023; Received in revised form: August 25, 2023; Accepted: September 07, 2023;
                                         Available online: September 10, 2023;


                                                     ABSTRACT

This research discusses the implementation of the School Management Information System (SIMS) at
SMK Negeri 1 Tomohon using the Rapid Application Development (RAD) method. School
management, as a process of planning, organizing, directing, and controlling, is carried out by the
school principal and his staff to achieve educational goals. The main goal of school management is to
create an effective and efficient learning environment. Information systems, as entities with human,
hardware, software, procedures, and data components, aim to collect, store, process, manage, and
convey relevant information. SMK Negeri 1 Tomohon, as a vocational school in North Sulawesi, faces
management challenges due to the use of conventional systems. Processes such as recording grades,
registering students, compiling schedules, and collecting data on school fee payments often take time
and are difficult. Therefore, this research is focused on implementing a School Management
Information System using the programming languages PHP, HTML, CSS, and MySQL, with users
consisting of Admin, Teachers, and Students, and using the RAD method. This research identifies
problems in data management and school administration which are still manual, resulting in
inefficiencies and potential errors. SIMS succeeded in making a positive impact with a structured
interface, allowing easy access to information on grades, schedules, and learning activities. SIMS also
facilitates systematic monitoring of student and teacher performance. This research concludes that
SIMS can be an effective solution to support educational management at SMK Negeri 1 Tomohon with
the potential for wider application in other school environments.

                                                                                                                      142
     International Journal of Information Technology and Education (IJITE)
     Volume 2, Number 4, September 2023
     e-ISSN: 2809-8463

        Implementation of School Management Information Systems at Vocational School State I Tomohon
              Israel Yonatan Fredrik Kamu, Parabelem Tinno Dolf Rompas, Mario Tulenan Parinsi

Keywords: information, school, system management



                                           INTRODUCTION

       School management is a process that involves planning, organizing, directing, and controlling
carried out by the school principal and his staff to achieve educational goals. The main goal of school
management is to create an effective and efficient learning environment for students, teachers, and
school staff. This process involves managing all operational and administrative aspects of the school,
including human resources, financial resources, and educational facilities. Effective school
management can improve the quality of education, achieve learning goals, and create an environment
that supports student growth and development.
       Information systems, as entities consisting of humans, hardware, software, procedures, and data
components, aim to collect, store, process, manage, and convey information that is relevant and useful
for users. Information systems can be used in various sectors, including education, to support decision-
making, business operations, and data management. Development and management of information
systems requires a good understanding of organizational needs, selection of appropriate technology,
adequate infrastructure settings, and effective security and data protection.
       SMK Negeri 1 Tomohon, as a vocational school in North Sulawesi Province, faces challenges in
school management due to the use of conventional systems. Processes such as recording grades,
registering new students, preparing schedules, and collecting data on school fee payments often
experience difficulties and take time. By looking at the context of the problem, researchers are
interested in conducting research with the title "Implementation of school management information
systems in vocational school negeri i tomohon." This research aims to create and analyze an information
system that can be used for education management at SMK Negeri 1 Tomohon.
       In limiting the problem, this research focuses on the use of PHP, HTML, CSS, and MySQL
programming languages. The application created will be a School Management Information System
with users consisting of Admin, Teachers, and Students. The development method used is RAD (Rapid
Application Development). Some of the issues identified involve manual processes in data collection,
processing, and management, which can lead to errors and inefficiencies. The lack of efficiency in data
collection and management, the absence of an efficient information system at SMK Negeri 1 Tomohon,
as well as anticipation to improve the quality of the school became the focus of problem identification.
       It is hoped that the results of this research can provide benefits, both theoretically by producing
new concepts in managing information systems and practically by increasing operational efficiency at
SMK Negeri 1 Tomohon through the implementation of information systems that suit the needs and
challenges faced by the school.


                                        LITERATURE REVIEW

Understanding the System

                                                                                                       143
    International Journal of Information Technology and Education (IJITE)
    Volume 2, Number 4, September 2023
    e-ISSN: 2809-8463

       Implementation of School Management Information Systems at Vocational School State I Tomohon
             Israel Yonatan Fredrik Kamu, Parabelem Tinno Dolf Rompas, Mario Tulenan Parinsi

       A system is a collection of elements that interact with each other and work together to achieve
certain goals. In a general context, a system is a unit consisting of components that are interconnected
and interact regularly to carry out certain functions or achieve certain goals. A system is a series
consisting of two or more components that are interconnected and interact with each other to achieve
goals where the system is usually divided into smaller sub-systems that support the larger
system(Romney and Steinbart, 2015).
       Based on the understanding of the experts above, it can be concluded that a system is a series or
collection of components that are interconnected and interact with each other in an organized
transformation process. Systems can consist of sub-systems that support a larger system and can be
viewed from a procedural and element perspective. In the context of information systems, a system is
a collection of components in a company or organization that are related to the creation and flow of
information. These components work together to achieve planned goals. Overall, a system is an entity
consisting of elements that interact and influence each other to achieve goals and carry out an
organized transformation process.

System Characteristics
       In defining a system, some approaches can focus on procedures or elements/components. In
principle, a system is a group of elements that are interconnected and work together to achieve certain
goals. Some experts have different approaches to defining the system, namely,
       According to Jeperson Hutahaean (2015:3) the system can be said to be a good system, it has
characteristics, namely:
       1. Components
       A system consists of several components that interact with each other, which means they work
together to form a single unit. System components consist of components in the form of subsystems or
parts of the system.
       2. System Limits (boundaries)
       System boundaries are areas that limit a system to other systems or the external environment.
These system boundaries allow a system to be viewed as a unit. The boundaries of a system indicate the
scope of the system.
       3. External Environment of the System (environment)
       The external environment of the system is outside the boundaries of the system which affects
system operations. The environment can be beneficial which must be maintained and detrimental
which must be maintained and controlled, otherwise, it will disrupt the survival of the system.
       4. System connector (Interface)
       The system liaison is a connecting medium between one subsystem and another subsystem. This
link allows resources to flow from subsystems to other subsystems. The output from a subsystem will
become input for another subsystem via a link.
       5. System Input (Input)
       Input is energy entered into the system, which can be in the form of maintenance (Maintenance
Input), and input signals (Signal Input). Maintenance input is the energy entered so that the system
can operate. The input signal is the energy that is processed to obtain the output. For example, in a


                                                                                                      144
    International Journal of Information Technology and Education (IJITE)
    Volume 2, Number 4, September 2023
    e-ISSN: 2809-8463

        Implementation of School Management Information Systems at Vocational School State I Tomohon
              Israel Yonatan Fredrik Kamu, Parabelem Tinno Dolf Rompas, Mario Tulenan Parinsi

computer system, a program is maintenance input, while data is an input signal to be processed into
information.
      6. System output (Output)
      The system output is the result of energy that is processed and classified into useful output and
waste. For example, computers produce heat which is waste, while information is the required output.
      7. System Processing (Process)
      A system is a processing part that will convert input into output. The production system will
process raw materials into finished materials, the accounting system will process data into financial
reports.
      8. System goals
      A system must have a goal or objective. The goals of the system determine the input the system
needs and the output the system will produce.

System Classification
       Several aspects of the system allow users to classify the system based on viewpoints. The system
classification in question (Tyoso, 2016), namely:
       1) Natural Systems and Man-Made Systems
       a) Natural systems are systems that occur through natural processes, not created by humans, for
            example, the solar system, galactic system, reproductive system, and others.
       b) Man-made systems are systems designed by humans. Artificial systems that involve human
            interaction, for example, accounting systems, information systems, etc.
       2) Deterministic Systems and Probabilistic Systems.
       a) A deterministic system is a system that operates with predictable behavior. The interaction
            of the parts can be detected with certainty so that the output of the system can be predicted,
            for example, a computer system, is an example of a system whose behavior can be determined
            based on the computer programs that are run.
       b) A probabilistic system is a system whose future conditions cannot be predicted because it
            contains elements of probability, for example, human systems.
       3) Open System and Closed System.
       a) An open system is a system that is connected and influenced by its external environment.
            More specifically, it is also known as an automated system, which is part of a human-made
            system and interacts with control by one or more computers as part of the system used in
            modern society. This system receives input and produces output for other subsystems, for
            example, the human cultural system.
       b) A closed system is a system that is unrelated and unaffected by its external environment. This
            system works automatically without any interference from outside parties. Theoretically,
            this system exists, but in reality, there is no truly closed system, there is only a relatively
            closed system (relatively closed, not truly closed).

Information


                                                                                                       145
    International Journal of Information Technology and Education (IJITE)
    Volume 2, Number 4, September 2023
    e-ISSN: 2809-8463

        Implementation of School Management Information Systems at Vocational School State I Tomohon
              Israel Yonatan Fredrik Kamu, Parabelem Tinno Dolf Rompas, Mario Tulenan Parinsi

      information is a collection of data or facts that are organized or processed in a certain way so that
they have meaning for the recipient(Anggraeni and Irviani, 2017). Information is data that has been
managed and processed to provide meaning and improve the decision-making process(Romney &
Steinbart, 2016). information is data that is processed and useful for users(Suryantara, 2017).
Information is data that has been processed and is intended for a person, organization, or anyone who
needs it (Mulyani, 2016).
      From the experts' explanations above, it can be concluded that information is the result of
processing or organizing data or facts that have meaning or value for the recipient. This information
has been processed so that it is useful and useful for the user or recipient of the information.
Information can also be used to assist in decision-making or improve certain processes.

Information Cycle
       The information cycle is a series of steps in processing information from beginning to end.
Consists of four stages: input, processing, output, and feedback. Input involves collecting data from
various sources. Processing involves manipulating data to produce meaningful information. Output
involves the presentation of processing results to the user. Feedback involves evaluating output results
and adjusting for improvement. The information cycle is important in processing information to
produce useful information. Information processing, data is processed using a certain process model.
For example, temperature in Fahrenheit is converted to Celsius through the use of a mathematical
model in the form of a conversion formula (Japreson Hutaen, 2015). The data is processed through the
model into information, which is then received by the recipient of the information. Recipients of this
information then make decisions and take relevant actions, which in turn generate new amounts of
data. This data then becomes input, processed again through the relevant model, and so on. This process
is called the information cycle or data processing cycle.

Information Systems
      An information system is an organized combination of people, hardware, software,
communication networks, and data resources that collect, change, and disseminate information
(Anggraeni & Irviani, 2017). An information system is a system created by humans and consists of
components in an organization to achieve goals, namely presenting information(Suryantara, 2017). An
information system is a system that is defined as collecting, processing, storing, analyzing, and
disseminating information for certain purposes. Like other systems, an information system consists of
input (data, instructions) and output (reports) (Gilang Ramadhan, et al, 2017).
      Based on the understanding conveyed by several sources, it can be concluded that an information
system is an orderly combination involving people, hardware, software, communication networks, and
data resources. This system functions to collect, change, and disseminate information with a specific
purpose. Information systems are also systems created by humans and consist of components in
organizations that aim to present information. As a system, an information system has input (data,
instructions) and output (reports), and involves the processes of collecting, processing, storing,
analyzing, and disseminating information.



                                                                                                       146
    International Journal of Information Technology and Education (IJITE)
    Volume 2, Number 4, September 2023
    e-ISSN: 2809-8463

       Implementation of School Management Information Systems at Vocational School State I Tomohon
             Israel Yonatan Fredrik Kamu, Parabelem Tinno Dolf Rompas, Mario Tulenan Parinsi

Information System Objectives
       an information system aims to produce information from data that is processed into a form that
is useful for its users (Nina Rahayu, Putri Sugiarti, and Siti Islamiyah, 2017).
      1. Usefulness. The system must produce information that is accurate, timely, and relevant for
           decision-making by management and operating personnel within the organization.
      2. Economy (Economic). All parts of the system including reports, controls, and machines must
           contribute a benefit value of at least the cost required.
      3. Reliability. The system output must have a high level of accuracy and the system itself must
           be able to operate effectively even when the human component is not present or when the
           machine component is temporarily inoperative.
      4. Subscription Services (Customer Service). The system must provide good or friendly service
           to customers. So that this system can be of interest to customers.
      5. Simplicity. The system should be simple enough so that its structure and operation can be
           easily understood and the procedures easy to follow.
      6. Flexibility. The system must be flexible enough to handle changes that occur, the importance
           of which is justified in the conditions in which the system operates or in the needs imposed
           by the organization.

School Management
       School management is a way of doing work involving many people to achieve educational goals
effectively (Daryanto, 2013). Daryanto also added that school management is viewed from a scientific
perspective, so school management is an application of administrative science in the field of schooling.


                                               METHODS

       The research method used is the RAD (Rapid Application Civilization) method. The RAD model
is a model used in the incremental software development process, especially for carrying out work in a
short time (Rosa & Salahuddin, 2018). The RAD method is a method adapted from the waterfall model
with a very high-speed version by using the waterfall model in the development of each software
component. See Figure 1.




                                                                                                      147
    International Journal of Information Technology and Education (IJITE)
    Volume 2, Number 4, September 2023
    e-ISSN: 2809-8463

        Implementation of School Management Information Systems at Vocational School State I Tomohon
              Israel Yonatan Fredrik Kamu, Parabelem Tinno Dolf Rompas, Mario Tulenan Parinsi




                                  Figure 1. Rapid Application Development

       The RAD method in system development includes five main stages. The following are the five
stages of RAD in system development:
      a. Business Modeling
       In business modeling, manual flows and school management information systems to be
developed are represented using business flowcharts.
      b. Data Modeling
       In data modeling, there are stages where the database design is created and the implementation
results are compiled into the school management information system database.
      c. Process Modeling
       At this stage, which is a stage in the design process, business functions have been defined and are
related to data definition. In this stage, researchers began to design a school management information
system using UML (Unified Modeling Language) tools.
          ▪ Creation of Usecase Diagrams
       At this stage, researchers will develop a system design based on the system requirements.
          ▪ Creation of Usecase Scenarios
       At this stage, the use case that was created in the previous stage has been defined.
          ▪ Creation of Activity Diagrams
       At this stage, the work sequence is designed from one activity to another. This stage is important
to get a picture of parallel behavior or provide an explanation of the behavior in the use case diagram.
          ▪ Creating Class Diagrams
       A class structure in a system that involves relationships between classes and explanations of each
class in the design modeling (logical view) of a system.
          ▪ Creation of Sequence Diagrams


                                                                                                       148
    International Journal of Information Technology and Education (IJITE)
    Volume 2, Number 4, September 2023
    e-ISSN: 2809-8463

        Implementation of School Management Information Systems at Vocational School State I Tomohon
              Israel Yonatan Fredrik Kamu, Parabelem Tinno Dolf Rompas, Mario Tulenan Parinsi

      In this stage, the relationship between objects arranged in a time sequence is explained.
Researchers pay attention to each stage in detail which has been developed to produce a better system.
     d. Application Creation
      In this stage, researchers integrate process modeling into the programming language stage.
     e. Testing And Replacement
      At this stage, researchers carry out trials with the aim of further understanding all the functions
in the system being developed.




                                      RESULTS AND DISCUSSION

       The implementation of the management information system at SMK Negeri 1 Tomohon has
produced a positive impact on the management process at the institution. Management information
systems play an important role in managing information related to students, preparing lesson schedules,
and school administration. Additionally, this system allows more effective use for teachers to provide
feedback to students through the school management platform. Using SIMS can not only increase time
efficiency but also make it easier to implement management systems in the school environment.
       In developing the school management information system application, the Visual Studio Code
text editor was used, as well as the PHP, HTML, and CSS (Bootstrap) programming languages, with
support from the Codeigniter framework. This system uses a MySQL database and Apache server. The
user interface of this school management information system is implemented by the process modeling
at the Rapid Application Development (RAD) stage.
       The Login page is the initial page for entering the school management information system
following user authentication (admin, student teachers, and principal). See Figure 2.




                                              Figure 2. Login page

                                                                                                       149
    International Journal of Information Technology and Education (IJITE)
    Volume 2, Number 4, September 2023
    e-ISSN: 2809-8463

        Implementation of School Management Information Systems at Vocational School State I Tomohon
              Israel Yonatan Fredrik Kamu, Parabelem Tinno Dolf Rompas, Mario Tulenan Parinsi



      The administrator page is a page for admins who have access rights to all menus and features
contained in this school management information system. On this page, the admin can also add, edit,
and delete data in the system. See Figure 3.




                                          Figure 3. administrator page

     The principal page is a page intended for the principal to control ongoing activities in the system.
On this page, the school principal can also see reports about ongoing learning activities. See Figure 4.




                                           Figure 4. Principal's Page

      The teacher page is a page intended for subject teachers to carry out learning activities. The
features found on this page are inputting and recapping absences, uploading materials and assignments,
and creating discussion forums. See Figure 5.




                                                                                                       150
    International Journal of Information Technology and Education (IJITE)
    Volume 2, Number 4, September 2023
    e-ISSN: 2809-8463

       Implementation of School Management Information Systems at Vocational School State I Tomohon
             Israel Yonatan Fredrik Kamu, Parabelem Tinno Dolf Rompas, Mario Tulenan Parinsi




                                            Figure 5. Teacher Page

      The student page is the access given to each student to view grades, and subject schedules, view
and send assignments, as well as to carry out activities in discussion forums opened by the admin or
subject teacher. And via this page, students can see announcements from the academic section. See
Figure 6.




                                             Figure 6. Student Page




                                              CONCLUSION

       School Management Information Systems (SIMS) make a significant contribution to increasing
efficiency and transparency in school operations. The success of these applications depends on meeting
functional standards, strict data security, and continuous development. SIMS allows the management
of student data, attendance, and school finances to be more structured and easy to track. Monitoring
student and teacher performance can be done more systematically through this platform.

Suggestions
Based on the conclusions above, several suggestions for maximizing the benefits of the School
Management Information System (School SIM) are as follows:


                                                                                                      151
    International Journal of Information Technology and Education (IJITE)
    Volume 2, Number 4, September 2023
    e-ISSN: 2809-8463

       Implementation of School Management Information Systems at Vocational School State I Tomohon
             Israel Yonatan Fredrik Kamu, Parabelem Tinno Dolf Rompas, Mario Tulenan Parinsi

   1. There needs to be regular training for school staff to ensure a good understanding of the use of
      the School Management Information System. This will increase the efficiency of application
      use and ensure that all features are fully utilized.
   2. The need for continuous development of the SIMS application. Update and add features as
      needs emerge over time. Make sure the application is always up-to-date and responsive to
      developments in the education system.
   3. The a need for active involvement of all relevant parties, including teachers, students, and
      school staff. Creating a shared understanding of the benefits of SIMS will increase participation
      and support from the entire education community.
   4. Increase awareness of data security among all users. Provide specific training on the importance
      of protecting student personal information and school data so that they can be accessed safely.




                                             REFERENCES

Anggraeni, E. Y., & Irviani, R. (2017). Pengantar Sistem Informasi (Penyuntingan ke-1). Andi.
Romney, M. B., & Steinbart, P. J. (2015). Sistem Informasi Akuntansi (Edisi Salemba Empat). Jakarta:
    Salemba Empat.
Hutahaean, J. (2015). Konsep Sistem Informasi. Deepublish.
Tyoso, J. S. P. (2016). Sistem Informasi Manajemen. Yogyakarta: Deepublish
Romney, M. B., & Steinbart, P. J. (2016). Accounting Information Systems (Edisi 14). Pearson
    Education, Inc.
Suryantara, I. G. N. (2017). Merancang Aplikasi Dengan Metodologi Extreme Programmings. Jakarta:
    Pt.Elex Media Komputindo.
Mulyani, E. (2016). Sistem Informasi Akuntansi. Yogyakarta: Andi.
Ramadhan, G., Budiman, E., & Syakir, A. (2017). Pengembangan Media Informasi Pengenalan Lagu
    Daerah Kalimantan Timur Berbasis Web. Prosiding Seminar Ilmu Komputer Dan Teknologi
    Informasi, 2(1), 256-262.
Rahayu, N., et al. (2017). SWOT Analysis Recruitment: PT Indo Taichen Textile Industry. Jurnal
    Semnasteknomedia, 5(1).
Daryanto, M. (2013). Administrasi dan Manajemen Sekolah.
Jakarta: Rineka Cipta.
Rosa, A. S., & Shalahuddin, M. (2018). Rekayasa Perangkat Lunak Terstruktur dan Berorientasi Objek.
    Bandung: Informatika Bandung.




                                                                                                      152
    International Journal of Information Technology and Education (IJITE)
    Volume 2, Number 4, September 2023
    e-ISSN: 2809-8463