International Journal of Research in Education
 Volume 3, Issue 1, January 2023, pp. 82 – 86

 e-ISSN: 2745-3553
 DOI: https://doi.org/10.26877/ijre.v3i1.17224



The Impact of School Management Misconceptions on Student
Encouragement of Student Acceptance in Primary Schools
Soedjono1*
1 Universitas PGRI Semarang, Indonesia



*Corresponding author’s email: soedjono@upgris.ac.id
  ARTICLE INFO                            ABSTRACT
                                          This research aims to explore school strategies to restore public trust
                                          through improving the quality of education. The methods used are the
  Received: December 20th 2022            critical method, dialectical method, and scholastic method. This research is
                                          included in library research. The author tries to find data, and theories
  Revised: January 15th 2023
                                          related to the issues raised in various literature or references that the
  Accepted: January 24th 2023             author finds and then compares them using the method mentioned above.
                                          The research results show that management misconceptions are caused by
                                          various deficiencies ranging from lack of understanding to low managerial
   This is an open access article under   competence of school principals, which has an impact on the low quality of
               the CC–BY-SA license.      output, resulting in low public enthusiasm for the school. The efforts made
                                          by the school are expected to be comprehensive, both internal and
                                          external, including, 1) strengthening the learning community in the school.
  Keywords:                               This community can be used as an effort to strengthen the competency of
                                          all human resources in the school, starting from the principal, teachers, and
  Misconceptions, management,
                                          education staff. ; 2) creating a comfortable school ecosystem, comfortable
  quality of education,
  encouragement                           not only for students but also for teachers and educational staff at the
                                          school; 3) collaboration with people and society, an effort that is no less
                                          important than the others, because this effort is like a double-edged sword,
                                          the context is to work together to improve the process and understanding
                                          of the quality measures of educational outcomes.


Introduction
   Educational outcomes have an impact on changes in almost all aspects of life. Quality
education is certainly a hope for all parties because the impact is broad. According to Tilaar
(2008), the quality of education is an indicator of school management, because this quality
describes the ability of the education system to be directed effectively at increasing the
added value of input factors in order to produce the highest possible output.
    Schools are the smallest educational entities that have characteristics in accordance with
the needs of society, especially the needs of students and parents. Based on this needs
orientation, the school bases the characteristics that will be built and realized in the vision,
mission, and goals in the framework of achieving general educational goals. Hurlock (2010)
states that factors that influence children's interest in choosing a school include, 1) parental
influence; 2) peers; 3) academic success; 4) early school experience; 5) attitude towards
work; 6) teacher and student relationships; and 7) the emotional atmosphere of the school.

  83               International Journal of Research in Education, 3(1), January 2023, 82-86


Even more specifically, Kotler and Fox (2002) stated that in competition, an educational
institution can use marketing assets to form a competitive advantage. These marketing
assets include, among others, aspects: 1) quality of educational programs; 2) differentiation
of educational programs; 3) cost or price; 4) institution's reputation; and 5) good quality
institutional human resources. The factors above are greatly influenced by school
management.
    The school's ability to manage the curriculum, organize learning, develop professional
human resource competencies, create a pleasant school ecosystem, and build cooperation
with stakeholders (parents and the community), and the output, apart from competence,
also school connectedness, greatly influences the image of the school in the surrounding
community, those were stated by Salim (2017). Facts in the field that hinder achieving the
above objectives, as stated by Sujanto B (2021), including that school principals do not have
adequate authority, school principals' managerial abilities are still not optimal, and low
involvement of education stakeholders.
    Identification of the conditions above, including, 1) the limited authority of the principal
makes the decisions taken by the principal haunted by uncertainty; 2) the lack of competence
of the school principal means that the management process implemented still contains
several misconceptions; 3) there is still low involvement of parents and the community in
the management of education because school principals are afraid of being seen as
committing extortion; 4) the perception of school principals who still misinterpret the
concept of school wellbeing; 5) the perception of school principals towards national
assessments is still low, so that the process leads to shortcuts rather than fundamental
process changes. The conditions above greatly influence the process, output, and outcome,
so that public trust in schools is relatively low.
    Starting from the problem of low public trust in the quality of schools, the next discussion
is what is the school's strategy to restore public trust through improving the quality of
education.
Research Methods
    Five steps described the method of philosophical thinking by Louis O. Kattsoff, 1) human
knowledge was collected as much as possible; 2) analysis; 3) raising doubts, questioning and
connecting, looking for better answers than existing answers; 4) looking for reasons,
coherence and understanding knowledge; 5) prepare a coherent, coherent and rational
chart; 6) logical; 7) develop conceptual. Although the discussion of this research was not as
detailed as the steps above, the author tried to get it closer by carrying out the following
synthesis. The discussions were 1) critical, an analysis of terms and opinions, which was an
interpretation of meaning that explains beliefs and shows contradictions; dialectical,
meaning by following the dynamics of nature itself according to realistic opinions, and
conflicting opinions, and both were synthesized so that a consensus of thought was reached;
3) scholastic, conclusions drawn on the basis of clear definitions and principles (synthetic-
deductive).

Discussion
    Apart from the general low quality of schools discussed above, this is coupled with the
latest policy that schools are expected to implement the concept of independent learning

  84               International Journal of Research in Education, 3(1), January 2023, 82-86


which is oriented towards facilitating education based on students' needs which is realized
in the independent curriculum. The low implementation of the independent curriculum is in
accordance with the research results of Alawi, D et al. (2022). Obstacles felt by schools
include, 1) compiling the school's operational curriculum; 2) organizing all school
components; 3) mobilizing all components in specific processes based on school
characteristics, and building a pleasant school ecosystem; 4) educational control; and 5)
empowering education stakeholders in improving the quality of education.
Developing operational curriculum in school
    Schools as autonomous institutions (in accordance with Government Regulation (PP)
number 58 of 2021) are given a very large mandate to develop their own operational
curriculum in accordance with the school's characteristics, vision, mission, and goals. Apart
from that, schools also independently and specifically prepare learning objectives (TP) and
flow of learning objectives (ATP), project objectives (T-Pro), and flow of project objectives
(AT-Pro) based on learning outcomes (CP) and project achievements (C-Pro), outlined by
the government. The school's task is very difficult because in preparing TP and T-Pro they
must pay attention to the needs of the school's characteristics and the needs of its students.
The mandate of PP 58/2021 is also in quality assurance, autonomous schools must also be
independent.
    School principals must understand curriculum management comprehensively so that
management functions can be planned, organized, driven, and controlled effectively and
efficiently in achieving the expected curriculum goals, as stated by Soedjono (2021). The
mindset of school principals with the change in curriculum preparation from top-down to
bottom-up still requires adjustments and hard work. This condition means that curriculum
policies in schools are not as expected, the impact felt by schools is the uncertainty of
teachers in implementing the curriculum that has been jointly planned.
Organizing all components of the school
    The concept of learning together is a central theme in implementing the concept of
independent learning which is realized in the independent curriculum. The learning
community is a forum that must be carefully organized to learn and develop an independent
curriculum through the habit of reflection. According to Jatmiko, HTP & RS Putra (2022),
teachers' reflective abilities in learning are still relatively lacking. Reflection is something
new in learning communities. Through reflection in the learning community, positive
interaction patterns will occur in the context of joint learning. The Ministry of Education and
Culture has provided an independent teaching platform that contains learning menu options
and learning communities are expected to become a medium for learning together through
learning community platforms. Another goal of the learning community is to change the
teacher's mindset that every time a change occurs, the teacher must be active and not always
wait.

  85              International Journal of Research in Education, 3(1), January 2023, 82-86


Pleased learning process
    The concept of teaching at the right level is expected to become a teacher's platform for
teaching students. Differentiated learning is a necessity that teachers prepare for every time
they carry out learning and assessment. School principals overseeing learning are expected
to focus on this concept. This concept is believed to meet the needs of students, as stated by
Farid, I. et al. (2022) that differentiated learning will meet students' needs. Even
differentiated learning will increase students' literacy and numeracy, as is the research
result of Rahma, S. et al. (2022). This condition will provide awareness for all parties that
literacy and numeracy cannot be achieved instantly. The impact of the successful
implementation of this concept is that apart from maximum student learning outcomes, the
teaching and learning process is enjoyable.
Controlling
    The concept of mentoring has become the nomenclature for changing the process of
monitoring and evaluating education, which was previously called supervision. This concept
emphasizes equality, the communication model is more recommended as coaching.
Sibagariang, D. et al. (2021) prove that coaching has a strategic meaning in building
collaboration, increasing creativity, building a consistent mindset, career awareness,
practicing reflection habits, and making people aware that successful education depends on
the support of parents and the community. In implementing this concept, the school
principal is the first and foremost person who becomes an example and role model. This
concept builds awareness both internally and externally. Awareness that education is
successful because of cooperation in building it will have a greater "magnetic" impact on
schools for stakeholders. In other words, this is the most effective marketing asset according
to Kotler and Fox (2002).
Empowerment of Stakeholders
    The final result of education at each level is a graduate profile who has the Pancasila
character. Through six dimensions, 1) faith, devotion to God Almighty, and noble character,
2) independence, 3) cooperation, 4) global diversity, 5) critical reasoning, and 6) creativity,
the learning process in educational units does not only relies on strengthening the cognitive
aspect, but the skill aspect becomes more attention, and even the attitude aspect becomes
more attention. Strengthening character cannot possibly be developed only at school, the
family and community must participate in supporting and encouraging it. This three-pillar
collaboration can be used as a platform for participation models outside of learning. The
stronger the interweaving of these three pillars, the more communication, information, and
participation can grow together, the result of which is the development of a common
understanding of educational outcomes which are a measure of educational quality. This is
as stated by Irawati, D (2022).
Conclusion
    The discussion illustrates how management misconceptions caused by various
deficiencies ranging from lack of understanding to low managerial competence of school

  86              International Journal of Research in Education, 3(1), January 2023, 82-86


principals have an impact on the low quality of output. The efforts made by the school are
expected to be comprehensive, both internal and external, including, 1) strengthening the
learning community in the school. This community can be used as an effort to strengthen the
competency of all human resources in the school, starting from the principal, teachers, and
education staff. ; 2) creating a comfortable school ecosystem, comfortable not only for
students but also for teachers and educational staff at the school; 3) collaboration with
people and society, an effort that is no less important than the others, because this effort is
like a double-edged sword, the context is to work together to improve the process and
understanding of the quality measures of educational outcomes.

References
Alawi, D. dkk. 2022. Implementasi Kurikulum Merdeka Belajar Kampus Merdeka Pasca
     Pandemi Covid-19. Edukatif: Jurnal Ilmua Pendidikan. 4 (4): 5863 – 5873.
Ane Kathrin Adam, 2015, Strategy and Succes Faktor of Business Schools, Germany: Springer
     Gabler.
Farid, Ilham. dkk. 2022. Strategi Pembelajaran Diferensiasi Dalam Memenuhi Kebutuhan
     Belajar Peserta Didik di Sekolah Dasar. Jurnal Pendidikan dan Konseling. 4 (6): 11177
     – 11182
Hurlock, Elizabeth, B. 2010. Perkembangan Anak. Jakarta: Erlangga.
Irawat, D. Siti Musitah, Muchamad Nursalim. 2022. Filsafat Pendidikan Ki Hajar Dewantara
     sebagai Landasan Pendidikan Vokasi di Era Kurikulum Merdeka. Jurnal Pendidikan
     Mandala. 7 (4): 1015 – 1025.
Jatmiko, HTP & RS Putra. 2022. Refleksi Diri Guru Bahasa Indonesia Dalam Pembelajaran
     Berdiferensiasi Di Sekolah Penggerak. Lingua Franca. Jurnal Bahasa, Sastra dan
     Pengajarannya. 6 (2): 224 – 232.
Kattsoff, Louis O. 1817, Pengantar filsafat / Louis O. Kattsoff; penerjemah: Soejono
     Soemargono 1986, Yogyakarta: Tiara Wacana
Kotler, P. & Karen Fox. 1995. Strategic Marketing for Education. New Jersey: Prentice-Hall.
Rahma,S. 2022. Pendekatan Pembelajaran Diferensiasi dalam Model Inkuiri terhadap
    Kemampuan Numerasi Siswa. Jurnal Ilmiah Pendidikan dan Pembelajaran. 6 (2): 393 –
    403
Salim, N. A. 2017. Peningkatan efektivitas pengelolaan sekolah melalui penguatan
     kemampuan manajerial kepala sekolah. JMSP (Jurnal Manajemen dan Supervisi
     Pendidikan). 2(1): 8-16.
Soedjono. 2021. Model penyelenggaraan pendidikanberbasis merdeka belajar di Kota
     Semarang. Jurnal Pendidikan Dasar dan Menengah: 1 (1): 51 – 59.
Sibagariang, Dahlia and Sihotang, Hotmaulina and Murniarti, Erni (2021) Peran Guru
     Penggerak Dalam Pendidikan Merdeka Belajar Di Indonesia. Jurnal Dinamika
     Pendidikan. 14 (2): 88 – 99.
Sujanto, B. 2021. Pengelolaan Sekolah: Permasalahan dan Solusi, Jakarta: PT Bumi Aksara
Tilaar, A. S. 2008. Analisis kebijakan pendidikan suatu pengantar. Bandung: Remaja Roesda
      Karya.