World Journal of Education and Humanities
                                                                      ISSN 2687-6760 (Print) ISSN 2687-6779 (Online)
                                                                                                   Vol. 4, No. 3, 2022
                                                                                 www.scholink.org/ojs/index.php/wjeh


Original Paper

    Professionalization of Educational Leadership for the Members

                     of the Association of African Universities
                Frederick Ebot Ashu1*, Michel Auguste T. Ngantchop2 & Moses S. Lavngwa3
1
    Senior Lecturer, Department of Educational Foundations and Administration. Faculty of Education,
University of Buea, Cameroon; and President of the Cameroon Council for Educational Leadership and
Management Society (CCELMS), Buea, Cameroon
2
    Dean of the School of Catholic Studies at the Catholic University Institute of the University of Buea and
Douala Campuses, Buea, Cameroon
3
    Head of Service for Programs and Adjunct Lecturer at the Faculty of Political Science, University of
Buea-Cameroon; Instructor at Biaka University Institute, Buea-Cameroon and Researcher in
Moral/Political Philosophy and Philosophy of Education
*
    Frederick Ebot Ashu, Senior Lecturer, Department of Educational Foundations and Administration.
Faculty of Education, University of Buea, Cameroon; and President of the Cameroon Council for
Educational Leadership and Management Society (CCELMS), Buea, Cameroon


Received: July 16, 2022             Accepted: August 16, 2022           Online Published: August 20, 2022
doi:10.22158/wjeh.v4n3p60               URL: http://dx.doi.org/10.22158/wjeh.v4n3p60


Abstract
This study sets out to theorize and conceptualize internal stakeholders’ provision of Educational
Leadership for the Members of the Association of African Universities (AAU). It reviews research
materials, policies and modalities in developing educational leadership, African Philosophies of
Education (APE) and interviews of university academic staff and students in measuring the success of
professionalization of educational leadership. The purposive sampling technique of data collection is
used to ensure representativeness and qualitative methodology, including the use of document-based
content analysis in order to generate valid, reliable and rich data based on interviews with academic
staff, administrators and students. The findings of this study will contribute to the deeper understanding
of internal stakeholders’ provision of a decolonized Educational Leadership Curriculum (DELC)
objective at Postgraduate Diploma, Master’s and Doctorate programmes in Educational Leadership is
therefore proposed for African universities. This will enable education leader, schools and School
system leaders to play a critical role in having a clear vision, the ability to communicate the vision to
team members, the ability to organize in an effective and efficient manner, inspiring subordinates

                                                      60

 www.scholink.org/ojs/index.php/wjeh          World Journal of Education and Humanities           Vol. 4, No. 3, 2022



towards the fulfillment of the organization’s goals, and balancing the conflict of interest of all
subordinates and stakeholders. The proposed leadership learning programs focus on the actual
improvement of schools and the educational systems to achieve equity, diversity, social inclusion,
peace, economic growth and prosperity. These leadership programmes will address the challenges of
developing human capital and well-being, promoting employment and economic integration,
governance, strategic management and democracy in the different African union countries.
Keywords
professionalization,      educational   leadership,   decolonized       educational       leadership   curriculum,
association of African universities


1. Introduction
Higher Education (HE) institutions in African countries have come under serious criticisms for failing
to improve professionalization in educational leadership and the continuing globalisation of the sector. In
an increasingly globalized world, educational leadership standards not only respond to domestic factors
but also take into account commitments made at the international level and goals established
collectively by a group of countries and global organisations like the African Union (AU),
Commonwealth, the European Union (EU), Asia-Pacific (APAC), and organisations like United
Nations (UN), the World Bank, United National Educational Scientific Cultural Organisation
(UNESCO).
Furthermore, for the Association of African Universities (AAU) in which development remains
dependent on donor support, the leadership process itself is at least partly shaped by the modalities of
external aid and the tools and procedures defined by the donor community. In this macroclimate of
change from administration to management and leadership and the new situation of democracy and
freedom in entrepreneurship, altruism, equity, peace and prosperity have become a major prerequisite
for the rapid economic development of most African Union nations and in the light of globalization.
The Association of African Universities is a continental union consisting of universities on the African
continent. The Ministries of Education (MoE) in African countries must engage stakeholders to develop
high-quality leadership skills and behaviours that will adapt to new circumstances of globalisation.
Improving access to leadership education for marginalized communities, developing the leadership
capacity of head teachers and principals through on-the job training or using information technology,
distance learning and part time learning opportunities, can help education leaders in both state, private
and faith learning institutions in African countries to enhance their learning and adapt better to the
changing global society. Provision of High-Quality Leadership learning programmes in the different
higher education institutions has been a crucial part of the different Ministry of Education‟s to sustain a
colonial aim that promotes alien legacies that suppress African customs, traditions, norms and values.
Previous empirical studies about high-quality educational leadership studies in Education are common
in most developed countries. Research on internal stakeholders‟ leadership effectiveness in
                                          61
Published by SCHOLINK INC.

 www.scholink.org/ojs/index.php/wjeh        World Journal of Education and Humanities     Vol. 4, No. 3, 2022



implementing professionalization of educational leadership in African Universities is scarce though
literature on the quality of educational curriculum reform in African higher education institutions has
either single or multiple case studies in employing qualitative methodology. Also, quantitative studies
have focused on higher education reform outcomes, such as the university structures, decolonising the
curriculum, staff and students‟ learning outcomes. Quantitative or qualitative measures of the process
and impact of the leadership of curriculum programme reforms at continental or international levels are
largely missing. A critical review of this will be presented below.
1.1 Objective and Research Questions
This study aims to critically address education policies by theorizing and conceptualizing internal
stakeholders‟ provision of effective Educational Leadership in Higher Education institutions that are
members of the Association of African universities. The study shall address the following research
question: What are the important factors perceived by internal stakeholders in higher education about
the implementation of professionalization of educational leadership in African Universities?
1.2 Scope of the Paper
Regarding the scope of this paper, the subject area would summarize the literature that has influenced
this study. The aims of the study and research questions are then presented and followed by a
justification about policies and modalities in developing educational and school leaders for the 21st
century. Antecedents of the study illustrating theoretical and conceptual frameworks that would be used
to interpret, analyse and discuss internal stakeholder‟s provision of the implementation of
professionalization of educational leadership in African universities. We would provide a wider
literature on high-quality leadership learning programmes in Higher Education. Also, the philosophical
and methodological approaches would be outlined, followed by the analysis of the field notes
documents and interview transcripts and the ethical considerations would be presented. Finally, the
findings and discussions of data would be discussed.
1.3 Policies and Modalities in Developing School Leaders in the African Continent
Here, we would analyse lessons that exhibit international policy reforms and expectations not only for
the preparation for school leaders‟ role, but also for relevant in-service professional development and
support for serving head teachers and principals. In most African countries, the Association of African
universities (AAU) is the lead policy-making institution on policies concerning African universities.
The AAU formulates policies and programmes for the development, management and administration of
higher education institutions in Africa. It ensures that policies in African universities concerning school
leaders‟ development are implemented. UNESCO encourages policymakers of developing countries to
draw on research and examples of best practice to deliver successful reforms in this area. The present
study is a contribution to this effort. It consists of international policy framework and aid modalities
supporting educational leadership development in different African countries.
A global review of Education for All (EFA) observation since the twenty-five years of the movement
has been marked by a shift in focus from quantity (access, enrolment and retention) to quality, as most
                                                 62
Published by SCHOLINK INC.

 www.scholink.org/ojs/index.php/wjeh        World Journal of Education and Humanities     Vol. 4, No. 3, 2022



countries in both developed and developing countries have invested in teacher training, learning
materials, equipment and facilities. It is worth noting that any educational system that lacks universal
character violates the basic right to education for all. This exclusion which favours an elitist education
leads to the denial of the rights of the indigenous communities, refugees, rural children, and street
children to quality education, health, and social services. Sadly, only few countries in the African Union
regions have attempted to tap the potential of education for all whose program is related to school
leadership, governance, management and administration in their pursuit of better quality, effectiveness
and efficiency in education delivery.
The main aim of the Millennium Development Goals (MDGs) is a firm commitment of the international
community to expand the vision of poverty reduction and pro-poor growth. This aim vigorously places
human development at the centre of social and economic progress in all countries. There were eight
international development goals for the year 2015 that had been established following the Millennium
Summit of the United Nations in 2000, following the adoption of the United Nations Millennium
Declaration. The Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs) succeeded the MDGs in 2016.
All 191 United Nations member states, and at least 22 international organizations, are committed to help
achieve the Sustainable Development Goals. This study provides evidence suggesting why the
Association of African Universities should work with its different universities and implement adequate
leadership strategies that will enable the African continent to become a globalized world power as
disscussed in Agenda 2063 and the Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs): especially the 1st which
seeks to eradicate poverty and hunger; the 4th which ensures inclusive and equitable education and
promote lifelong learning opportunities for all; and SG8 which seeks to promote sustainable, inclusive
and sustainable economic growth, full and productive employment and decent work for people of our
nations.
Allen & Lachapelle‟s research results also indicate that minor investments in leadership development
can yield dramatic changes in a community‟s capacity to identify and address problems affecting
educators e.g., Scholarships and grants by government, international organizations and NGOs are also
encouraging Africans to become school leaders. This can be achieved by enabling as many children and
adults as possible to go to school at a very little or no cost and graduate with qualifications to work as
leaders. Some NGOs in different African countries have also partnered with Government and
international organizations in providing jobs in rural areas to reach out to the poor.
Sector-Wide Approaches or SWAps as they have come to be called, reflect a common goal, governance;
coherent vision of education developed in the second half of the 1990s as one of several means for
development agencies to achieve greater coherence in their approaches to providing development
assistance. The Institute for Health Sector Development (IHSD) provides an overview of experience of
education in SWAps in Rwanda, Uganda and Zambia to address this question and make
recommendations as to how strategy development can be improved. Boak & Ndaruhutse discuss the
various considerations necessary when choosing such policy frameworks or aid modalities. We note
                                               63
Published by SCHOLINK INC.

 www.scholink.org/ojs/index.php/wjeh       World Journal of Education and Humanities      Vol. 4, No. 3, 2022



that UNESCO has been instrumental in supporting the development of education systems in its member
states, working across a range of areas, including sector-wide policy and planning, teacher policies and
development, adult literacy and non-formal education and gender equality in education. UNESCO‟s
intervention in SWAps modalities vary according to needs, but reflect different key functions including
capacity-builders in member states and catalysts for international cooperation. Through these functions
and its international mandate, UNESCO is well placed to support countries at different stages of the
development of school leadership.
Budget support is a particular method of giving international development aid. This is also known as an
aid instrument or aid modality and has been used for developing the capacity for teachers and school
leaders. During the past two decades, some donor countries have changed the way they work by
contributing parts of their development assistance directly to partner countries‟ budgets. The aim of
budget support is to better align support with country policies and to reduce the burden of multiple and
fragmented aid projects like supporting the development of teachers and school leaders. Budget support,
as this type of aid is known, also attempts to strengthen the country‟s financial and management systems
by using them, and, ultimately, to achieve better development results through more efficient and effective
spending. There is growing interest from various stakeholders in assessing the impacts of budget support
and finding out whether budget support is indeed an effective way to support the leadership development
of school leaders for poverty reduction. The OECD methodology was tested in evaluations of budget
support in Tunisia, Mali and Zambia in 2010/2011, and, after revision, it was used in Tanzania and
Mozambique in 2012/2013. Evaluations are now underway in Morocco and Burundi and many other
African countries.
This study proposes the curriculum policies for implementing educational leadership objectives at the
diploma, Master and Doctoral programmes could enable countries in the African continent to achieve
equity, social inclusion, peace, economic growth and prosperity. These policy frameworks and aid
modalities addressed are usually used by most developing countries for developing human capital and
well-being, promoting employment and economic integration, governance, strategic management and
democracy in the different African union countries. It also demonstrates that the Association of African
Universities can work in partnership with member universities and improve teaching and learning
indirectly and most powerfully through their support and influence on staff motivation, commitment
and working conditions. It is appropriate that civil society and other donors can work together to bring
about policies that will increase African countries with the tools such as suggested policy frameworks
and modalities that can help in the implementation of professionalization of educational leadership in
different African countries. Donors should work in partnership with the Association of African
Universities and support the emergence and development of policy making processes that are formal,
transparent and accountable to the interests of the poor, and conduct their policy dialogue through
them.


                                                    64
Published by SCHOLINK INC.

 www.scholink.org/ojs/index.php/wjeh           World Journal of Education and Humanities       Vol. 4, No. 3, 2022



1.4 Conceptual Framework
The conceptual framework which informs this study is drawn from the provision of professionalization
of educational leadership learning programmes in Higher Education in African countries and
Leadership Learning programmes in Higher Education.
1.4.1 Professionalization of Educational Leadership in Higher Education in African Universities
The implementation of the professionalization of educational leadership requires innovative practices
to ensure improvement programmes within African universities. This requires a broader range of
students not just to apply and begin, but to stay and gain qualifications that meet Higher Education
expectations and gain employment or venture into business in the current job market. Whilst
professionalization of educational leadership inevitably involves some form of organisation
improvement, Fullan and Stigelbauer suggest that lack of attention to the process of improvement is a
major reason for its failure in most African societies. Fullan‟s model identified four broad phases in the
improvement       process     namely:   initiation,   implementation,       continuation and   outcome.       The
implementation phase is said to be crucial since it identified the major factors affecting implementation
which African governments and other stakeholders should consider before committing the university
improvement effort or rejecting it.
Professionalization researchers have consistently stressed the importance of Higher Education
institutions‟ commitment to nurturing leaders and managers in academia, and the form of developing
the capacity of middle managers and students‟ use of information technology to enhance teaching and
learning in the changing society scenarios. This study reports about increasing international interest of
universities‟ provision of formal, informal and non-formal leadership learning opportunities within the
framework of the principle of lifelong education.
The African Union considers the distinctiveness of the provision of professional programmes in
universities, professional schools and vocational training institutes in Higher Education from the
students‟ perspective in different learning institutions in Africa. In particular, the students‟ experience
was addressed within different specialities; the context for curriculum development; professional
learning programmes; academic advice and support; and the student life-cycle was addressed. An
investigation into the similarities and differences between the experience of students studying in
universities, professional schools or vocational training institutions revealed extrinsic and intrinsic
features, such as social life, costs, resources, administration and tutor accessibility.
1.4.2 Leadership Learning Programmes in Higher Education
Throughout the world, universities are creating educational leadership learning the diploma, bachelor,
master or doctorate levels that offer career growth to educators. This approach can enable teachers and
other educational professionals to become school administrators, such as principals or head teachers and
even university lecturers.
Eacott and Asuga evaluated the Botswana Primary Education Improvement Project (PEIP) in 1981,
funded by the USAID and Primary Schools Management Development Project (PSMDP) (1999-2002).
                                            65
Published by SCHOLINK INC.

 www.scholink.org/ojs/index.php/wjeh        World Journal of Education and Humanities      Vol. 4, No. 3, 2022



This was a joint venture between the government and the British Department for International
Development that sought to develop the management and instructional leadership skills of primary
school heads in order to make them more effective at their jobs. The PEIP project was institutionalized
through the establishment of a Department of Primary Education at the University of Botswana.
Evans and Yoder noted that the PSMDP project consisted of three training units: i) leading the learning
school; ii) leading the ethical school; and iii) leading the person-centred school. These projects had a
significant impact but, there is a consensus that much work still needs to be done in relation to leadership
preparation and support in Botswana. Pansiri and Pheko added that a systemic national training policy
and or national training institute are the desirable paths forward. Some other African countries like
Eritrea and Gambia are already providing mandatory training for head teachers. In Eritrea, this takes
the form of a short management course for newly appointed school directors, while Gambia offers a
one-year certificate for head teachers, also focusing on school management.
With regard to the South African model and the role of the institute of South Africa‟s path to national
qualifications for school leaders, it is clear that aspiring school leaders in South Africa must obtain the
National Professional Qualification for Principals (NPQP) like in the English system to qualify as a
candidate for school head teacher. Bush, Kiggundu and Moorosi explained that the Advanced Certificate
in Education (ACE) based on the National Qualification Framework (NQF) has been introduced and it is
believed to be the first national qualification of its kind in Africa. The ACE is a practice-based two-year
part-time course addressing the professional development concerns of head teachers. This is delivered by
universities through an agreed common framework with the former National Department of Education
and the National Management and Leadership Committee.
In Kenya, there was an evaluation on the Primary School Management (PRISM) project that was
implemented from 1996 to 2000 courtesy of donor funding, providing 16,700 teachers the opportunity to
participate in school management learning activities with a range of educational stakeholders through
support groups. According to Eacott and Asuga, the national institute, the Kenya Education Management
Institute (KEMI), was established to serve as a catalyst for poverty reduction by enhancing educational
leaders‟ management competencies and bringing about a paradigm shift among educational leaders. The
Ministry of Education in Kenya, through funding from US Agency for International Development
(USAID), conducted the Kenya Educational Management Capacity Assessment (KEMCA) which
concluded that most head teachers feel that they either had not been prepared for their role or lacked key
administrative skills even when they had attended courses.
Kenya, like many other African countries is part of the current United Nations Educational, Scientific
and Cultural Organisation (UNESCO) and Varkey GEMS Foundation have funded 10,000 Principals
Leadership Programmes (with Ghana and India). As a policy initiative, the Teachers‟ Service
Commission (the employing body of educators) requires school administrators to attend a minimum of
two development courses annually. Although there are some courses offered by KEMI, universities,
systemic authorities, professional associations and consultants, school leadership preparation and
                                                 66
Published by SCHOLINK INC.

 www.scholink.org/ojs/index.php/wjeh        World Journal of Education and Humanities     Vol. 4, No. 3, 2022



development remain ad hoc, haphazard, and not responsive to the needs of current and aspiring
principals.
Ebot Ashu argues that primary school head teachers in Cameroon do enjoy pragmatic approaches to
in-service-training that include the following content: pedagogical management, functions of head
teachers, management of teaching and learning, human resource management, resource management,
personnel management, financial management, learning and assessment, school relationship
management, learning development, the school within its environment, performance management,
self-development of leaders, health and safety, research in education, and leadership in education.
Ebot Ashu has critically conducted an assessment of the Master of Education degree in Education
Leadership programme at the Faculty of Education of the University of Buea-Cameroon which
envisages the growing recognition and use of Essential ICT Management Skills for School Leaders,
Leadership in Education: Deputies and Middle Managers, School Resource Management, Education
Administration and Planning, Leadership in Education: Senior Leadership, Managing Education
Change Policy, Research and Statistical Methods in Education, Strategic Management in Educational
Leadership, Seminar in Research Methods in Educational Leadership, Organisation Effectiveness,
Improvement and transformation, Human Resource Management, Review Moderation Systems and
Process, Practicum and Thesis.
UNESCO discussed about the theory programme of most French African countries like Togo, Ivory
Coast, Benin, Algeria, Morocco, etc., which consists of gaining an in-depth understanding of school
administration and management in schools or different workplaces. According to Collins, the image of
organisational leaders as experts in administration, strategic leadership and team management skills
were the most distinctive modifications in the content of leadership and management development
programmes in most French Speaking African countries. Huber and West argue that the French system
emphasizes experiential methods and course-based learning opportunities.
Overall, it is evident to summarize that the need to improve schools, organisations and educational
systems performances through the development of leaders and managers has not been given priority by
many African countries. In turbulent times, we argue that educational leadership thought in different
African countries may be relevant to develop the current and new generation of global head teachers,
principals and university leaders and managers through partnerships between governments,
international agencies and universities in Africa and western societies. In the next section, the
philosophical and methodological approaches are considered in more detail, allowing a critical review
of their appropriateness for the study.


2. Philosophical and Methodological Approaches
The aim of this section is to locate and justify the research approach and the case study methodology
used. The section falls into two distinct parts: Firstly, the research will be located within wider African
Philosophies of Education (APE). Secondly, the researchers will clarify their research methodology and
                                                 67
Published by SCHOLINK INC.

 www.scholink.org/ojs/index.php/wjeh            World Journal of Education and Humanities     Vol. 4, No. 3, 2022



method and give details of how they analysed the interview transcripts, considering issues such as
validity and ethics.
2.1 African Philosophies of Education (APE) as They ‘Fit’ in Developing a Decolonized Educational
Leadership Curriculum (DELC)
The notion of an African Philosophy of Education (APE) in developing a decolonised educational
leadership curriculum (DELC) emerged with the advent of a de-colonial education and the call for an
educational philosophy that would reflect this renewal through a focus on Africa and its cultures,
identities and values, and the new imperatives for education in a postcolonial era. This section is
proposing a framework to inform future research into the integration of APE with DELC. Adopting this
framework can be a powerful tool to help local and international scholars create real social change and
justice.


Table 1. Approaches to Knowledge: How African Philosophies of Education (APE) “Fit” in
Developing an Epistemic Educational Leadership Curriculum (EELC)
 African Philosophy of           International Educational Leadership Curriculum
 Education
 Ethnophilosophy                 The features of ethnophilosophy could be used to resolve practical school
                                 or educational system problems. Education for Africans means absorbing a
                                 new language and new thought forms of school leadership that describe the
                                 worldview or thought system of the African continent. Ethnophilosophy is
                                 embodied in communal African customs, poems, music, arts and culture
                                 and literature etc. African educational system leaders need to align with an
                                 elusive “world-class” standard.
 Ubuntu (Ochemabissi             A potential new global leadership philosophy that all stakeholders have to
 Ka Ore Ezuume)                  fit in to an organisation and be involved in the sharing of resources. Ubuntu
                                 promotes the common good of society and includes humanness as an
                                 essential element of human growth. In African culture, the community
                                 always comes first. The individual is born out of and into the community.
                                 Therefore, he will always be part of the community. Interdependence,
                                 communalism, sensitivity towards others and caring for others are all
                                 aspects of Ubuntu as an African Union philosophy of education.
 Community (Etek)                Knowledgeable school leaders will be able to transform their own schools
                                 into authentic learning communities that prepare today‟s youth by using
                                 clear criteria that are aligned to pedagogical and philosophical purposes.
                                 They recognise that given the increasingly transparent organisational
                                 boundaries in a decolonialised and postmodernist world, there is a need to


                                                         68
Published by SCHOLINK INC.

 www.scholink.org/ojs/index.php/wjeh            World Journal of Education and Humanities     Vol. 4, No. 3, 2022



                                 develop a vibrant and culturally affirming learning community and
                                 leadership network.
 Reasonableness (Atah)           A good school administrator is an educational leader who provides
                                 reasonable means to make known their culture and values to the rest of the
                                 word; promotes the learning and wellbeing of all students; exhibits
                                 understanding of educational leadership, school effectiveness and school
                                 development, and coaches evolving culture and values that affect today‟s
                                 education system. Such leaders make reasonable budget requests and
                                 always prepare a solid rationale for his/her manager, etc.
 Moral             Maturity      One important aspect of moral education is to help citizens to be truthful,
 (Ayaamba)                       virtuous, honest, responsible and compassionate. Another is to help
                                 students to be informed and reflective about important and controversial
                                 moral issues. Both purposes are embedded in African Philosophy of
                                 Education and School Leadership.
 Maat        or         Ma’at    This is an ancient Egyptian goddess who is the personification of truth,
 (Moninkim)                      order, and righteousness, symbolized by a feather. School educators must
                                 be trained to acquire understanding about the African continent‟s
                                 representation of creation and truth. Maat was a deity of truth, justice,
                                 harmony, equilibrium, cosmic law, and righteousness, incorporating a
                                 holistic blend of theory and practice. Maat represents order (of the social
                                 world and/or the cosmos), and ethical and moral righteousness or justice
                                 for the Egyptian or say African people and not to Westerners alone. The
                                 kind of leadership and teaching needed today requires school leaders and
                                 teachers to have a high-level of moral and cultural orientation and not her
                                 ideological opposite Isfet (Egyptian jzft), meaning injustice, chaos,
                                 violence, confusion and misery. Thus, to do evil is against the principles
                                 of Maat.
 The Teachings of the            The virtues within Ptahhotep‟s philosophy are not only necessary for a
 Vizier           Ptahhotep      successful organisation or system but also for general good behaviour in
 (obasinjom)                     God‟s order: modesty, justice, generosity, self-control, truthfulness, and
                                 moderation are regarded as the ideal of human action; whereas greed,
                                 fornication, cursing and defamation are condemned. Warlike virtues, such
                                 as courage or bravery, which we often see in sources from Greek
                                 antiquity, are completely absent in the African continent.
 The      Tale     of     the    The leaders are not simply jockeying for power and position; they also have
 Eloquent Peasant                to focus on the duty of those in authority to dispense justice equally under


                                                         69
Published by SCHOLINK INC.

 www.scholink.org/ojs/index.php/wjeh             World Journal of Education and Humanities       Vol. 4, No. 3, 2022



 (Ntii-aloh Nkpak)               the law. A good magistrate is one who does not discriminate because of a
                                 plaintiff‟s class but who recognises the divine benefits of living in balance
                                 and maintains justice for all the people
 Imhotep (Ntuifar)               The image of Imhotep has fostered a world revolution in black education,
                                 focusing on the contemporary independent black school movement that has
                                 stressed reading and learning as a way to become a fully realised leader.
                                 The medieval period produced the philosophical schools of Timbuktu and
                                 Egypt and Africans observed the development of great leaders. Imhotep,
                                 Socrates and many other Greek philosophers sum up the benefits of such
                                 education. Imhotep encourages Africans and the world to learn to embrace
                                 what matters, to learn to convene in dialogue about what matters, and to
                                 learn to express in writing to our peers what we think is important about
                                 what matters.
 Kemetic                         This pertains to ancient Egypt, especially to its religion. When it came to
                                 the acquisition of knowledge, Kemet (the ancient Name of Egypt) was the
                                 centre of most, if not all, ancient learning. At the centre of this learning was
                                 the Mystery School, a secret learning centre (until c. 570 B.C.) where one
                                 went to become a whole person, and thus help mould civilization and its
                                 philosophy. The Mystery System was learned in all the wisdom of the
                                 Egyptians, and was mighty in words and in deeds (Acts, 7:22). Its
                                 curriculum was a rigid and lengthy process designed to ensure (1) an
                                 educated leadership, and (2) peace among the populous via effective
                                 leadership (3) Secret World (philosophy, theology); and (4) the school
                                 (mystery) of Pharaoh. Furthermore, Kemetic education required students
                                 to master the ten virtues of: (1) the control of thought; (2) the control of
                                 action; (3) steadfastness of purpose; (4) identity with spiritual life to
                                 higher ideals; (5) evidence of a mission in life; (6) evidence of a spiritual
                                 call to Orders or the Priesthood in the Mysteries; (7) freedom of
                                 resentment when under persecution or wrong; (8) confidence in the power
                                 of the master teacher; (9) confidence in one‟s ability to learn; and (10)
                                 readiness or preparedness for initiation.
 As Above so Below               As in the macrocosm, so in the microcosm; „as above, so below‟ tells us
 (Ossow yah Enssi)               Isis, the goddesses of learning and culture who is in the public mind,
                                 associated with theosophical leadership in the East‟ as a new „World
                                 Teacher,‟ or as the Christ returned, proclaimed by the Star in the East‟ as a
                                 new „World Teacher‟. The first thing we learned from „as above, so below‟


                                                          70
Published by SCHOLINK INC.

 www.scholink.org/ojs/index.php/wjeh           World Journal of Education and Humanities    Vol. 4, No. 3, 2022



                                 is that the leaders in high-performing education systems control over
                                 others; so school leaders, teachers and students in low achieving
                                 educational system may be more likely to give up trying harder to become
                                 like them.
Source: Adapted from Ebot Ashu & Lavngwa.


This study emphasises that the “APE” “fits” in developing a „DELC‟ that will increasingly become a
truly global phenomenon supporting school leaders‟ development and school improvement. African
philosophers of education must do their utmost to make their discipline “fit” into today‟s international
educational leadership curriculum. Research, if it is to influence practice, must be incorporated into
teaching, especially for pre-service and in-service training of school leaders. Given that educational
leadership training remains in its infancy, there is a need for greater attention to advance scholarship that
is based on empirical evidence that is grounded in perspectives from different regions and societies in
Africa.
The above framework presents assumptions in research that deal with the understanding of the basis of
the African reality. The notion of APE in DELC emerged with the advent of a de-colonial education and
the call for an educational philosophy that reflects this renewal. It focuses on Africa and its cultures,
language, identities and values, and new imperatives for education in a postcolonial era. Such an African
Union Philosophy of education based on indigenous epistemologies and socio-political values must
liberate Africans from the sad historical experiences of slavery and colonialism that „enchained‟ them
and must dialogue with humanity to be relevant.
2.2 Methodology
This study adopted a qualitative interpretive methodology because it allowed the researchers to get the
data directly from university stakeholders themselves by hearing their views, voices, perceptions and
expectations through interviews in ZOOM meetings during the COVID Pandemic period. This strategy
contends that knowledge is subjective and truthful in a way that is faithful to the original as possible.
The study combines the best features of a case study including the review of research materials,
documents and transcribed interviews recorded as a case study. The conclusions reached, in the
absence of quantifiable data, although subjective in nature, will be based on clear evidence emerging
from the interviews.
2.3 Sampling
The technique used in this study is random sampling. The approach of random sampling involves the
selection of international stakeholders from a larger group (universities population) literally at random
and each member of the population had a known, but possibly non-equal, chance of being included in
the sample. In this study, three groups were interviewed—one comprising 2 Professors and 2 Associate
Professors; 2 Lecturers and 2 Assistant Lecturers and 4 students from different case study universities
in Cameroon, Nigeria, South Africa, Botswana and Uganda. The three groups were chosen to add
                                             71
Published by SCHOLINK INC.

 www.scholink.org/ojs/index.php/wjeh             World Journal of Education and Humanities        Vol. 4, No. 3, 2022



validity to the data generated by means of respondents‟ triangulation. A detailed breakdown of the
sample is given in Table 2.


Table 2. Interview Sample
                    Professors         and   Lecturers            and
 University         Associate                Assistant                  Students             Total
                    Professors               Lecturers
                    Zoom Meeting 2           Zoom Meeting 3             Zoom Meting 4
                    Target       Actual      Target      Actual         Target      Actual   Target       Actual
 University A       4            4           4           4              4           4        12           12


The respondents interviewed were as diverse as practicable: females and males, various ages, job roles,
level of experience and so on. We used students studying at different levels at the Faculty of Education
in different African countries. The researchers were not personally acquainted with any of the
respondents and their consent was sought.
2.4 Methods
The two research questions (highlighted above) for this study determined the aim of the study and
established the philosophical and conceptual frameworks for the methodological approach. The
research design flows from the initial research questions and a qualitative design was chosen
comprising elements of field notes documents and interviews as good examples of a case study research
design and methods.
2.5 Field Note Documents and Interviews
The field note documents analysis-based research were designed around the literature review. The basis
of this understanding informed the identification of different policies and modalities in developing
school leaders for the 21st Century: lessons from around the world.
2.6 Interviews
This study employs interviews as a structured group process to explore attitudes and perceptions,
feelings and ideas about internal stakeholders‟ implementation of professionalization of educational
leadership in Higher Education improvement programmes in African Universities through ZOOM
meetings. The semi-structured interview questions schedule guided the interviews. The enquiries were
based on the research questions. However, flexibility was given to Professors, Associate Professors,
Lecturers, Assistant Lecturers, Instructors and students to develop ideas and speak more widely on the
issues raised.
2.7 Field Note Documents and Interview Analysis Process
Field document analysis develop from literature and policy documents from around the world
exhibiting international policy reforms and expectations for the preparation for school leaders‟ role, but


                                                             72
Published by SCHOLINK INC.

 www.scholink.org/ojs/index.php/wjeh          World Journal of Education and Humanities          Vol. 4, No. 3, 2022



also for relevant in-service professional development and support for serving head teachers and
principals are presented thematically using emergent themes which are dealt with individually and in
turn using relevant codes to create data sets; for example, PD2ZM1Utt10-Utt14, as coded by Ebot
Ashu, referring to Policy Document (PD2), and the Zoom Meeting 1 (M1) which took place and whose
quote was taken and Utterance (Utt) 10 to Utterance Utt14 in the field document analysis.
The transcribed interviews were coded with numerical numbers to create data sets as recommended by
Silverman and the analytical technique of pattern coding was used to interpret the interviews. This
enabled the researchers to come up with relative manageable themes related to the research questions,
and allowed preliminary analyses undertaken by the allocation of codes.
For the interpretation of the results within philosophical, theoretical and conceptual frameworks,
interviews consisting of alphabetical codes were assigned to each Professor (P), Associate Professor
(AP), Lecturer (L), Assistant Lecturer (AL), Instructor (I) and student (S) as a descriptor for where the
interviews were collected; respondents were not referred to using their real names but were assigned an
alpha-numerical       code     based   on   their   numerical      number       (e.g.,    (AL1ZM3Utt2-Utt4         or
AP1ZM3Utt3-Utt5). The first code AL1ZM3Utt2-Utt4 refers to interview analysis from Assistant
Lecturer 1, the Zoom Meeting 3 (ZM3) took place for which the quote was taken and Utterance 2 to
Utterance 4. The second code AP1ZM2Utt3-Utt5 identifies Associate Professor 1 and Zoom Meeting 2
(ZM2), Utterance 3 to Utterance 5 or P2ZM2Utt6-Utt8 referring to interview analysis from Professor 2,
the Zoom Meeting 2 (ZM2) took place for which the quote was taken and Utterance 6 to Utterance 8 in
the interview transcript.
2.8 Ethical Considerations
International Policy guidelines and aid modalities framework provided the framework for the research
activity undertaken in relation to the analyses of the policy documents. For example, in accordance
with the Association of African University ethical guidelines, the researchers had to adhere to those
guidelines in order to ensure respect for policy documents, knowledge, democratic principles, the
excellence of educational research and intellectual openness. Ethical considerations were given the
highest importance in that informed consent was sought from all the samples and their gatekeeper, in
this case by the different stakeholder‟s universities. Care was taken to inform respondents that
video-recording would be used in Zoom meetings but their identities would be safeguarded and the
reporting would be done in anonymity. The Association of African Universities research guidelines
were adhered to in order to ensure respect for each person, knowledge, democratic values, the quality
of educational research and academic freedom.


3. Result
This section presents the findings, broken down into themes, based on qualitative data collected from
the Zoom meeting note documents and interviews with university stakeholders‟ (Professors, Associate


                                                       73
Published by SCHOLINK INC.

 www.scholink.org/ojs/index.php/wjeh           World Journal of Education and Humanities              Vol. 4, No. 3, 2022



professors, Lecturers, Assistant Lecturers, Instructors and students) inquiry in the form of
process-outcome evaluation.
3.1 Professionalization of Educational Leadership in African Universities
A range of important perspectives on educational leadership development could also be found in an
interview with an Associate Professor and Professor to assure the researchers that school leaders are
eager to engage in a Postgraduate Diploma and Master‟s in Educational Leadership that would lead to
employment as principal or head teacher (AP1ZM2Utt35-Utt36). There is a true need for a professional
Doctorate in Educational Leadership (EdD) which improves the behaviours and leadership skills of
educational leaders, and it is the university‟s internal policy to support the development and learning
progress     of   these      stakeholders   through    their    daily    practices         and   external    evaluation
(P1ZM2Utt32-Utt36).
Meanwhile, an instructor explained that the most important mission of the university and educational
system was to develop a vision and strategy that would influence and empower practitioners and young
education leaders with high quality leadership, change management skills and sustainable leadership
development theory outcomes (I1ZM3Utt24-Utt26). An Associate Professor and a Lecturer lamented
on the internal and external factors that drive the decisions of the educational system are to provide a
safe, secure and healthy learning environment; engage stakeholders in management and leadership
duties (AP2ZM2Utt19-Utt21); involve stakeholders in in-service leadership training so that leaders can
assign tasks to aspiring leaders that will optimize their performance and build successful learning
institutions in the African continents (L2ZM3Utt6-Utt11).
An Assistant Lecturer added that newly recruited Lecturers must be experienced and must have
published in peer reviewed journals and be ready to offer greater flexibility in teaching, learning,
research and outreach and they must be able to improve pastoral provision to qualify for administrative
duties (AL1ZM3Utt24-Utt26). An instructor also articulates similar views by noting that Higher
Education institutions in most African countries can also include leadership courses for middle and
senior leaders, strategic management, school resource management, managing educational change,
leadership and school effectiveness course content in new forms of assessments (I1ZM3Utt6-Utt8). A
professor insists that ICT-based pedagogies should cover a range of learning contexts including
e-learning in Master and Doctoral degrees as in America and other approaches to e-portfolios,
e-assessment projects and using software and mobile technologies to support learners in their degree
programmes (P2ZM2Utt16-Utt17).
Another Professor and a Lecturer emphasise that course modules should include diversity, equity,
inclusion and social justice that will enable educational leaders and managers in the different African
universities to learn to resolve the tensions and demands placed upon them (P1ZM2Utt32-Utt34) by
stakeholders, their government and international funders (L1ZM3Utt38-Utt39).
Students‟ experience was a strong consideration within the context of professionalization in
Educational Leadership in the interviews with stakeholders. A government funded Postgraduate
                                             74
Published by SCHOLINK INC.

 www.scholink.org/ojs/index.php/wjeh       World Journal of Education and Humanities    Vol. 4, No. 3, 2022



Diploma and a paid Master and Doctorate programme in Educational Leadership (EdD) were
recognized as a strength, particularly for those pursuing professional routes and those who want to
study locally (S3ZM4Utt3-Utt5). High quality leadership was expected from structured partnerships
between schools, universities, different Ministries of Education (MoE), international organisations and
the Association of African Universities (AAU) arrangements and funding agencies (S4ZM4Utt6-Utt8).
Some students claim that most lecturers and middle managers have been very supportive in providing
academic support, leadership skill development and career advice. They are enhancing students‟
capability in different subject areas and in their employment (S2ZM4Utt8-Utt9) as educators in
universities.
The interviews suggest that whilst students feel a strong need to fit in a professional training
programme in any given African university sponsored by the state or any given international
organisation (S3ZM4Utt16-Utt18), they want African universities to support progression pathways and
their achievements in educational leadership (S4ZM4Utt12-Utt14). Most stakeholders stressed on
motivating factors with significant funding resources and employment at the end of the programmes
(S3ZM4Utt24-Utt25). Finally, a recurring theme mentioned by many was the criticality of ideas on
inclusive learning and employment opportunities. So, putting the learner first was the key to our
findings.


4. Discussion
Having summarised the themes and described the evidence in response to the research question, the
researchers now relate these findings to the literature reviewed and theorised. This would focus on the
impact these findings can potentially contribute to the deeper understanding of internal stakeholder‟s
effectiveness in the implementation of professionalization of educational leadership in African Higher
Education Improvement Programmes
4.1 Professionalization of Educational Leadership in African Universities
Both the literature and findings acknowledged that professionalization of educational leadership is the
process of giving educators professional qualities, typically by increasing leadership training or
administering required qualifications for any given profession as discussed by Eacott and Asuga in their
presentation of the South Africa National Qualification for School Leaders issued by the Institute of
South Africa. Professionalization is a social process by which any trade or occupation transforms itself
into a true profession of high integrity and competence as evaluated by the Advanced Certificate in
Education (ACE) rooted from the National Qualification Framework of South Africa. Initiatives of
professionalization in educational leadership extend from raising aspirations, through fair admission to
retention, flexible progression, outreach partners, flexible delivery and lifelong learning as in Kenya
through Kenya Educational Management Institute (KEMI).
The Association of African Universities (AAU) working in partnership with universities and their
African Ministries of Education (MoE) need resources to create suitable high-quality leadership
                                            75
Published by SCHOLINK INC.

 www.scholink.org/ojs/index.php/wjeh        World Journal of Education and Humanities     Vol. 4, No. 3, 2022



training for teachers, head teachers and principals‟ professional qualification in educational leadership.
Depending on the stage of their professional journey, African universities essentially are effective and
competent establishments in providing a Postgraduate Diploma and a Professional Master in
Educational Leadership for Principals and Head teachers, and graduates who can continue for a
Doctorate (EdD) in Educational Leadership can enable school leaders to teach in universities.
The findings support Eacott and Asuga in their commitment that proposes that Ministries of Education
(MoE) in African countries must work in partnership with universities to support the development of
educational leaders. Fullan and Stigelbauer suggest that lack of attention to the process of improvement
is responsible for the Association of African Universities and universities in African countries‟ failure
to subject educational leadership training for school leaders. The findings accord with Eacott and Esuga
presenting the South African model that proposes educational leadership objectives for a Postgraduate
Diploma, Master and Doctoral programmes that could enable countries in Africa to achieve peace,
economic growth and prosperity.
Findings also uphold that in most African countries as elsewhere, universities accept challenges and
profound transformations, shaped by the theatre of political, economic, cultural and social changes that
should encourage university and school leaders to work in harmony through the Association of African
Universities with local and international partners. These findings corroborate Government policies for a
sophisticated approach in educational leadership that is based on the student lifecycle in developing
leadership skills.
4.2 Conclusion and Recommendations
This evaluative case study was conducted in the form of reviewing policy documents and interviews
with university Professors, Associate Professors, Lecturers, Assistant Lecturers, Instructors and
students. It contributes knowledge pertaining to internal stakeholder‟s effectiveness in the
implementation of professionalization of educational leadership in member universities of the
Association of African Universities, and so provides practitioners in Educational Leadership with „what
works‟ in the context they know and understand better.
4.2.1 The Contributions of Knowledge
This study supports the need for further understanding of internal stakeholders‟ provision of
high-quality leadership in Higher Education for the 21st century effectiveness in the implementation of
professionalization of educational leadership in African universities which has become a dilemma for
education and social science researchers.
4.2.2 Professionalization of Educational Leadership in African Universities
This study proposes a government funded educational leadership objective for a 9 months‟ programme
for a Postgraduate Diploma in Educational leadership (90 Credits), 2 years Master in Educational
Leadership (M.Ed EDL-120 credits) and 3 years paid Doctor of Education programme (EdD, 180
credits) that will enable African countries to achieve diversity, equity, social justice, peace, economic
growth and prosperity. These Decolonized Educational Leadership Curriculum (DELC) supports the
                                              76
Published by SCHOLINK INC.

 www.scholink.org/ojs/index.php/wjeh          World Journal of Education and Humanities       Vol. 4, No. 3, 2022



role for head teachers and principals and the professional Doctor of Education (EdD) programme that
supports academicians.
4.2.3 How the Decolonized Educational Leadership Curriculum (DELC) Can Be Applied
The researchers and respondents of the ZOOM focus group meetings envisage that efforts towards the
decolonization of educational leadership in African Universities will need the growing recognition and
use of Essential ICT Management Skills for School Leaders at the Postgraduate Diploma, Masters and
Doctorate levels, are designed to equip participants with knowledge and skills related to the use of ICTs
for educational purposes.
The Leadership in Education for Deputies and Middle Managers course at both Postgraduate Diploma,
Master and EdD levels focuses on the changing roles, responsibilities and professional development of
deputies, middle managers and senior management teams (or leadership groups), in schools and other
educational organisations.
Strategic Management in Educational Leadership at both Master and Doctor of Education (EdD)
programmes will help participants to deliver the best outcomes for their pupils as they learn to plan
strategically for their respective schools and educational systems.
Diversity, Equity, Inclusion and Social Justice at the Doctor of Education (EdD) level will deepen
students; experience of the multicultural nature of the African continent, and further all aspects of
indigenous pedagogy while advancing our commitment to diversity, equity, social inequality and social
justice in Africa. We must introduce the principle of decolonization (of knowledge, teaching, and
pedagogy) so that it can most succinctly capture the elements of diversity, inclusion, equity and social
justice.
School Resource Management is learnt at Postgraduate, Diploma and Doctorate (EdD) levels. It sets out to
provide students with the knowledge to be financially literate and to interface confidently with the finance
function in order to achieve the school‟s strategic plans. With sustainability as a cross cutting theme where
students are introduced to the main topics in accounting and finance, this is intended to impact on the
strategic decisions that are made in organisations every day. By using case studies and projects, students gain
hands-on experience in the strategic deployment of financial literacy by managers.
Regarding Leadership in Education, senior managers learn leadership in education at the Postgraduate
Diploma, Master and Doctorate (EdD) levels that will enable both managers and leaders to develop
knowledge, understanding of critical perspective—based upon evidence drawn from research,
scholarship, practice and the wider literature—of the work, lives, careers and perspectives of senior
managers as leaders within educational institutions and contexts.
Managing Education Change Policy is a course that is learnt at the Postgraduate Level and Master
levels is an important prerequisite for increasing the potential of educational leaders to manage changes
they initiate in their different learning establishments.
Organisational Effectiveness, Improvement and Transformation is a Master and Doctor of Education
(EdD) course that will help develop staff and students‟ skills in change management, improve
                                             77
Published by SCHOLINK INC.

 www.scholink.org/ojs/index.php/wjeh       World Journal of Education and Humanities      Vol. 4, No. 3, 2022



organizational effectiveness, enhance their decision-making, and develop analysis and research
expertise.
The Human Resources Management is a course learnt at both the Master and Doctorate (EdD) levels
and it is designed to enable school leaders to understand and be able to apply relevant content
knowledge in leading and managing people and material resources.
An interesting module for the Master programme is the Entrepreneurship programme (ENT) which is a
cost-effective investment in the development of entrepreneurial capacity of young people. Students
learn foundational leadership and venture-vetting skills that are appropriate for starting a new business,
advancing in their current company or joining a brand-new business (versus one that‟s already
established).
A National Centre for Education Research is required in every African university so that it can enable
rigorous research that contributes to the solution of significant educational problems. The Association
of African Universities can work with qualified university centres and students to examine the
effectiveness of educational programs, practices, and policies, including the application of technology
to instruction and assessment.
The school of education research centres in Africa can support the different Faculties of Education in
providing a compulsory course in Education Research and the Researcher’s Identity and Epistemology
at the doctorate level that would address the need to embed research enquiry within a particular
research paradigm. Research students in African universities are expected to demonstrate an
understanding of the interplay between research paradigms, African philosophies, ontology,
epistemology, methodology and research methods prior to initiating a research project.
The Research Design and Methodology course at the doctorate (EdD) level seeks to develop the
knowledge, skills and attitudes required to conduct a research project, with specific reference to data
collection, data analysis, and interpretation of results and the presentation of research. Using
Sources/Producing Analysis in Research Methods at the doctorate level also builds on the research
skills developed in earlier modules. These research modules will be delivered in tandem with the Thesis
at the doctorate level.
All students are obliged to do Practicum in Educational Leadership at Postgraduate Diploma, Master
and Doctorate levels which is designed to give students a hands-on experience in educational
leadership. Students are required to spend 200 hours in an educational organisation under the
supervision of a cooperating leader or manager or academic staff of the department. Students explore
current thinking on how organisations are judged as effective or improving. They are challenged to
critique contemporary research in these areas applying the views of colleagues both locally and globally.
Every candidate in the Master or doctorate level in Educational Leadership (EdD) completes a
culminating Thesis (Diploma, Master and Doctorate levels) employing their professional knowledge
and new learning in order to demonstrate transformative and distributional leadership, organization,
and community change and sustainable leadership.
                                                78
Published by SCHOLINK INC.

 www.scholink.org/ojs/index.php/wjeh         World Journal of Education and Humanities      Vol. 4, No. 3, 2022



Overall, this study proposes Educational Leadership programmes offering more interactive, reflective
and experiential learning approaches than the education administration courses provided in the different
African universities. Further research is essential to find out what kind of leadership curriculum
influences students, schools, university, educational system and the Association of African Universities
performance, and the circumstances under which these performances may be most effectively enhanced.
Given the ever-increasing investment in decolonising education curricula in developing countries, this
becomes a disturbing void in the educational research.
This study concludes that for internal stakeholders to succeed in the implementation of
Professionalization (P) of Educational Leadership programmes within schools, universities and
educational systems in African countries, there needs to be greater international collaboration with the
Association of African Universities for schools, universities, Ministries of Education (MoE) in African
countries, and that quality assurance mechanisms need to be standardized across institutions.
Furthermore, stakeholders on these programmes need a greater time to reflect upon their activities and
that the provision will be most effective where there is a critical mass of staff and students.
This study also concludes that clear strategic planning involving internal and external stakeholders is
needed in the relative effectiveness of partnerships, but that differences in the relative status of partners
can become a source of tension. The Association of African Universities can collaborate with
universities working with schools in a variety of ways but sometimes it becomes a big challenge with
large mixed-economy states, faiths and private schools with diverse higher education links.
4.3 Limitations of the Research
Besides struggling to decentralize and implement professionalization of educational leadership in
African countries, higher education faces management deficiencies associated with overly decentralized
decision-making which makes it hard for institutions to respond to local conditions, needs and
preferences of students, lecturers or establishments. This over-centralization and tight control of
educational leadership in some countries whereby the whole country‟s educational system is
administered from the capital city constrains educational initiatives from the lower rungs and
communication cannot flourish. Also, evaluation of activities is not yet decentralized. Complete
decentralization or a federal system of government is required in the field of evaluation of work quality
to improve leadership, access and professionalization in both universities and professional learning
institutions in African countries and the global leadership community.
4.4 Suggestions for Further Research
We propose an improvement of leadership skills of school and university leaders by updating
participants about relevant and current sector trends and providing global professional networking
opportunities with peers. Our new models offer knowledge sharing, new organizational frameworks
and leadership skill acquisition that should enable those who work with case studies in building on
participants‟ experiences. There are proposals to develop a local, national or international marketing


                                                      79
Published by SCHOLINK INC.

 www.scholink.org/ojs/index.php/wjeh           World Journal of Education and Humanities            Vol. 4, No. 3, 2022



and communication strategy to promote educational leadership training across the full range of
providers.


References
Ebot, A. F. (2020a). Decolonising the Curriculum at Cameroonian Universities: The Case of the
     Department of Education Foundation and Administration. African Journal of Education and
     Practice (AJEP), 6(5), 13-39.
Also confer African Union & European Commission. (2019). Harmonisation of African Higher
     Education Quality Assurance and Accreditation (HAQAA Initiative)–Draft SADC Guidelines for
     Credit Accumulation and Transfer. Addis: African Union (AU).
Nwokeocha, S. (2017). Heralding professional standards for teachers and school leaders in Sierra
     Leone. Freetown: EuropeanUnion Delegation.
Also confer Gallie, M., & Keevy, J. (2014). Standards framework for teachers and school leaders.
     London: Commonwealth Secretariat.
Bush, T., & Oduro, G. K. T. (2006). New principals in Africa: preparation, induction and practice.
     Journal              of           Educational           Administration,               44(4),           359-375.
     https://doi.org/10.1108/09578230610676587
Taysum, A. (2019). Education Policy as a Road Map to achieving the Sustainable Development Goals.
     Scarborough: Emerald. https://doi.org/10.1108/9781839092978
Also confer Jones, P., Forlin, C., & Gillies, A. (2013). The contribution of facilitated leadership to
     systems development for greater inclusive practices. International Journal of Whole Schooling,
     9(10), 60-74.
African Union. (2016a). Agenda 2063: The Africa we want. Addis Ababa: AU.
Ebot, A. F. (2020a). Decolonising the Curriculum at Cameroonian Universities: The Case of the
     Department of Education Foundation and Administration. African Journal of Education and
     Practice (AJEP), 6(5), 13-39.
Pheko, B. (2008). Secondary school leadership practice in Botswana. Educational Management,
     Administration and Leadership, 36(1), 71-84. https://doi.org/10.1177/1741143207084061
Ebot, A. F. (2014). Effectiveness of School Leadership and Management Development in Cameroon: A
     Guide for Educational Systems, Schools and School Leaders. Newcastle Upon Tyne, United
     Kingdom: Cambridge Scholars Publishing.
Lavngwa, M. S., & Ngalim, V. B. (2015). Laying the Foundation for Holistic Education in Cameroon
     Schools. British Journal of Education, Society & Behavioural Science, 5(2), 43-52. Retrieved
     from                                  https://www.sciencedomain.org/lavngwa&ngalim.pdf17/12/2020
     ttps://doi.org/10.9734/BJESBS/2015/13020
Ebot, A. F. (2020b). Historical Foundation of Education in Cameroon. Limbe, Cameroon: Presbook.


                                                        80
Published by SCHOLINK INC.

 www.scholink.org/ojs/index.php/wjeh      World Journal of Education and Humanities      Vol. 4, No. 3, 2022



Black, S. A. (2015). Qualities of Effective Leadership in Higher Education. Open Journal of
     Leadership, 4(2), 1-12. https://doi.org/10.4236/ojl.2015.42006
Drugus, D., & Landoh, A. (2014). Leadership in Higher Education. Economic Sciences, 7(560),
     124-132.
Njeuma, D. L., Endeley, H. N., Mbuntum, F. F., Lyonga, N., Nkweteyim, D. L., Musenja, S., & Ekanje,
     E. (1999). Reforming a National System of Higher Education: The case of Cameroon. A Report of
     the ADEA Working Group on Higher Education. Washington, USA: ADEA Working Group on
     Higher Education, the World Bank.
Jones, P., Forlin, C., & Gillies, A. (2013). The contribution of facilitated leadership to systems
     development for greater inclusive practices. International Journal of Whole Schooling, 9(10),
     60-74.
Hargreaves, A., & Fink, D. (2006). Sustainable leadership. San Francisco: Jossey-Bass.
Filho, W. L., Eustachio, J. H., Caldana, A. C., Will, M., Salvia, A. L., Rampasso, L. S., Anholon, R.,
     Platje, J. I., & Kovela, M. (2020). Sustainability Leadership in Higher Education Institutions: An
     Overview of Challenges. Sustainability, 12(376), 1-19. https://doi.org/10.3390/su12093761
Drugus, D., & Landoh, A. (2014). Leadership in Higher Education. Economic Sciences, 7(560),
     124-132.
OECD. (2006). Improving School Leadership: Guidelines for Country Participation. Paris, OECD.
Ebot, A. F. (2020a). Decolonising the Curriculum at Cameroonian Universities: The Case of the
     Department of Education Foundation and Administration. African Journal of Education and
     Practice (AJEP), 6(5), 13-39.
African Union. (2016a). Agenda 2063: The Africa we want. Addis Ababa: AU.
UNESCO. (2016). Leading better learning: School leadership and quality in the Education 2030
     agenda. Regional reviews of policies and practices. Paris: UNESCO Education Sector Division
     for Policies and Lifelong Learning Systems (ED/PLS) Section of Education Policy
     (ED/PLS/EDP).
Commonwealth, S. (1996). Better schools: resource materials for school heads: Introductory module.
     London: Commonwealth Secretariat
Lavngwa, M. S. (2019). Plato and the Institution on Education: Critique of Cameroon Education
     (Unpublished PhD thesis). Dschang: University of Dschang.
OECD. (2012). Preparing Teachers and Developing School Leaders for the 21st century-Lessons from
     around the World. Paris, OECD.
UNESCO. (2015). Incheon Declaration and Framework for Action for the implementation of
     Sustainable Development Goal 4 Ensure inclusive and equitable quality education and promote
     lifelong learning opportunities for all. Paris: UNESCO.




                                                   81
Published by SCHOLINK INC.

 www.scholink.org/ojs/index.php/wjeh            World Journal of Education and Humanities               Vol. 4, No. 3, 2022



Allen, R., & Lachapelle, P. (2012). Can leadership development act as a rural poverty alleviation
     strategy?,                 Community                 Development,                      43(1),                95-112.
     https://doi.org/10.1080/15575330.2011.645046
UNESCO. (2010). Strategic Planning Concept and Rationale. Paris: International Institute for
     Educational Planning.
Mkapa, B. W. (2008). Leadership for Growth, Development, and Poverty Reduction: An African
     Viewpoint and Experience. Commission on Growth and Development Working Paper; No. 8.
     Washington,           DC          World    Bank.         ©       World          Bank.           Retrieved        from
     https://openknowledge.worldbank.org/handle/10986/28015
African Union. (2016a). Agenda 2063: The Africa we want. Addis Ababa: AU.
Institute for Health Sector Development (IHSD). (2003). Sector-wide Approaches in Education’,
     Background paper for a UNICEF workshop. London: Institute for Health Sector Development
     (IHSD).
Boak, E., & Ndaruhutse, S. (2011). The impact of sector-wide approaches: where from, where now and
     where to? London, UK: CfBT Education Trust.
UNESCO. (2007). Education Sector-Wide Approaches (SWAps): Background, Guide and Lessons.
     Fontenoy, Paris, France: Division of Education Strategies and Field Support, UNESCO
Hayman, R. (2011). Budget Support and Democracy: A twist in the conditionality tale. Third World
     Quarterly, Taylor & Francis, Ltd, 32(4), 673-688. https://doi.org/10.1080/01436597.2011.566998
OECD. (2006). Improving School Leadership: Guidelines for Country Participation. Paris, OECD.
United Nations Development Programme, Human Development Center, UN. (2021). The Human
     Development Index. New York: UN. Retrieved from http://hdr.undp.org/en/data, 05/01/2021
UNESCO. (2016). Leading better learning: School leadership and quality in the Education 2030 agenda.
     Regional reviews of policies and practices. Paris: UNESCO Education Sector Division for
     Policies and Lifelong Learning Systems (ED/PLS) Section of Education Policy (ED/PLS/EDP).
Ebot, A. F. (2020a). Decolonising the Curriculum at Cameroonian Universities: The Case of the
     Department of Education Foundation and Administration. African Journal of Education and
     Practice (AJEP), 6(5), 13-39.
Tamukong, N. M., & Ngeche, M. (2018). Educational Leadership: Implications for Quality
     Management in the Development of Cameroon Higher Education. International Journal of Trend
     in       Scientific        Research       and       Development            (IJTSRD),            2(2),       756-768.
     https://doi.org/10.31142/ijtsrd9534
Chisholm, L., & Leyendecker, R. (2009). Curriculum Reform in Sub-Saharan Africa: When Local
     Meets Global. In Cowen R., & Kazamias, A. M. (Eds.), International Handbook of Comparative
     Education (Vol. 22). Springer International Handbooks of Education, Springer, Dordrecht.
     https://doi.org/10.1007/978-1-4020-6403-6_44


                                                         82
Published by SCHOLINK INC.

 www.scholink.org/ojs/index.php/wjeh             World Journal of Education and Humanities              Vol. 4, No. 3, 2022



Higher Education Funding Council for England (HEFCE). (2009). Supporting higher education in
     further education colleges: Policy, practice and prospects. Bristol: HEFCE.
Fullan, M., & Stiegelbauer, S. (1991). The new meaning of educational change (2nd ed.). New York:
     Teachers College Press.
Fullan, M. (1991). The New Meaning of Educational Change. London: Cassell.
Fullan, M., & Stiegelbauer, S. (1991). The new meaning of educational change (2nd ed.). New York:
     Teachers College Press.
Ebot, A. F. (2020a). Decolonising the Curriculum at Cameroonian Universities: The Case of the
     Department of Education Foundation and Administration. African Journal of Education and
     Practice (AJEP), 6(5), 13-39.
Harber, C., & Dadey, A. (1993). The job of headteacher in Africa: research and reality. International
     Journal               of            Educational            Development,                 13(2),             147-160.
     https://doi.org/10.1016/0738-0593(93)90009-O
African Union. (2016a). Agenda 2063: The Africa we want. Addis Ababa: AU.
Also confer African Union. (2016b). Continental education strategy for Africa (CESA 16-25). Addis
     Ababa: African Union (AU).
Filho, W. L., Eustachio, J. H., Caldana, A. C., Will, M., Salvia, A. L., Rampasso, L. S., Anholon, R.,
     Platje, J. I., & Kovela, M. (2020). Sustainability Leadership in Higher Education Institutions: An
     Overview of Challenges. Sustainability, 12(376), 1-19. https://doi.org/10.3390/su12093761
Higher Education Funding Council for England (HEFCE). (2009). Supporting higher education in
     further education colleges: Policy, practice and prospects. Bristol: HEFCE.
Parry, G. (2006). Policy-Participation Trajectories in English Higher Education. Higher Education
     Quarterly, 60(1), 392-412. https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1468-2273.2006.00330.x
Oduro, G. K. T., & MacBeath, J. (2003). Traditions and tensions in leadership: The Ghanaian
     experience.           Cambridge           Journal          of         Education,          33(3),           441-455.
     https://doi.org/10.1080/0305764032000122050
Eacott, S., & Asuga, G. N. (2014). School leadership preparation and development in Africa: A critical
     insight.     Educational          Management      Administration      and     Leadership,        42(6),    919-934.
     https://doi.org/10.1177/1741143214523013
Monyatsi, P. P., Tsayang, G., Bulawa, P. G., & Mhozya, C. (2008). An evaluation of the impact of the
     PSMDP on the management performance areas from the perspectives of the SMTs. International
     Journal of Scientific Research in Education, 1(1), 1-12.
Tamukong, N. M., & Ngeche, M. (2018). Educational Leadership: Implications for Quality
     Management in the Development of Cameroon Higher Education. International Journal of Trend
     in       Scientific        Research       and        Development            (IJTSRD),        2(2),         756-768.
     https://doi.org/10.31142/ijtsrd9534


                                                          83
Published by SCHOLINK INC.

 www.scholink.org/ojs/index.php/wjeh             World Journal of Education and Humanities           Vol. 4, No. 3, 2022



Evans, W. M., & Yoder, H. J. (1991). The primary education improvement project. In W. M. Evans, &
     H. J. Yoder (Eds.), Patterns of reform in primary education: The case of Botswana (pp. 38-58).
     Gaborone: University of Botswana.
Pansiri, N. O. (2008). Instructional leadership for quality learning: an assessment of the impact of the
     primary school management development project in Botswana. Educational Management,
     Administration and Leadership, 36(4), 471-494. https://doi.org/10.1177/1741143208095789
Pheko, B. (2008). Secondary school leadership practice in Botswana. Educational Management,
     Administration and Leadership, 36(1), 71-84. https://doi.org/10.1177/1741143207084061
UNESCO. (2016). Leading better learning: School leadership and quality in the Education 2030
     agenda. Regional reviews of policies and practices. Paris: UNESCO Education Sector Division
     for Policies and Lifelong Learning Systems (ED/PLS) Section of Education Policy
     (ED/PLS/EDP).
Eacott, S., & Asuga, G. N. (2014). School leadership preparation and development in Africa: A critical
     insight.     Educational          Management    Administration        and     Leadership,     42(6),     919-934.
     https://doi.org/10.1177/1741143214523013
Bush, T., Kiggundu, E., & Moorosi, P. (2011). Preparing new principals in South Africa: The ACE
     school     leadership      programme.      South      African    Journal      of   Education,   31(1),      31-43.
     https://doi.org/10.15700/saje.v31n1a356
Mestry, R., & Singh, P. (2007). Continuing professional development for principals: A South African
     perspective. South African Journal of Education, 27(3), 477-490.
Bush, T., & Heystek, J. (2006). School leadership and management in South Africa: Principals'
     perception.       International       Studies    in     Educational         Administration,     34(2),      63-76.
     https://doi.org/10.1177/1741143206068212
Waudo, J., Juma, M., Herriot, A., & Mwirotsi, M. (2002). Headteacher support groups initiative within
     the PRISM project in Kenya. Eastern Africa Social Science Research Review, 18(1), 97-108.
     https://doi.org/10.1353/eas.2002.0006
Eacott, S., & Asuga, G. N. (2014). School leadership preparation and development in Africa: A critical
     insight.     Educational          Management    Administration        and     Leadership,     42(6),     919-934.
     https://doi.org/10.1177/1741143214523013
Asuga, G., & Eacott, S. (2012). The learning needs of secondary school principals: an investigation in
     Nakuru district, Kenya. International Journal of Educational Administration and Policy Studies,
     4(5), 133-140. https://doi.org/10.5897/IJEAPS11.073
Ebot Ashu, F. (2014). Effectiveness of School Leadership and Management Development in Cameroon:
     A Guide for Educational Systems, Schools and School Leaders. Newcastle Upon Tyne, United
     Kingdom: Cambridge Scholars Publishing.




                                                           84
Published by SCHOLINK INC.

 www.scholink.org/ojs/index.php/wjeh       World Journal of Education and Humanities      Vol. 4, No. 3, 2022



Ebot, A. F. (2020a). Decolonising the Curriculum at Cameroonian Universities: The Case of the
     Department of Education Foundation and Administration. African Journal of Education and
     Practice (AJEP), 6(5), 13-39.
UNESCO. (2016). Leading better learning: School leadership and quality in the Education 2030
     agenda. Regional reviews of policies and practices. Paris: UNESCO Education Sector Division
     for Policies and Lifelong Learning Systems (ED/PLS) Section of Education Policy
     (ED/PLS/EDP).
Burguel, N., & Busch, A. (2018). How is Universities Creating the Leaders They Need?
Dering, A., Brundrett, M., Slavikova, L., Karabec, S., Murden, B., & Nicolaidou, M. (2005).
     Educational Leadership Development in Finland, the Netherlands and France: An Initial
     Comparative             Report.    Management            in        Education,     19(5),         34-37.
     https://doi.org/10.1177/089202060501900509
Collins, B. (2002). The Effectiveness of Managerial Leadership Development Programs: A
     Meta-Analysis of Studies from 1982-2001 (PHD Dissertation). Louisiana: Louisiana State
     University: The School of Human Resources Education and Workforce Development.
Huber, S., & West, M. (2002). Developing school leaders: A critical review of current practices,
     approaches and issues, and some directions for the future. In Leithwood, P. H.
     https://doi.org/10.1007/978-94-010-0375-9_37
Ministry of Education, Republic of Ethiopia. (2013). National Professional Standard for School
     Principals. Addis Ababa.
Ebot, A. F. (2020b). Historical Foundation of Education in Cameroon. Limbe, Cameroon: Presbook.
Lavngwa, M. S. (2019). Plato and the Institution on Education: Critique of Cameroon Education
     (Unpublished PhD thesis). Dschang: University of Dschang.
Ebot, A. F., & Lavngwa, M. S. (2022). An Evaluation of Leadership Effectiveness in the
     implementation of Higher Education Reforms: The Case of the Faculty of Education, University
     of Buea, Cameroon. International Journal of Education and Social Science, 9(1), 9-27.
Ebot, A. F. (2021a). African Philosophies of Education and their Relevance in Developing an
     International Leadership Curriculum: A Guide for Educational Systems, Schools and School
     Leaders. In E. A. Samier, E. Elkaleh, & Waheed Hammad (Eds.), Internationalisation of
     Educational Administration and Leadership Curriculum: Voices and Experiences from the
     ‘Peripheries’. Bingley: Emerald Publishing Ltd.
Ebot, A. F. (2021a). African Philosophies of Education and their Relevance in Developing an
     International Leadership Curriculum: A Guide for Educational Systems, Schools and School
     Leaders. In E. A. Samier, E. Elkaleh, & W. Hammad (Eds.), Internationalisation of Educational
     Administration and Leadership Curriculum: Voices and Experiences from the Peripheries.
     Bingley: Emerald Publishing Ltd.


                                                    85
Published by SCHOLINK INC.

 www.scholink.org/ojs/index.php/wjeh             World Journal of Education and Humanities              Vol. 4, No. 3, 2022



Ebot, A. F. (2021b). Theories and Practices of Educational Leadership, Administration and Planning
     in Cameroon. Limbe: Pres Book Limbe.
Lavngwa, M. S. (2019). Plato and the Institution on Education: Critique of Cameroon Education
     (Unpublished PhD thesis). Dschang: University of Dschang.
Miles, M., & Huberman, A. (1994). Qualitative data Analysis. Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage.
Denscombe, M. (2003). The Good Research Guide, Maidenhead (2nd ed.). London: Open University
     Press.
Denscombe, M. (2003). The Good Research Guide, Maidenhead. London: Open University Press, 2nd
     Edition.
Yin, R. (2002). Case Study Research: Design and Methods. Thousand Oaks. SAGE Pubs.
Ebot, A. F. (2014). Effectiveness of School Leadership and Management Development in Cameroon: A
     Guide for Educational Systems, Schools and School Leaders. Newcastle Upon Tyne, United
     Kingdom: Cambridge Scholars Publishing.
Denscombe, M. (2003). The Good Research Guide, Maidenhead (2nd ed.). London: Open University
     Press.
Ebot, A. F. (2014). Effectiveness of School Leadership and Management Development in Cameroon: A
     Guide for Educational Systems, Schools and School Leaders. Newcastle Upon Tyne, United
     Kingdom: Cambridge Scholars Publishing.
Silverman, D. (2000). Doing Qualitative Research. London: Sage.
Miles, M., & Huberman, A. (1994). Qualitative data Analysis. Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage.
Ebot, A. F., & Lavngwa, M. S. (2022). An Evaluation of Leadership Effectiveness in the
     implementation of Higher Education Reforms: The Case of the Faculty of Education, University
     of Buea, Cameroon. International Journal of Education and Social Science, 9(1), 9-27.
Ebot, A. F. (2014). Effectiveness of School Leadership and Management Development in Cameroon: A
     Guide for Educational Systems, Schools and School Leaders. Newcastle Upon Tyne, United
     Kingdom: Cambridge Scholars Publishing.
Eacott, S., & Asuga, G. N. (2014). School leadership preparation and development in Africa: A critical
     insight.     Educational          Management      Administration      and     Leadership,        42(6),    919-934.
     https://doi.org/10.1177/1741143214523013
Gunter, H., & Ribbins, P. (2003). The field of educational leadership: Studying maps and mapping
     studies”.        British          Journal      of      Educational           Studies,       51(3),         254-281.
     https://doi.org/10.1111/1467-8527.t01-1-00238
Harber, C., & Dadey, A. (1993). The job of headteacher in Africa: Research and reality. International
     Journal              of             Educational            Development,                 13(2),             147-160.
     https://doi.org/10.1016/0738-0593(93)90009-O




                                                          86
Published by SCHOLINK INC.

 www.scholink.org/ojs/index.php/wjeh            World Journal of Education and Humanities         Vol. 4, No. 3, 2022



Science Position Paper. (2012). The Professionalization of Academics as Teachers in Higher Education.
     Strasbourg Cedex, France: European Science Foundations, Standing Committee for the Social
     Sciences.
Botswana, National Commission on Education. (1993). Report of the national comission on education.
     Gaborne, Botswana: National Commission on Education.
Tikkanen, L., Pyhältö, K., Pietarinen J., & Soini, T., (2019). Lessons learnt from a large-scale
     curriculum reform: The strategies to enhance development work and reduce reform-related stress.
     Journal of Educational Change, 1(4), 1-25. https://doi.org/10.1007/s10833-019-09363-1
Eacott, S., & Asuga, G. N. (2014). School leadership preparation and development in Africa: A critical
     insight.     Educational          Management   Administration        and     Leadership,   42(6),    919-934.
     https://doi.org/10.1177/1741143214523013
Fullan, M., & Stiegelbauer, S. (1991). The new meaning of educational change (2nd ed.). New York:
     Teachers College Press.
Fullan, M. (2016). The Elusive Nature of Whole System Improvement in Education. Journal of
     Educational Change, 17(4), 539-544. https://doi.org/10.1007/s10833-016-9289-1
Eacott, S., & Asuga, G. N. (2014). School leadership preparation and development in Africa: A critical
     insight.     Educational          Management   Administration        and     Leadership,   42(6),    919-934.
     https://doi.org/10.1177/1741143214523013
Ezeanya-Esiobu, C. (2019). Contemporary Education Curriculum in Africa. In Indigenous Knowledge
     and Education in Africa. Frontiers in African Business Research. Singapore: Springer.
     https://doi.org/10.1007/978-981-13-6635-2_4
Ebot, A. F. (2020b). Historical Foundation of Education in Cameroon. Limbe, Cameroon: Presbook.
     https://doi.org/10.1007/978-981-13-6635-2_4
Waudo, J., Juma, M., Herriot, A., & Mwirotsi, M. (2002). Headteacher support groups initiative within
     the PRISM project in Kenya. Eastern Africa Social Science Research Review, 18(1), 97-108.
     https://doi.org/10.1353/eas.2002.0006
GESP, Growth and Employment Strategy Paper. (2010). Reference Framework for Governmental
     Action over the period (2010-2020). Yaoundé: The Prime Minister‟s Office.
Also confer United Nations. (2016). Sustainable Development Goals. New York. UN. Retrieved from
     https://sustainabledevelopment.un.org/?menu=1300, 02/12/2019
Lavngwa, M. S. (2019). Plato and the Institution on Education: Critique of Cameroon Education
     (Unpublished PhD thesis). Dschang: University of Dschang.




                                                         87
Published by SCHOLINK INC.