Revista Românească pentru Educaţie Multidimensională
ISSN: 2066-7329 | e-ISSN: 2067-9270
Covered in: Web of Sciences (WOS); EBSCO; ERIH+; Google Scholar; Index Copernicus; Ideas RePeC; Econpapers;
Socionet; CEEOL; Ulrich ProQuest; Cabell, Journalseek; Scipio; Philpapers; SHERPA/RoMEO repositories; KVK;
WorldCat; CrossRef; CrossCheck


2020, Volume 12, Issue 1, pages: 334-349 | doi:10.18662/rrem/217

                                              Abstract: A variety of research has shown that involvement in
Art Education,                                the arts increases student achievement across all subject areas,
Therapy                                       as well as social and adaptive skills. Accordingly, special
                                              education and art integration might be beneficial on many
Interventions and                             levels for individuals with ASD as well. This study aims to
School Management                             determine the trends in the studies on autism and arts through
                                              content analysis and discuss the role of school management in
in Autism                                     art education for individuals with autism. Several databases
                                              were examined in the study in order to carry out the content
Yücehan YÜCESOY¹,                             analysis in order to provide a review of on the studies related
Başak BAĞLAMA2,                               with art interventions in Autism Spectrum Disorder (ASD).
Mehmet TÜZEL3                                 Articles published in academic databases were examined based
1 Department of Classroom Teaching,
                                              on certain criteria including year of publication, research
Atatürk Education Faculty, Near East          subject, sample, name of the journals, authors in the studies.
University, North Cyprus, Mersin 10 Turkey,   Data were analyzed based on content analysis method. Results
yucehan.yucesoy@neu.edu.tr                    are discussed with reference to relevant literature and
2 Department of Special Education, Atatürk
                                              implications for further research and practices are also
Education Faculty, Near East University,      provided.
North Cyprus, Mersin 10 Turkey,
basak.baglama@neu.edu.tr
3 Department of Educational Administration,   Keywords: Autism spectrum disorder; art; art education;
Supervision, Planning and Economics,          intervention; review.
Nicosia, North Cyprus, Mersin 10 Turkey,
mehmet.tuzel@neu.edu.tr                       How to cite: Yücesoy, Y., Bağlama, B., & Tüzel, M. (2020).
                                              Art Education, Therapy Interventions and School
                                              Management in Autism. Revista Romaneasca pentru Educatie
                                              Multidimensionala, 12(1), 334-349. doi:10.18662/rrem/217

    Art Education, Therapy Interventions and School Management in Autism
                          Yücehan YÜCESOY et al.


1. Introduction
        In today‟s world, there is a close relationship between education,
science and arts. Art is one of the most important part of peoples‟s lives in
the past, today and in the future. In most general terms, art could be
described as the methods used to express an emotion, design or
phenomenon (Silverstein & Layne, 2010; Yolcu, 2018). Accordingly,
Naughton, Biesta and Cole (2017) stated that teaching arts is also important
for exploring and discovering the new in line with the aims of education and
science. Art education is the field of education which contributes to people
in terms of gaining positive personality characteristics, internalizing
humanistic values, becoming sensitive about the society, coping with the
negative situations, self-fulfilment and acquiring esthetics value and
perspective.
        Art education is not only for individuals who prefer arts education or
make artistic activities; it is an essential phenomenon for all individuals living
in a society (Duncum, 2001; Buyurgan, 2007). In addition, Cahnmann-Taylor
and Siegesmund (2017) stated that art education incorporates theoretical and
practical studies related with arts education from preschool to higher
education and it involves many branches such as arts, music, sculpture,
architecture, graphic arts, industrial design, fine arts, cinematography,
fashion design and video art. Furthermore, there are several methods in art
education which have technical characteristics such as drama, analysis and
merge, visual activities and computer assisted methods (Ramamoorthi &
Nelson, 2011; Kirisoglu, 2014).
        Art is very important for individuals to express themselves and to
create aesthetic perceptions. It is known that art develops creativity, enables
individuals to produce practical solutions to problems and helps students to
relate to other courses with its interdisciplinary role. Derby (2011)
mentioned that the visual arts course at a young age also develops fine and
gross motor skills and establishes eye-hand coordination. The limits of art
are so wide; it is even used today for therapeutic purposes. Treatment with
art increases the physical, mental and sensory well-being of people through
various applications.Art, especially painting, helps children to express their
mental health. It enables them to develop a sense of responsibility and
cooperation, solidarity and sharing in individual or group work, and feelings
and behaviors such as love, respect and cooperation between each other and
gain technical knowledge and skills about formal expression. It enables the
child to learn by doing and prepares the child for the stages of learning with


                                       335

Revista Românească pentru                                         March, 2020
Educaţie Multidimensională                                   Volume 12, Issue 1

versatile stimuli (Lusebrink, 2004; Malchiodi, 2011; Demir & Demir, 2018;
Martin et al., 2018; Bal, 2019; Chiang, Reid-Varley & Fan, 2019).
         Special education is the form of education provided by specially
trained professionals in appropriate educational environments with
individualized education programs and methods based on their individual
abilities and requirements in order to fulfil educational and social needs of
individuals with special needs (Cook & Oldom, 2013; Wilmshurst & Brue,
2018). Individuals with special needs are individuals who show significant
differences from their peers in terms of developmental characteristics and
competencies. According to Salderay (2012), art education is really important
for individuals with special needs to gain individual identity, experience the
feeling of success, increase self-confidence and encouragement, adapt to
social life, enable hand-eye-brain coordination, develop and regulate
emotional structure, improve self-expression abilities, increase ability of
percetion, develop fine and gross motor skills and make comparison and
metaphors.
         The importance and necessity of art education for individuals with
autism spectrum disordershould first be adopted by school managers,
supervisors, educators and parents. School managers and teachers should be
involved in art education and intervention activities for students with autism.
First of all, it is important that the management staff believe, adopt and
support art education. For this reason, it is a realistic and beneficial way for
school managers and teachers to approach the solutions by supporting art
education for students with autism to the practice, theory and education of
art. Art education is an area where problems are experienced for many
reasons. These problems arise mainly from general education policy,
curriculum, managers, teachers, physical structures of schools. This prevents
art education from reaching its goals.
         In general, the attitudes of managers, supervisors, other teachers and
parents who perceive and interpret art such as emotional relaxation,
discharging, pleasure, reflecting beauties, exhibiting talent have reduced the
position of art education to the occupation of leisure time. School managers
and teachers should be aware of the importance and necessity of art
education and that it is an important activity in the life of the child with
autism. If art is an important element in special education institutions, they
should not ignore the development of human life, experience and aesthetic
aspect for a qualified, balanced education. It is very difficult to limit art
education to forty minutes in schools and to achieve the positive
developments expected in our students with insufficient physical equipment.
This is because one of the tasks of the visual arts teacher should inform and

                                      336

    Art Education, Therapy Interventions and School Management in Autism
                          Yücehan YÜCESOY et al.

educate students, colleagues, managers, families and other members of
society (Ture, 2007).
         Furthermore, art education and therapy interventions help
individuals with special needs to develop esthetics, emotions and values and
acquire and generalize knowledge and academic skills such as basic
mathematical skills and daily life skills (Hourigan, 2014; Dunn-Snow, 2015).
Individuals produce a product or a work of art with artistic activities and one
of the most basic goal of art education is to improve individuals‟ social and
communication skills. At this point, it could be inferred that art contributes
to individuals with special needs in terms of acquiring independent living
skills in the society which is one of the most important goal of special
education. Integration of art into special education enhances many skills of
individuals with special needs and ensure permanence and generalization of
these acquired skills (Epp, 2008).
         Autism Spectrum Disorder (ASD) is a disorder that manifests
symptoms in early childhood and prevents the development of the brain that
causes lifelong, impair social interaction and communication, and leads to
limited and repetitive behaviors (DSM-5 American Psychiatric Association,
2013). Children with ASD have problems in attention gathering, coping with
problems and keeping in memory and these problems primarily affect their
social lives as well as their academic success (Tekin-Iftar & Degirmenci,
2012).
         Today, children with the diagnosis of ASD are given various
supportive and alternative treatment methods (music therapy, art therapy,
dolphin therapy, hippo therapy, hydrotherapy etc.). According to recent
studies, researchers divide supportive and alternative treatment methods into
three main groups (Riesgo, Gottfried & Becker, 2013; Kircaali-Iftar, 2015):
         a. Promising therapies: This treatment method, which gives very good
results, includes music therapy, art therapy, imitation based education,
naltrexone and acetyl-cholinesterase inhibitors and so on. comprising.
         b. Treatments with a certain degree of scientific evidence: This treatment
group includes carnitine, ocytocin, vitamin C, tetrahydrobiopterin,
adrenergic alpha-2 agonists, as well as hyperbaric oxygen therapy,
immunomodulatory therapy, and anti-inflammatory therapies.
         c. Treatments with no scientific evidence: This treatment group includes
carnosine, multivitamin and mineral complexes, omega-3 fatty acids,
selective diets, auditory integration training, neuro-feedback, acupuncture,
dolphin therapy, hippo and hydro therapies.
         Children express their feelings and thoughts with shapes and colors
by using various tools and colors through art education. According to

                                       337

Revista Românească pentru                                         March, 2020
Educaţie Multidimensională                                   Volume 12, Issue 1

Osborne (2003), art intervention for autism has two aspects including both
educational and therapeutic outcomes. In other words, art workshops
(painting, music, theater and dance sessions) in the daily education programs
of individuals with ASD are obligatory in terms of therapeutic effect. Art is a
very special and important channel for the self-expression of individuals
with autism and for meeting with others individuals. In addition, children's
use of non-verbal expression encourages them to share their experiences.
Figures represent objects, and a drawing with a purpose can encourage
contact with the object of the child with ASD. There are various positive
outcomes of art education for individuals with ASD and these can be listed
as follows:
          They gain sensory experience and sensory relaxation occurs.
          They learn to analyze and explore.
          They develop skills to express themselves individually.
          Their imagination develops and they become more sociable.
          They gain skills and their attention span increases.
          They develop eye-hand coordination and enhance big and small
muscles.
          They acquire new ideas, learns new concepts and develop sensory
abilities while using creative tools and materials.
          It leads them to manage to plan, implement and finalize their own
work and increase self-confidence.
          They use time constructively and enjoy through an activity
(Kellman, 2001; Schweizer, Knorth & Spreen, 2014;Gabriels & Gaffey,
2012;Ozcan, 2015; Alter-Muri, 2017).
         Art works, in the most general terms, aim to support the mental and
emotional development of children diagnosed with autism through art
activities. Art works provide concrete outputs in areas such as improving life
skills, eliminating behavioral disorders, eliminating problem behaviors, and
improving the child's self-expression processes.There are some specific art
activites which can be used for children with ASD. These might include
painting, finger-printing, ceramics and clay and other kneading materials.
Children with ASD express the connections between the inner world and
the outer world through painting activities (Josefi & Ryan, 2004; Karim &
Mohammed, 2015; Snapp, 2017).The picture relaxes the child emotionally
and sometimes pictures about the child's inner world give us clues. Finger-
printing provides emotional relaxation without any means of sensory
satisfaction. First, the child plays shyly by inserting a finger in a short time
with wide arm and hand gestures spread the paint on paper. Ceramics, clay


                                      338

    Art Education, Therapy Interventions and School Management in Autism
                          Yücehan YÜCESOY et al.

and other kneading materials are essentials of art workshops. Rolling,
punching and easily shaped kneading agents help the child relax (Kim, 2009).
         The materials used in art works can also provide the child with a
sense of satisfaction and relaxation in the field of sensory integration (Case-
Smith & Bryan, 1999; Dunbar et al., 2012). There are several important
reasons why artwork is beneficial for individuals with autism. One of the
most significant symptoms of autism is the difficulties in communication.
Individuals with a diagnosis of autism often have difficulty in verbal
communication and language. For individuals who have difficulty expressing
themselves in language and words, art offers a different channel that allows
them to express themselves directly. Since most people with autism have a
stronger visual memory, using visual art has positive effects for them. The
child's ability to express himself through art makes him a more comfortable
and happy individual than the first day (Silverman, 2008).
         Malley (2014) expressed that art works also reduce the difficulties of
the autistic child in social communication and strengthen their
communication with their peers. During art activities, positive effects arise in
terms of understanding others 'perspective, taking turns, and „looking‟ at
others' art productions and seeing other perspectives. Artwork is an effective
process used to reduce autism and symptoms associated with autism. It
relaxes the child in the areas of communication, emotional development and
sensory integration and enables the child to express himself / herself.
         A variety of research has shown that involvement in the art increases
student achievement across all subject areas, as well as social and adaptive
skills and special education and art integration might be beneficial on many
levels for special needs students as well. Given the importance of art
education and therapy in the lives of individuals with special needs in terms
of enhancing their daily living skills; this study aims to determine the trends
in the studies on autism and art through content analysis and discuss the role
of school management in art education for individuals with
autism.Considering the positive learning outcomes and therapeutic effect of
art activities for individuals with ASD, it is important to reveal the current
trends in the scientific studies regarding art interventions in autism to shed
light for future research and practices regarding art and autism.

2. Method
2.1. Research Model
       This study used content analysis as a qualitative research method in
order to analyze the published documents on arts and ASD in Google

                                      339

Revista Românească pentru                                          March, 2020
Educaţie Multidimensională                                    Volume 12, Issue 1

Scholar, ULAKBIM and DergiPark databases which are academic databases
that indexes a wide variety of journal sources. Content analysis is defined a
method which involves organization, categorization and comparison of
verbal or written materials and inference of outcomes from these materials
and it is frequently used in educational and social sciences (Karasar, 2005;
Cohen, Manion & Morrison, 2007).
2.2. Data Collection
        Google Scholar, ULAKBIM and DergiPark were selected as the
database for the study. The published documents were obtained through
searching keywords “art” and “autism” in order to reveal the current
situation and trends in this area. A total number of 6 published documents
were searched, identified and obtained based on the search for the study.
2.3. Data Analysis
        The obtained published documents which were obtained based on a
comprehensive literature review were analyzed especially based on aim,
participants, results, implications and publication of journal.

3. Results and Discussion
       The research which were included and analyzed in the study are
shown in Table 1. Author(s), subject, study group and journal of the
published documents on autism and art are demonstrated.
            Table 1. Research on Art Interventions for Autism
     Research        Research subject          Study group         Journal
      on the
      related
      subject
   1. Ozorak         Views of teachers          4 special      Afyon Kocatepe
       (2019)        on the effects of         education     University Academic
                      child songs for         teachers, 1       Music Research
                     speech problems         guidance and          Journal
                      among children         psychological
                        with autism           counseling
                                              specialist, 1
                                           school principal,
                                           1 music teacher
   2. Sensoy            Designing a        Literature review Inonu University Art
      (2017)         sensory garden for                       and Design Journal
                      individuals with

                                         340

    Art Education, Therapy Interventions and School Management in Autism
                          Yücehan YÜCESOY et al.

                            ASD
   3.   Pektas         Importance of      Literature review     Art Education
        (2016)       music education                               Journal
                        for children
                      diagnosed with
                            ASD
   4. Ekmen &           Using qanun            2 children     Proceeding Book of
      Yukselen        instrument as a       diagnosed with     International Art
       (2015)         communication               ASD             and Health
                     tool for children                            Symposium
                      diagnosed with
                            ASD
   5. Girli &             Effect of            3 children     Ankara University
      Sabirsiz           “Teaching          diagnosed with    Education Sciences
       (2011)       Emotions through              ASD          Faculty Special
                    Pictures” program                         Education Journal
                        on emotion
                     recognition skills
                      of children with
                            ASD
   6.Senel (2009)   Effect of sport and     2 seperate        Ankara University
                      art activities on       groups          Education Sciences
                    communication of      consituted from      Faculty Special
                    children with ASD      Children with      Education Journal
                      with their peers     ASD and their
                                               peers


         It has been revealed in many current studies that music education or
music activities for children diagnosed with ASD have lasting positive
effects in many of their developmental areas (Shi, Lin & Xie, 2016; Dieringer
et al., 2017; LaGasse, 2017; Gottfried, Thompson, Elefant & Gold, 2018;
Mossler et al., 2019). In the study carried out by Ozorak (2019), it was aimed
to determine whether selected children songs used together for the
treatment of speech disorders seen in children with ASD are effective. It was
found that In this study, the selected children songs were supportive in the
treatment of speech disorders among children with ASD. Although song is
not sufficient by itself, but it is concluded that children songs are both a
solution providing method for speech problems and a supportive element by
teaching the concepts mentioned in the songs by means of speech therapy
or language-speaking lessons. Within the scope of the research, two children
with ASD participated in one-to-one therapy sessions during a school year in


                                      341

Revista Românească pentru                                        March, 2020
Educaţie Multidimensională                                  Volume 12, Issue 1

a Special Education and Rehabilitation Center affiliated to the Ministry of
Education. In the sessions carried out with children, plays were applied
through songs and rhythms which wereconsidered to contribute to their
level and speaking skills.At the end of this study, based on the fact that
genetic, physical or environmental factors that cause speech disorders
require therapy studies, it is concluded that children songs can be a
supportive implementation in the education of children with ASD.
         In the other study examined, Sensoy (2017) described how a sensory
garden should be designed for individuals with ASD and what features the
sensory garden should have. Benefits of sensory gardens for the individuals
with ASD and how sensory gardens based on a literature review should be
designed were mentioned. As a result, it was stated that sensory gardens
should be designed as a supportive green area covering the therapeutic
procedures.Providing playgrounds for individuals with ASD that take into
account their perceptions and sensory problems allows them to gain the
benefits of playing outdoors while relieving some of their symptoms. When
the sensory garden samples were examined, it was observed that the
attention duration of indviduals with ASD who spend time in the natural
environment increased, their reaction times decreased and behavioral
temperament improved.
         Pektas (2016) provided a literature review on the importance of
music education for children with ASD and revealed that a broad number of
studies showed that music education or music activities for children with
ASD have a lasting positive impact on many of their developmental
domains. It also plays an active role in minimizing problem behaviors that
manifest themselves in many of children with ASD. For those children who
do not communicate much with the outside world, music is the one of the
most enjoyable communication tool. It has been proved by research that we
can teach a concept or skill we want to teach children with autism
sometimes faster and more permanently through music.
         Furthermore, Ekmen and Yukselen (2015) aimed to investigate
whether music, especially the qanun instrument, has an effect on the
communication and interaction skills of children with ASD who have social
interaction problems.Two children with ASD participated in the research. In
the first session; K. did not make eye contact, did not look at the instrument,
did not establish eye contact, and displayed swinging movement, irrelevant
reactions, began to shake his head after a while and was bored. However, it
was observed that he was delighted and interested when he came near the
law and touched the wires on both sides of the threshold with his fingers.
Especially the sound of birds on the right side of the threshold attracted

                                     342

    Art Education, Therapy Interventions and School Management in Autism
                          Yücehan YÜCESOY et al.

attention. It was seen that E. tried to get up, talked, showed great interest in
the instrument and often wanted to stand up and come to the researcher to
play. It was later discovered that E., like K., tried to explore the law by
playing and enjoyed it. As a result, it was concluded that using qanun
insrument improved social interaction problems of the participants.
         Girli and Sabirsiz (2011) investigated the effect of “Teaching
Emotions through Pictures” program on emotion recognition skills of
children with ASD. In the study, the “five-stage emotion teaching program”
developed by Howlin et al. (1999) was implemented to three students
diagnosed with Asperger syndrome and high functional autism teach sad,
angry, happy and scared emotions with picture cards. In order to determine
whether the emotion teaching program using picture cards is effective or
not, multiple probe design of single-subject research method was used.It was
determined the three students who participated in the study learned the
targeted emotions, generalized them in different materials and preserved
them to a great extent during the monitoring process.This result is parallel to
the results of other studies in which children with autism are taught
emotions using visual materials.
         Particularly, the necessity and importance of interactions with peers
of individuals with autism is known. In the last study examined, Senel (2009)
presented two examples of interaction in which groups with and without
autism come together through different activities. Examples of these
interactions were carried out in two separate schools, a private college and
an Anatolian High School. The students who volunteered to participate in
the activities participated in various sports and art activities with OCEM
(Autistic Children Education Center) students after a short training. For
example, 18 volunteer students aged between 16 and 18 attending OCEM,
10 students aged 12 to 19, with different arts and sports activities have come
together at events. Together, the two groups performed activities such as
step, percussion, solo and choir music studies, playing ball, taking photos
and making shapes with different kinds of dough. The results revealed that
these sports and music activities increased the interaction between students
with and without autism.
         Art education and therapy interventions can be considered as one of
the most problematic areas in special educational institutions. The problems
are based on educational policies. The existence of contemporary art
education among the requirements of children with autism cannot be
denied. The adoption of an art-focused approach to interventions for
individuals with autism spectrum disorder will lead to more positive and
lasting results. Therefore, it is very important that the school administration,

                                      343

Revista Românească pentru                                             March, 2020
Educaţie Multidimensională                                       Volume 12, Issue 1

which is the key point of operation in educational environments, attaches
importance to art education, therapy interventions and activities and places
them in their curriculum.

4. Conclusion and Recommendations
        In conclusion, a literature review related to art interventions in
individuals with ASD is reviewed and the aim, subject and findings of these
studies are presented in the current study. In all six researches examined in
the study, although different branches of art such as painting and music
were discussed, it was concluded that art interventions positively affect the
social and communication skills of individuals with ASD. Based on the
results obtained from the study, following recommendations for further
research and practices are provided:
         In this study, the keywords “autism” and “art” were used as
keywords for literature review. Future studies can be carried out by using
different keywords related to art such as art therapy, painting, music in
different disability groups which might include mental disability, hearing
impairment and learning difficulty.
         In this study, literature was searched for studies published in
Turkish language. In future studies, literature can be searched in foreign
sources and trends in autism and art researches in the world can be revealed.
         Current trends in autism and art researches are revealed in this
study. Therefore, it may be recommended to repeat this research in different
periods in the future and to determine the current research trends in that
period.
         In this study, published articles in relevant databases were
analyzed. Further research might examine the trends in postgraduate thesis
in order to shed light for the researchers who study postgraduate.

References
Alter-Muri, S. B. (2017). Art education and art therapy strategies for autism
      spectrum disorder students. Art Education, 70(5): 20-25.

DSM-5 American Psychiatric Association. (2013). Diagnostic and statistical manual of
    mental disorders. Arlington, Texas: American Psychiatric Publishing.

Bal, F. (2019). Renk terapi'nin depresyon uzerindeki etkisinin incelenmesi. Journal of
       International Social Research, 12(62): 744-752.



                                        344

     Art Education, Therapy Interventions and School Management in Autism
                           Yücehan YÜCESOY et al.

Buyurgan, S. (2007). Egitim fakultelerinin resim-is egitimi ana bilim dali
     ogrencilerinin aldıklari egitim-ogretime yonelik gorus ve beklentileri. Turk
     Egitim Bilimleri Dergisi, 5(4): 657-677.

Cahnmann-Taylor, M.,& Siegesmund, R. (Eds.). (2017). Arts-based research in
     education: Foundations for practice. London, UK: Routledge.

Case-Smith, J. & Bryan, T. (1999). The effects of occupational therapy with sensory
      integration emphasis on preschool-age children with autism. American Journal
      of Occupational Therapy, 53(5): 489-497.

Chiang, M., Reid-Varley, W. B., & Fan, X. (2019). Creative art therapy for mental
      illness. Psychiatry Research. 275, 29-136

Cohen, L., Manion, L., & Morrison, K. (2007). Observation. Research Methods in
     Education, 6, 396-412.

Cook, B. G.,& Odom, S. L. (2013). Evidence-based practices and implementation
      science in special education. Exceptional Children, 79(2): 135-144.

Demir, V., & Demir, A. (2018). Sanatla terapi programi ve etkilesim grubu
     uygulamasinin ruhsal belirti duzeyleri uzerindeki etkisi. Turkiye Butuncul
     Psikoterapi Dergisi, 1(2): 97-120.

Derby, J. (2011). Disability studies and art education. Studies in Art Education, 52(2),
      94-111.DOI: https://doi.org/10.1080/00393541.2011.11518827

Dieringer, S. T., Zoder‐Martell, K., Porretta, D. L., Bricker, A., & Kabazie, J.
      (2017). Increasing physical activity in children with autism through music,
      prompting, and modeling. Psychology in the Schools, 54(4): 421-432.

Dunbar, S. B., Carr-Hertel, J., Lieberman, H. A., Perez, B., & Ricks, K. (2012). A
     pilot study comparison of sensory integration treatment and integrated
     preschool activities for children with autism. Internet Journal of Allied Health
     Sciences and Practice, 10(3): 1-8.

Duncum, P. (2001). Visual culture: Developments, definitions, and directions for
     art education. Studies in Art Education, 42(2): 101-112.

Dunn-Snow, P. (2015). Art therapy: Definitions and dimensions. Delta Kappa
     Gamma Bulletin, 81(4): 79-85.




                                         345

Revista Românească pentru                                               March, 2020
Educaţie Multidimensională                                         Volume 12, Issue 1

Ekmen, G. & Yukselen, A. (2015). Otizm spektrum bozuklugu olan cocuklarda
     kanun enstrumaninin bir iletisim araci olarak kullanilmasi.Proceedings on
     International Symposium on Health and Arts, 1, 11-17.

Epp, K. M. (2008). Outcome-based evaluation of a social skills program using art
     therapy and group therapy for children on the autism spectrum. Children &
     Schools, 30(1): 27-36.

Gabriels, R. L.,& Gaffey, L. J. (2012). Art therapy with children on the autism
      spectrum. In C. A. Malchiodi (Ed.), Handbook of art therapy (pp. 205-221). New
      York, NY, US: Guilford Press.

Girli, A.,& Sabirsiz, S. (2011). The examination of the effectiveness of the
       instructional program that teaches emotions through pictures to children
       with autism. Ankara University Faculty of Educational Sciences Journal of Special
       Education, 12(1): 1-21.

Gottfried, T., Thompson, G., Elefant, C., & Gold, C. (2018). Reliability of the
      music in everyday life (MEL) scale: A parent-report assessment for children
      on the autism spectrum. Journal of Music Therapy, 55(2): 133-155.

Hourigan, R. M. (2014). Intersections between school reform, the arts, and special
      education: The children left behind. Arts Education Policy Review, 115(2): 35-
      38.

Howlin, P., Baron-Cohen, S., & Hadwin, J. (1999). Teaching children with autism to
     mind-read: A practical guide for teachers and parents. Chichester: J. Wiley & Sons.

Josefi, O., & Ryan, V. (2004). Non-directive play therapy for young children with
       autism: A case study. Clinical Child Psychology and Psychiatry, 9(4): 533-551.

Karasar, N. (2005). Bilimsel arastirma yontemi (17th ed.). Ankara, Turkey: Nobel
      Publication.

Karim, A. E. A. & Mohammed, A. H. (2015). Effectiveness of sensory integration
     program in motor skills in children with autism. Egyptian Journal of Medical
     Human Genetics, 16(4): 375-380.

Kellman, J. (2001). Autism, art, and children: The stories we draw.Westport, Connecticut,
     US: Greenwood Publishing Group.

Kim, S. M. (2009). Research of education program for autistic children the clay. The
      Journal of the Korea Contents Association, 9(3): 91-98.


                                          346

     Art Education, Therapy Interventions and School Management in Autism
                           Yücehan YÜCESOY et al.


Kircaali-Iftar, G. (2015). Otizm spektrum bozuklugu. Istanbul, Turkey: Daktylos
      Publication.

Kirisoglu, O. T. (2014). Sanat bir seruven. Ankara, Turkey: Pegem A Publishing.

LaGasse, A. B. (2017). Social outcomes in children with autism spectrum disorder:
     a review of music therapy outcomes. Patient Related Outcome Measures, 8, 23-32.

Lusebrink, V. B. (2004). Art therapy and the brain: An attempt to understand the
      underlying processes of art expression in therapy. Art Therapy, 21(3): 125-
      135.

Malchiodi, C. A. (Ed.). (2011). Handbook of art therapy. New York, New York:
      Guilford Press.

Malley, S. M. (2014). Students with disabilities and the core arts standards: Guiding principles
      for teachers. Washington, US: Internationl Organsiation on Arts and Disability.

Martin, L., Oepen, R., Bauer, K., Nottensteiner, A., Mergheim, K., Gruber, H., &
      Koch, S. (2018). Creative arts interventions for stress management and
      prevention—a systematic review. Behavioral Sciences, 8(2): 1-18.

Mossler, K., Gold, C., Assmus, J., Schumacher, K., Calvet, C., Reimer, S., &
      Schmid, W. (2019). The therapeutic relationship as predictor of change in
      music therapy with young children with autism spectrum disorder. Journal of
      Autism and Developmental Disorders, 49(7): 2795-2809.

Naughton, C., Biesta, G., & Cole, D. R. (Eds.). (2017). Art, artists and pedagogy:
     Philosophy and the arts in education. London,UK: Routledge.

Osborne, J. (2003). Art and the child with autism: Therapy or education?.Early Child
     Development and Care, 173(4): 411-423.

Ozcan, M. (2015). Zihinsel engelli bireylerde gorsel sanat egitimi. Istanbul Aydin
     Universitesi Guzel Sanatlar Fakultesi Dergisi, 1(2):71-83.

Ozorak, O. (2019). Otizmli cocuklardaki konusma problemlerine cocuk sarkilarinin
     etkilerinin ogretmenlerin goruslerine göre degerlendirilmesi. Afyon Kocatepe
     Universitesi Akademik Muzik Arastirmalari Dergisi, 5(9): 91-108.

Pektas, S. (2016). Otizm spektrum bozuklugu tanisi almis cocuklarda muzik
      egitiminin onemi. SED-Sanat Egitimi Dergisi, 4(1): 95-110.


                                             347

Revista Românească pentru                                            March, 2020
Educaţie Multidimensională                                      Volume 12, Issue 1


Ramamoorthi, P., & Nelson, A. (2011). Drama education for individuals on the
    autism spectrum. In Key concepts in theatre/drama education (pp. 177-181).
    Leiden: Brill Sense.

Riesgo, R., Gottfried, C., & Becker, M. (2013). Clinical approach in autism:
      Management and treatment. In Recent Advances in Autism Spectrum Disorders
      (Volume I). IntechOpen. DOI: 10.5772/54784

Salderay, B. (2012). Evaluation of visual art works which made by handicapped
       persons by their families and educational staff. Erzincan Universitesi Egitim
       Fakultesi Dergisi, 12(1): 219-229.

Schweizer, C., Knorth, E. J., & Spreen, M. (2014). Art therapy with children with
     Autism Spectrum Disorders: A review of clinical case descriptions on „what
     works‟. The Arts in Psychotherapy, 41(5): 577-593.

Senel, H. G. (2009). Otizmli bireylerle akranlarinin spor ve sanat etkinlikleri
       araciligiyla etkilesimde bulunduklari iki ornek uygulama. Ankara Universitesi
       Egitim Bilimleri Fakultesi Ozel Egitim Dergisi, 10(02): 65-74.

Sensoy, N. (2017). Otizm spektrum bozuklugu olan bireyler icin duyu bahcesi
      tasarimi. Inonu Universitesi Sanat ve Tasarim Dergisi, 7(15): 115-128.

Shi, Z. M., Lin, G. H., & Xie, Q. (2016). Effects of music therapy on mood,
      language, behavior, and social skills in children with autism: A meta-analysis.
      Chinese Nursing Research, 3(3): 137-141.

Silverman, M. J. (2008). Nonverbal communication, music therapy, and autism: A
       review of literature and case example. Journal of Creativity in Mental Health,
       3(1): 3-19.

Silverstein, L. B.,& Layne, S. (2010). What is arts integration. Washington, DC: The
       Kennedy Center for the Performing Arts.

Snapp, B. (2017). Serious play: Clay and the plastic brain. Journal of Australian
      Ceramics, 56(1): 60-64.

Tekin-Iftar, E. & Degirmenci, H. D. (2012). Otizm spektrum bozuklugu olan cocuklar ve
      egitimleri. Ankara, Turkey: Vize Publishing.




                                        348

     Art Education, Therapy Interventions and School Management in Autism
                           Yücehan YÜCESOY et al.

Ture, N. (2007). Contributions of visual arts education as a tool in education and instruction
      (Unpublished master thesis). Graduate of Social Sciences, Selcuk University,
      Konya.

Wilmshurst, L. & Brue, A. W. (2018). The complete guide to special education: Expert
     advice on evaluations, IEPs, and helping kids succeed. London, UK: Routledge.

Yolcu, E. (2018). Sanat egitimi kuramlari ve yontemleri. Ankara, Turkey: Pegem
      Publishing.




                                            349