Cypriot Journal of Educational
                                         Sciences
                                        Volume 16, Issue 5, (2021) 2640-2650


      Implementation of community-based education management: A
    case study of Islamic boarding schools in Bengkulu City, Indonesia
Zulkarnain Zulkarnain a*, Islamic University of Fatmawati Soekarno, Raden Fatah street, Pagar Dewa, Selebar,
      Bengkulu, Indonesia, https://orcid.org/ 0000-0002-4519-2515
Zubaedi Zubaedi b, islamic University Negeri Fatmawati Soekarno, Raden Fatah street, Pagar Dewa, Selebar,
      Bengkulu, Indonesia, https://orcid.org/0000-0003-0681-8770


Suggested Citation:

Zulkarnain, Z. & Zubaedi, Z. (2021). Implementation of community-based education management: A case study
of Islamic boarding schools in Bengkulu City, Indonesia. Cypriot Journal of Educational Science. 16(5), 2640-
2650. https://doi.org/10.18844/cjes.v16i5.6331

Received from July 02,2021; revised from August 17,2021; accepted from october 25,2021.
©2021 Birlesik Dunya Yenilik Arastirma ve Yayincilik Merkezi. All rights reserved.


Abstract
The purpose of this study is to reveal the objective conditions and characteristics of Islamic boarding school management
as a model of community-based education in Bengkulu City. This study uses a qualitative approach, the method used is a
single instrumental case study. The data collection process used (1) in-depth interviews, (2) participatory observation, and
(3) documentation study. The data analysis technique is domain analysis by focusing on terms, semantic relationships, and
the phrases they cover. The results and research findings show that Islamic boarding school management as a model of
community-based education in Bengkulu City needs to be addressed regarding management according to good and correct
management principles, which have been using full authority and top leader charisma. Given that Islamic boarding school is
a type of community-based education, the application of management must pay attention to the aspects of management
that apply to community-based education.


Keywords: management, community-based education, Islamic boarding school




*
 ADDRESS OF CORRESPONCE: Zulkarnain Zulkarnain, Islamic University of Fatmawati Soekarno, Raden Fatah
street, Pagar Dewa, Selebar, Bengkulu, Indonesia.
Email Addresszulkarnaid@iainbengkulu.ac.id:

Zulkarnain, Z. & Zubaedi, Z. (2021). Implementation of community-based education management: A case study of Islamic boarding schools
in Bengkulu City, Indonesia. Cypriot Journal of Educational Science. 16(5), 2640-2650. https://doi.org/10.18844/cjes.v16i5.6331


1. Introduction

      The era of decentralization-autonomy has had an impact on the opening of the community's
freedom to design and implement education according to their own needs. One of the efforts is the
paradigm of community-based education. The emergence of this paradigm is influenced by
modernization, which requires the creation of democratization in human life, including in the field of
education. Therefore, education must be managed in a decentralized manner by providing the
widest possible space for community participation (Mastuhu, 2004). Community-based education
works on the assumption that every community has actually been equipped with the potential to
solve their own problems. For this purpose, the community needs to be empowered, given the
opportunity and freedom to design, plan, finance, manage, and assess for themselves what is
needed specifically within, for, and by the community itself (Zubaedi, 2009).

       Community-based education is a model of education that is based on the principles of the
community, by the community and for the community. In this context, the community is required to
have an active role and participation in every educational program. Community-based education is a
collaborative effort that involves community participation (May 1999, Becker et al., 2001,
Nurhattati, 2014, Shumer, 1994, (Hunt et al., 2011), (Strand et al., 2003), Cooper, 2007, Ridwan et
al., 2020). Participation in this context is in the form of cooperation between the community and the
government in planning, implementing, maintaining, and developing educational activities (Hamilton
& Cunningham, 1989). Community-based education could be defined as an educational process by
which individuals (in this case adults) become more competent in their skills, attitudes, and concepts
in an effort to live in and gain more control over local aspects of their communities through
democratic participation (Galbraith, 1995). Smith and Sobel (2014) stated that community-based
education is a process designed to enrich the lives of individuals and groups by engaging with people
living within a geographical area, or sharing a common interest, to develop voluntarily a range of
learning, action, and reflection opportunities, determined by their personal, social, economic and
political need. Thus, Community-based education is a form of education that involves a group of
people living in a specific area.

       In its development, the concept of community-based education is widely used in the field of
education, one of which is Indonesia. In Indonesia, the form of community-based education model is
Islamic boarding school. Islamic boarding schools in Indonesia have their own autonomy in
management or self-management known as community-based education management. According
to data from the Indonesian Ministry of Religious Affairs, the number of Islamic boarding schools in
Indonesia in 2016 was 28,961 institutions with 4,028,660 students (Rahmawati, 2017). Furthermore,
she stated that Islamic boarding school is a unique educational institution, not only because of its
long existence, but also because of the unique culture, methods, and networks applied by this
religious education institution.

       Islamic boarding school in Indonesia is the oldest educational institution. Until now, Islamic
boarding school as a community-based education still survives in the midst of modernization of
education. The birth of Islamic boarding school was from social construction and social epistemology
that created a transcendence of social historical journey. In the process, the Islamic boarding school
model in Indonesia was founded on the initiative of the Muslim community with the aim of being a
means of studying, shaping social behavior (for the younger generation) in order to understand and
practice Islamic teachings well. In the Islamic boarding school, there are five basic elements, i.e., (1)
where the students live, (2) the mosque where they study, (3) the students, (4) the teaching of
classical books, and (5) religious leaders as caregivers (Syafe’i, 2017). The Islamic boarding school
was developed at the initiative of the community members to answer their life problems. Islamic



                                                                                                                              2641

Zulkarnain, Z. & Zubaedi, Z. (2021). Implementation of community-based education management: A case study of Islamic boarding schools
in Bengkulu City, Indonesia. Cypriot Journal of Educational Science. 16(5), 2640-2650. https://doi.org/10.18844/cjes.v16i5.6331


boarding school is managed independently by utilizing the facilities owned by the community and
emphasized the importance of every citizen's participation in every learning activity.




       In its development, Islamic boarding schools as community-based education have spread
widely in various provinces in Indonesia. The study about this topic was also quite explored, for
instance the study conducted by (Achmat, 2018) about Aisyiyah boarding school, Malang, East Java
as well as character and civid education in boarding school in Ibnu Abbas, Central Java by
(Mustakim.M, M2020). In Bengkulu province the history of the Islamic boarding school in Bengkulu
City was caused by the entry of Islam to Bengkulu in the 16th century. At that time the government
order in Bengkulu was in the form of regional kingdoms. Nowadays, in Bengkulu province specifically
in the city of Bengkulu, there are ten recorded Islamic boarding schools, i.e., (1) Hidayatul
Mubtadiin; (2) Hidayatul Qomariyah; (3) Sentot Alibasya; (4) Pancasila; (5) Al-Mubarak; (6) Al-Qur'an
Harsallakum; (7) Al-Marjan; (8) Al-Muhajirin; (9) Darussalam; (10) Hidayatullah. The ten institutions
serve as centers for Islamic education and broadcasting in Bengkulu City.

       As a community learning agent, the existence of an Islamic boarding school in Bengkulu City
has three missions to achieve. First, it increases the religious knowledge of the people. Second, it
increases public religious awareness. Third, it improves the morals of the community in accordance
with religious values and norms as well as state law. In addition, Islamic boarding schools have roles
and functions, i.e., as religious (diniyah), social (ijtimaiyyah), and educational (tarbawiyah)
institutions. The teachings conveyed in Islamic boarding school include (1) human values; (2) simple
thought and life; (3) honesty; (4) tolerance (tasamuh); (5) moderate (tawasuth); (6) balanced with
the notion of inclusiveness (infitahiyah); (7) plurality (ta'addudiyyah) (Fahhan, 2013) These teachings
place Islamic boarding school as a place where people learn to behave, think and behave fairly and in
moderation (ummatan wasathan).

       Structurally, institutional management in Islamic boarding school in Bengkulu City is held by
the leader (caretaker) of the institution. Leaders have full authority in setting policies. The principles
of kinship and professionalism are used in determining the management. In other words, the
principle of family-ism is used in determining the organizational structure and determining the
functionaries who occupy a position. Meanwhile, in running a boarding school, the leadership is
assisted by caregivers according to their duties and fields. The main tasks of Islamic boarding school
caregivers are as professionals in community development and unifying, dynamizing community
development programs, and being able to prevent conflicts in the community.

       It can be assumed that the existence of Islamic boarding school in Bengkulu City as a model of
community-based education has the main task of conducting and developing religious guidance or
counseling activities and community development through religious language. Guidance or
counseling is a series of activities in the form of providing information and guidance in the field of
religion and development through religious language that is easily understood and easily digested by
the public. Therefore, The purpose of this study is to reveal the objective conditions and
characteristics of the management used and developed by Islamic boarding schools in Bengkulu City
as a model of community-based education.

2. Methods and Materials

     2.1. Research Method




                                                                                                                              2642

Zulkarnain, Z. & Zubaedi, Z. (2021). Implementation of community-based education management: A case study of Islamic boarding schools
in Bengkulu City, Indonesia. Cypriot Journal of Educational Science. 16(5), 2640-2650. https://doi.org/10.18844/cjes.v16i5.6331


           Study uses a qualitative approach, and the method used is a single instrumental case study.
           The stages of research implementation include (1) Pre-research, i.e., targeting and
           preparation of research instruments; (2) Field work, i.e., orientation, exploration, and data
           checking; (3) Data analysis, i.e., recording, classifying, determining the focus and theme; (4)
           Compiling reports.

     2.2. Participants

           Ten Institutional leaders and administrators Islamic Boarding School in Bengkulu City were
           chosen to be interviewed for this study. All those Islamic Boarding School was observed to
           find out how the implementation of community-based education management.

     2.3. Data Collection Technique

          This research used Lists of interview questions and observation check lists. These
          instruments used for doing in-depth interviews and participatory observation. Then,
          Documentation study was also utilized with the goal to reaffirm from the interview and
          observation results.

    2.5. Data Analysis

        The data analysis technique uses domain analysis, which focuses on terms, semantic
        relationships and the phrases they cover. To obtain the level of data trustworthiness, the
        process of analyzing and checking the validity of the data uses the criteria of credibility,
        transferability, dependability, and confirmability.

        The interview transcripts, observation notes, and documentations notes were analyzed by
        coding or categorizing the terms. From this stage, the categories of the important data were
        obtained and then finding the relation between those categories. Next, data phrases stage
        was done for filtering the information that relevant to the purpose of study.

3. Result and Findings

      The findings of this study describe the existence of Islamic boarding school as a model of
community-based education in Bengkulu City. The research results are categorized into three
focuses of research findings: (1) The pattern of implementation; (2) Characteristics; (3)
Implementation management.

a. Implementation of Community-Based Education at Islamic Boarding School

      The pattern of implementation includes four forms of management in the implementation of
community-based education in Islamic boarding schools. First, the Islamic boarding school institution
in Bengkulu City has an independent management structure (organization) and does not depend on
other institutions. Structurally, the holder of autonomy (authority) of each institution is held by the
head of the institution. With this autonomy (authority), each institution can use its authority in
regulating where and how the implementation of education is directed according to the vision and
mission of the institution.

      Second, the curriculum at the Islamic boarding school in Bengkulu City is completely based on
needs and human resources. The preparation of the curriculum material is based on the needs of the
community. This can be seen in the goal orientation and Islamic boarding school programs in

                                                                                                                              2643

Zulkarnain, Z. & Zubaedi, Z. (2021). Implementation of community-based education management: A case study of Islamic boarding schools
in Bengkulu City, Indonesia. Cypriot Journal of Educational Science. 16(5), 2640-2650. https://doi.org/10.18844/cjes.v16i5.6331


Bengkulu City that emphasize the values of religious teachings and development to the wider
community, and also the understanding the values of Islamic teachings. In addition, the curriculum
at Islamic boarding school is fully oriented to the overall social dynamics of society, measurable,
comprehensive, and represents the reality of community life.

       Third, the empowerment of Islamic boarding schools in Bengkulu City is based on social trust
and leader figures (caregivers). In the program's achievements, the Islamic boarding school in
Bengkulu City succeeded in empowering the community. The success of the program was caused by
several factors including: (1) clarity of cooperation program between institutions and the
community; (2) social trust on a broad understanding of religion; (3) the suitability and compatibility
of the community empowerment program with the real needs of the community; (4) availability of
social capital and facilities for partner institutions; (5) providing benefits for all parties related to the
empowerment program.

       Fourth, Islamic boarding school in Bengkulu City forms partnership continuum participation
and symbiotic mutualism. Bengkulu City community participation has relevance to Islamic boarding
school, can be established effectively and is a symbiotic mutualism, and provides broad benefits.
Community activity in participating in programs launched by Islamic boarding school is a form of
community trust and the needs of people's lives to learn. According to Tilaar (2002), community
participation in the implementation of education is absolute. This is because the community is the
first and main stakeholder in the community-based education process.

       From the four findings as revealed above, it shows that Islamic boarding school as a model of
community-based education in Bengkulu City has a characteristic in its implementation and has a
scientific tradition that is different from the scientific tradition of other institutions. Islamic boarding
school is an institution for developing moral-spiritual values, information, culturally reciprocal
communication with the community, and a place for fostering community solidarity. The existence
of Islamic boarding school in its development has played three roles, i.e., (1) transmission of Islamic
knowledge; (2) maintenance of Islamic tradition; (3) reproduction of scholars (Azra, 1998).

b. Characteristics of Community-Based Education Management in Islamic Boarding School

       In the implementation of community-based education in Islamic boarding schools, there are
four forms of policy characteristics. First, the determination of the vision, mission, goals and
strategic objectives in Islamic boarding schools is fully the authority of the leader (caregiver). The
policy authority is entirely determined by the leader (caregiver) of the institution, while other parties
tend to only act as followers and translators in the operationalization of the institution's programs.
The policies taken are based on the experience of the institutional leaders, discussions with various
figures and experts, and based on an analysis of the potential of the institution and the surrounding
community.

      Second, the organizational system is based on family-professionalism. The principle used in
the management of Islamic boarding school in Bengkulu City uses principles of familialism and
professionalism. The principle of familialism is used in determining the organizational structure and
determining the functionaries who occupy a position. The model for providing family-based
education, as applied at Islamic boarding schools in Bengkulu City, has similarities with other Islamic
boarding schools in Indonesia. The implemented organizational system has been formed from one
generation to another and is fully under the authority of the institutional leader.

     Third, there is charismatic-professional leadership. Islamic boarding schools in Bengkulu City
have a charismatic-professional leadership model based on the figure of a leader. These figures

                                                                                                                              2644

Zulkarnain, Z. & Zubaedi, Z. (2021). Implementation of community-based education management: A case study of Islamic boarding schools
in Bengkulu City, Indonesia. Cypriot Journal of Educational Science. 16(5), 2640-2650. https://doi.org/10.18844/cjes.v16i5.6331


include having broad and visionary insight, deep and comprehensive mastery of substance, qualified
managerial technical abilities, and holistic personality. The figure of a leader in Islamic boarding
school for the community is a role model to be imitated and respected for their high religious
understanding.

       Fourth, Islamic boarding school’s internal control in Bengkulu City uses a religious approach. In
running and leading the institution, the internal control system used is fully guided by the principle
of mutual trust and Islamic teachings, including: honest and transparent (shiddiq), accountable
(amanah), professional and rational (fathonah) and communicative (tabligh), and also belief in
blessings. The internal control used by Islamic boarding school is entirely using a religious approach
or religious values (Zubaedi et al., 2020), i.e., the tendency to think and behave based on belief
(faith).

       The three findings described above show that the managerial pattern in Islamic boarding
school in Bengkulu City so far is generally still natural. The natural pattern of coaching and
development can produce good leadership continuity. The process of establishing an Islamic
boarding school presents a leader who is forged by experience and has the advantage of a religious
personality. This personal power gives rise to a wise leadership style. This absolute and personal
nature of leadership is called charisma. Therefore, this term of ‘charismatic’ refers to the quality of a
person's personality who is considered to have supernatural powers, a special human being, or at
least special in the eyes of society. A leader is considered charismatic if they have certain aspects
that show an appearance of power and cause others to accept their orders as something to follow.

c. Management of Community-Based Education Implementation at Islamic Boarding Schools

       There are five models in the development of community-based education in Islamic boarding
schools. First, the Islamic boarding schools in Bengkulu City apply a community-based education
model. There are reasons behind the importance of Islamic boarding school, i.e., (1) Economic
perspective, financing efficiency in Islamic boarding schools is affordable for people from various
communities; (2) Socio-cultural perspective, the existence of Islamic boarding schools is an effort to
improve the social behavior of the community and an effort to restore, rehabilitate, and reform
social conditions that occur in the community; (3) Socio-political perspective, the existence of an
Islamic boarding school contributes to the development of multicultural values in society, given the
condition of the Bengkulu City community that has a very high level of plurality and diversity; (4)
Managerial perspective, the existence of Islamic boarding school is an effort to improve in giving
birth to various alternatives and innovations to changes in people's lives.

       Second, there is a goal of achieving community-based education in Islamic boarding schools.
The people of Bengkulu realize that the objectives of community-based education are to (1) increase
religious understanding and religious moderation; (2) Strengthen the decentralized community-
based education system, which refers to strengthening the attitude of independence and
community resources; (3) Accommodate community needs that are oriented toward economic
needs; (4) Grow and strengthen the democratization process of Islamic education.

       Third, there are steps for implementing community-based education in Islamic boarding
schools. For the efforts to achieve productivity, efficiency, and effectiveness in the implementation
of Islamic boarding schools, the Islamic boarding school carried out the following steps: (1) Raising
public awareness that religious understanding is basically the property and responsibility of the
community; (2) The need to mobilize and motivate the community to be moved and stimulated to
take concrete action in the implementation of community-based education; (3) Carrying out
concrete work stages including: (a) formulating vision, mission, and goals, (b) identification and

                                                                                                                              2645

Zulkarnain, Z. & Zubaedi, Z. (2021). Implementation of community-based education management: A case study of Islamic boarding schools
in Bengkulu City, Indonesia. Cypriot Journal of Educational Science. 16(5), 2640-2650. https://doi.org/10.18844/cjes.v16i5.6331


needs analysis, (c) problem analysis based on its dimensions, (d) setting priorities for education
needs, (e) setting policies education concerns the outputs, inputs and processes according to the
vision and mission.

       Fourth is the management of community-based education steps. In managing an Islamic
boarding school, the steps taken by the leaders and administrators include (1) Preparation of vision,
mission, goals, and work programs oriented to the needs of the community; (2) The organization,
structure, function, and division of tasks are based on public interest; (3) The leadership system can
use the charismatic-professional leadership model; (4) The internal control is based on Islamic
religious principles.

       Fifth is the principles of community-based education in Islamic boarding schools. In managing
Islamic boarding schools, the principles used by institutional leaders and administrators include: (1)
Believing that all communities have rights and responsibilities in determining their own needs, (2)
Making efforts to adapt services and programs to the potential of the local community area; (3)
Integrated services from various sectors; (4) Optimizing the utilization of physical and financial
resources in the community area; (5) Developing an attitude of accepting diversity, difference, and
pluralism (religious moderation); (6) Being responsive to the needs or aspirations of the community;
(7) Developing the principle of lifelong learning.

       From the five findings above, Islamic boarding school as a model of community-based
education is an Islamic educational institution that was established due to the support and
participation of the community. Islamic boarding schools are generally known as private education
institutions that are highly capable of being self-sufficient in providing Islamic education. So far,
education experts in Indonesia have not wanted to study more deeply the phenomenon of the
emergence of this type of education that grows from society. Basically, the type of community-based
education as reflected in Islamic boarding school also describes the ideals and visions contained in
the minds of educational pioneers, i.e., the realization of intelligent, skilled, independent, and
competitive society, by conducting learning programs according to the needs of the community. For
this reason, an in-depth understanding of the existence of Islamic boarding school education experts
is needed as a model of community-based education.

4. Discussion

      The concept of community-based education in Indonesia, precisely in Bengkulu City, has
become a public awareness movement to continue learning throughout life in overcoming the
changing and increasingly difficult challenges of life. Conceptually, Community-based education is a
model of providing education that is based on the principles of the community, by the community,
and for the community (Wahyudin, 2022; Trisandi & Santosa, 2020; Suharto, 2005; Syakdiah, 2000)
Education from the community means that education provides answers to the needs of the
community. Education by the community means that the community is placed as the subject/actor
of education, not the object of education. Furthermore, education "for the community" means that
the community is included in all programs designed to meet their needs (Zubaedi, 2009).

      Community-based education can be designed, regulated, implemented, assessed and
developed by the community. This leads to efforts in answering the existing challenges and
opportunities with a critical pedagogical orientation. Murphy (2001) reveals that community-based
education is always grounded in critical theory and pedagogy. In critical pedagogy, education is an
arena of political struggle. In the conservative educational paradigm, education aims to maintain the
status quo, but for the liberal education paradigm it is for moderate changes. However, in critical


                                                                                                                              2646

Zulkarnain, Z. & Zubaedi, Z. (2021). Implementation of community-based education management: A case study of Islamic boarding schools
in Bengkulu City, Indonesia. Cypriot Journal of Educational Science. 16(5), 2640-2650. https://doi.org/10.18844/cjes.v16i5.6331


pedagogy, education is directed at fundamental structural changes in the political economy of the
society in which education is located.

       The community-based education model in Indonesia is now recognized for its existence after
the issuance of Law no. 20 of 2003 concerning the National Education System. The existence of this
institution is regulated in Article 26 paragraphs 1-7 by using the term non-formal education. Non-
formal education is organized by community members who need educational services and serves as
a substitute, addition, and/or complement to formal education in order to support lifelong
education.

       The existence of community-based education in Indonesia is an effort for the community to
identify their needs and find solutions to problems experienced by the community (Fuad, 2008;
Masduki, 2019; Fuad, 2010). Community based education can be interpreted as community
education for development, i.e. as a process that becomes a way for community members to be able
to identify problems and their needs, find solutions among themselves, mobilize existing resources
as needed, and carry out action plans or learning or both (Compton & McClusky, 1980). Community-
based education is one form of approach that considers the community as an agent as well as a goal.
Education takes the role as a process and the community takes the role of a facilitator.

         The implementation of community-based education in Indonesia is actually not a new thing
and it has been a long time since community-based education has grown and developed. Until now,
it still exists and has even become a trending educational model called Islamic boarding school. The
existence of Islamic boarding schools in Indonesia is progressing and growing rapidly. It was
recorded that in 2016 the number of Islamic boarding schools in Indonesia was 28,961 institutions
with 4,028,660 students. The large number of Islamic boarding schools that spread across all
provinces in Indonesia means that Islamic boarding schools and the community have strong social
networks. According to Zubaedi (2009), Islamic boarding school also has a strong social network with
the community and with fellow Islamic boarding schools because most Islamic boarding school
caregivers are not only bound by the same mindset and religious understanding, but they also have a
fairly close kinship relationship.

       Bengkulu as one of the provinces in Indonesia has 52 Islamic boarding schools that spread
across various regencies, while in Bengkulu City there are 10 Islamic boarding schools. The existence
of Islamic boarding school in Bengkulu City as a community-based education was born due to the
support and participation of the community. According to people's perceptions and beliefs, Islamic
boarding school is a place to study. People believe that Islamic boarding schools represent (1)
traditional institutions; (2) cultural resistance; (3) religious education. With high trust and
expectations, people send their children to Islamic boarding schools so that their children can study
religious knowledge as a provision for life in society.

       Judging from the management system, the dominance of the authority of the institutional
leader in the Islamic boarding school in Bengkulu City is still very strong. This can be seen from the
practices of making and setting policies that are fully held by the leadership. Institutional leaders
have full authority, while other parties (caregivers) tend to only act as followers and translators in
program operations. With the full authority model of leadership, it is often found that the
development of Islamic boarding schools in Bengkulu City has experienced a decrease in the quality
of institutional leaders. There is a decline in leadership quality with the ongoing change of leadership
from one generation to the next.

      It should be noted that the paradigm of leadership that is oriented toward full authority and
the charisma of top leaders is now no longer relevant to the demands of modernization. According

                                                                                                                              2647

Zulkarnain, Z. & Zubaedi, Z. (2021). Implementation of community-based education management: A case study of Islamic boarding schools
in Bengkulu City, Indonesia. Cypriot Journal of Educational Science. 16(5), 2640-2650. https://doi.org/10.18844/cjes.v16i5.6331


to (Wahid, 2001), there are four consequences that will occur from the leadership model of full
authority and top leader charisma, including: (1) The emergence of uncertainty in the development
of Islamic boarding school because everything depends on the personal decision of the leader; (2) (2)
The assistant leaders (caregivers) will experience difficulties in taking steps to develop Islamic
boarding schools if there is no charismatic kiai figure accepted to lead the Islamic boarding school;
(3) Dependence on charismatic institutional leaders often results in a sudden and unplanned pattern
of changing leaders in in the Islamic boarding school; (4) Dependence on the charismatic leader of
the institution will cause the Islamic boarding school to be less responsive to changes and mobility.

      Currently, Islamic boarding schools in Bengkulu City are faced with the swift currents of social
change due to modernization-industrialization. Therefore, Islamic boarding schools are required to
provide adequate reactions or responses. There needs to be a breakthrough and a change in the
managerial pattern of leadership at the Islamic boarding school in Bengkulu City, given that the
current leadership paradigm is starting to shift to the paradigm of leadership from everybody. The
managerial pattern of leadership needed in the institution is team leadership where everyone in the
organization is all one team.

      Considering that the Islamic boarding school culture in Bengkulu City still uses a leadership
model that is oriented toward full authority and the charisma of a top leader, new ideas are needed
in implementing community-based education management in Islamic boarding schools. So far,
Islamic boarding schools only maintain a cautious policy and accepting modernization or renewal of
education only on a limited scale to ensure that the Islamic boarding schools continue to survive.
Therefore, Islamic boarding schools are required to open themselves in responding to changes, i.e.,
by modernizing their management.

       There are efforts to realize effective and efficient organizational management in Islamic
boarding schools. The application of community-based education management in Islamic boarding
schools can be done through five steps. First is planning. In the planning process, which is an
important part in formulating the vision-mission and objectives, work programs in good planning is
to involve the entire team (management) of Islamic boarding school. Planning vision-mission, goals,
and work programs are not solely dependent on the decision of the leader of the institution
(individual).

       The second is organization. In the process of organizing, managing and dividing tasks for all
members or managers of Islamic boarding schools are formed jointly by the leaders and their
assistants. With this, the incumbent can identify the duties of each member. Then, power is no
longer centered on the leader.

       The third is supervision. The process of supervision or control in the Islamic boarding school
environment on the learning process of students can be carried out by involving the assistants of the
leader. Supervision is not only carried out by leaders, but also by the other assistants so that
activities at Islamic boarding schools can be controlled.

      Fourth is budgeting. The budgeting process can be carried out in a transparent and fair
manner. The preparation of the budget should be able to meet the needs of Islamic boarding
schools, i.e., the costs of income and expenses. Budgeting is a planning step as well as a fundamental
planning instrument.

      Fifth is evaluation. In the evaluation process, the leadership of the Islamic boarding school
involves members of the management in conducting the evaluation process. With this, the
leadership will identify thoroughly the obstacles encountered during the program of activities at the

                                                                                                                              2648

Zulkarnain, Z. & Zubaedi, Z. (2021). Implementation of community-based education management: A case study of Islamic boarding schools
in Bengkulu City, Indonesia. Cypriot Journal of Educational Science. 16(5), 2640-2650. https://doi.org/10.18844/cjes.v16i5.6331


Islamic boarding school. Evaluation as a function of administration is an activity to identify to what
extent the implementation carried out in the overall process of the organization achieves results
that are in line with the assigned plans or programs in order to achieve the goals of the Islamic
boarding school.

       The five ideas for implementing community-based education management in Islamic boarding
schools above illustrate that it is time to address for management in Islamic boarding schools as a
model of community-based education in Bengkulu City. The efforts can be related to the
management that is in line with good and correct management principles, which so far have been
using full authority and top leader charisma. Management in this context is intended as a process of
planning and decision-making, organizing, leadership, and controlling financial, physical, and
information resources to achieve organizational goals in an efficient and effective manner.
Management is a systematic and cooperative process in an effort to utilize existing resources in
order to achieve the goals that have been set efficiently and effectively. Because Islamic boarding
school is a type of community-based education, the application of management must pay attention
to the aspects of management that apply to community-based education.




5. Conclusion and Recommendations

       The results and findings of this study reveal that Islamic boarding school as a model of
community-based education in Bengkulu City is an Islamic educational institution that was
established due to the support and participation of the community. The implementation of
community-based education management in Islamic boarding schools has the following leadership
characteristics: (1) The leadership of the Islamic boarding school is oriented toward the full authority
of the leader; (2) Islamic boarding school organization system is based on professional-familialism;
(3) Islamic boarding school leadership pattern uses a charismatic-professional leadership model
based on the figure of a leader; (4) Internal control of Islamic boarding school in Bengkulu City uses a
religious approach, which is based on belief and faith.

      Recommendations from this study that can be offered for further research include: (1) It is a
novel study related to the role of community-based education; (2) It can be used as material for
evaluation and analysis of the implementation of community-based education management in
Islamic boarding schools in Bengkulu City; (3) It can be used as a reference in representing the
objective conditions and characteristics of community-based education management at Islamic
boarding schools in Bengkulu City

References
Achmat, M. (2018). Strategi Peningkatan Pembelajaran Melalui Manajemen Boarding School (Studi Kasus Di
    Smp ‘Aisyiyah Boarding School Malang). Jurnal Murabbi, 3(2), 229–247.
Azra, A. (1998). Esei-Esei Intelektual Muslim Pendidikan Islam. Logos Wacana Ilmu.
Becker, K., Fruin, M., Gooding, T., Tirschwell, D., Love, P., & Mankowski, T. (2001). Community-Based Education
     Improves Stroke Knowledge. Cerebrovascular Diseases, 11(1), 33–43.
Compton, J., & Mcclusky, H. (1980). Community Education For Community Development. Jossey-Bass.
Cooper, J. (2007). Strengthening The Case For Community-Based Learning In Teacher Education. Journal Of
     Teacher Education, 58(3), 245–255.
Fahhan, A. M. (2013).Character Education In Islamic Boarding School. Jurnal Masalah-Masalah Sosial, 4(1), 29–
     45.


                                                                                                                              2649

Zulkarnain, Z. & Zubaedi, Z. (2021). Implementation of community-based education management: A case study of Islamic boarding schools
in Bengkulu City, Indonesia. Cypriot Journal of Educational Science. 16(5), 2640-2650. https://doi.org/10.18844/cjes.v16i5.6331


Fuad, N. (2008). Pendidikan Berbasis Masyarakat Di Pondok Pesantren. Jurnal Manajemen Pendidikan, 3(1),
     399–409.
Fuad, N. (2010). Pendidikan Berbasis Masyarakat: Studi Kasus Di Pondok Pesantren Al-Ittifaq Bandung.
Galbraith, M. . (1995). Community Based Education Organizations And The Delivery Of Lifelong Learning
     Oppurtunities. Department Of Education.
Hamilton, E., & Cunningham, P. (1989). Community-Based Adult Education. Jossey-Bass.
Hunt, J., Bonham, C., & Jones, L. (2011). Understanding The Goals Of Service Learning And Community-Based
     Medical Education: A Systematic Review. Academic Medicine, 86(2).
Masduki, M. (2019). Pendidikan Berbasis Masyarakat Dalam Pendidikan Islam. Qalamuna, 11(2), 111–123.
Mastuhu. (2004). Menata Ulang Pemikiran Sistem Pendidikan Nasional Dalam Abad 21. Safiria Insania Press.
May, S. (1999). Indigenous Community-Based Education. Multilingual Matters.
Murphy, S. (2001). Informing Our Practice: A Case Study To Interrogate And Seek Critical Foundation For
    Community-Based Education. Department Of Education.
Mustakim, M. (2020). Model Pendidikan Karakter Di Sekolah Berbasis Pesantren. Prosiding Konferensi Nasional
     Pendidikan Indonesia : 103–114.
Nurhattati. (2014). Manajemen Pendidikan Berbasis Masyarakat: Konsep Dan Stratedi Implementasi. Raja
     Grafindo Persada.
Rahmawati, U. (2017). Pesantren: Lembaga Pendidikan Berbasis Masyarakat. Jurnal Penelitian, 11(2).
Ridwan, F., Gunawati, D., & Triastuti, R. (2020). Strategy For Development Of Ecological Citizens By Walhi
     Yogyakarta Through Community-Based Education In Communities Gunung Sewu. Budapest International
     Research And Critics Institute-Journal, 3(1).
Shumer, R. (1994). Community-Based Learning: Humanizing Education. Journal Of Adolescence, 17(4), 357–
    367.
Smith, G., & Sobel, D. (2014). Place-And Community-Based Education In Schools. Routledge.
Strand, K., Cutforth, N., Stoecker, R., Marullo, S., & Donohue, P. (2003). Community-Based Research And Higher
     Education: Principles And Practices. John Wiley & Sons, Inc.
Suharto, T. (2005). Konsep Dasar Pendidikan Berbasis Masyarakat. Cakrawala Pendidikan, 3(1).
Syafe’i, I. (2017). Pondok Pesantren: Lembaga Pendidikan Pembentukan Karakter. Al-Tadzkiyyah: Jurnal
      Pendidikan Islam, 8(1), 61. Https://Doi.Org/10.24042/Atjpi.V8i1.2097
Syakdiah, H. (2000). No Titleparadigma Pendidikan Berbasis Masyarakat. Jurnal Taushiah Fai Uisu, 9(2), 86–95.
Tilaar, H. (2002). Perubahan Sosial Dan Pendidikan: Pengantar Pedagogik Transformatif Untuk Indonesia.
       Grasindo.
Trisandi, & Santosa, S. (2020). Implementasi Manajemen Pendidikan Berbasis Masyarakat Di Smp Ksm Sonit
      Pulau Masoni Daerah Perbatasan Sulawesi Tengah. Jurnal Pendidikan Dompet Dhuafa, 10(2), 43–52.
Wahid, A. (2001). Menggerakkan Tradisi. Lkis.
Wahyudin, U. R. (2022). Implementasi Manajemen Pendidikan Berbasis Masyarakat Dalam Penjaminan Mutu
    Pendidikan Anak Usia Dini. 6(2), 652–663. Https://Doi.Org/10.31004/Obsesi.V6i2.1357
Zubaedi. (2009). Pendidikan Berbasis Masyarakat. Pustaka Pelajar.
Zubaedi, Utomo, P., Kholidin, F. I., & Rahmawati, N. R. (2020). Nilai Kerja Dalam Teks Mawlid Syarf Al-Anam
     Dan Implikasinya Terhadap Bimbingan Pribadi-Sosial Melalui Kesenian Islam Syarofal Anam : Kajian
     Hermeneutika      Gadamerian.       At-Ta’lim :   Media     Informasi      Pendidikan   Islam,    19(2).
     Https://Doi.Org/10.29300/Atmipi.V19.I2.4002




                                                                                                                              2650