Journal of Education and Practice                                                                         www.iiste.org
ISSN 2222-1735 (Paper) ISSN 2222-288X (Online)
Vol.11, No.31, 2020


Challenges of Women in Educational Leadership Position in Tano
          North Municipality of Ahafo Region, Ghana
                                               Yaw Boakye Djan
                           St James Seminary and Senior High School, Abesim-Sunyani

                                                 Asante Gordon
                            Nkoranza Senior High/Technical School, Nkoranza-Bon East

Abstract
The study explored the challenges of women in educational leadership in Tano North Municipality, Ahafo Region
of Ghana. This was a qualitative study which employed case study design. Purposive sampling technique was used
to select participants comprising 15 women in educational leadership position for the study. Semi-structured
interview guide were the instruments used for data collection. The data was analysed using thematic approach. It
emerged that some teachers do not accord female heads the necessary respect due to their culture, religious
background and perception about women in general. Also, the problem of heavy workload associated with their
new positions posed challenges to women in educational leadership position. It was established that mentoring,
professional development coupled with leadership and administrative support help women in leadership positions
to excel. It is recommended that Tano North Municipal Education office and other gender-based groups should
periodically organize leadership training programmes or seminars for women to prepare them professionally for
leadership positions.
Keywords: Leadership, Subordinates, Gender, Equality, Position.
DOI: 10.7176/JEP/11-31-04
Publication date: November 30th 2020

Introduction
Worldwide, women are underprivileged in terms of leadership representation both in the public and private sectors
of our national life. (Anigwe, 2013). Recently, the important role of women in educational development and the
economy has stimulated the need for women involvement in the educational leadership position. Since the Beijing
Conference in 1995, women have gained prominence in global thrifts and policies resulting in increased exposure
to leadership positions. The conference in Beijing manifest a turning point in women empowerment and expedite
action for women in leadership development or advancement.
      It is generally acknowledged that national discourse and gender stereotypes in education in relation to planned
positioning and governance qualities impart the capability of women to effectively seek public office. People’s
opinions and attitudes toward women affects their competence to engage themselves in public dialogue. Gender
stereotypes often put females at the margin prior to decision - making process. In the view of Elson (2005) the
challenges women continue to face in educational leadership position is based upon the sexual characteristics,
patriarchy and division of labour in the society. Women’s labour is not to a larger extent flexible. “It cannot widen
to cover all the deficiencies left by reduced public operating expense. It cannot absorb all the shocks of adjustment”
(Baah-Boateng, 2009 p.128)
      Accordingly, women participation and progress in educational leadership and politics in Africa is still behind
that of men (Nebolisa, 2009). Reasons accounting for the low participation of women in active decision-making
process may be assigned to poverty, lack of resources, religious and cultural beliefs, societal norms and customs
and ignorance (Baah-Boateng 2009). According to the 2010 Population and Housing Census, the gender structure
of Ghana’s population revealed that female constitutes about 51% of the population; Even though there has been
some significant increase in participation in educational leadership positions in Ghana, their contribution in the
socio- political and economic growth and development is still low (Elson, 2005).
      Gender variation may affect the physical condition of women and girls, especially in developing countries
with relatively low life expectancy, high illiteracy rate, famine, diseases and widespread poverty (Baah-Boateng,
2009). In some traditional societies in Ghana, educating girls is considered a misuse of family resources because
girls may join their husband’s family when they marry, and will not contribute to their family of orientation.
      Some Ghanaian cultural practices and norms promotes gender inequalities in education depriving women and
young children the opportunity to harness their talents, potentials and leadership skills. These cultural practices
include female slave marriage (trokosi), widowhood rites, early marriage or force marriage, child labour practices,
banishment of women alleged or suspected to be witches and female genital mutilation (FGM) (Ngaaso & Atom,
2011). According to Ngaaso and Attom (2011, p.13) ‘unfortunately, there are certain people who use culture to
justify discriminatory practices against women and other social group’. According to Amoah (1986) as cited by
Ngaaso and Attom (2011) in Ghana, a strong successful woman is regarded as a witch and thus marginalized and


                                                         25

Journal of Education and Practice                                                                       www.iiste.org
ISSN 2222-1735 (Paper) ISSN 2222-288X (Online)
Vol.11, No.31, 2020

demonized in a similar way.
      Equally, (Ngaaso & Atom, 2011) stated that a number of laws have been enacted to prohibit some of these
destructive gender-based practices. These laws include the Criminal Code Act, 1984, Act 554 outlaw religious
oppression of girls and Act 484 against Female Genital Mutilation (FGM). Ghana is also a party to the Convention
on the Elimination of all forms of Discrimination against Women (CEDAW). Article 26 (2) of the 1992
Constitution of the republic of Ghana prohibits customary practices which dehumanized or are harmful to the
physical and mental well-being of all persons. The African Charter on Human and People’s Rights and its women’s
Protocol have requirements outlawing cultural practices which discriminate against any person, including women.
Ghana’s pledge under International Human Rights Instrument includes the support of cultural norms which give
confidence to the rights and progress of women and the elimination of practices which discriminate against them.
However, social pressure from society and the family make it complex to assess the impact of the laws passed
against these cultural practices. Lack of prompt and sufficient responses from law enforcement agencies such as
the police, the law court and Commission on Human Rights and Administrative Justice (CHRAJ) discourage
women from reporting cases of maltreatment.
      Education is very essential to the accelerated pace of social, political and economic development of every
country. This is the rationale for apportioning substantial size of nations’ Gross Domestic Product (GDP) to expand
the educational sector. Ghana sets aside, between 7.6 billion cedis and 9.9 billion cedis of the annual development
and recurrent expenditure to education (MOF, 2018). This includes payment for human resources, like the
education administrators, and provision of educational infrastructure to increase accessibility.
      Ghana is in the centre of the nation’s encouraging for gender equality and women empowerment prosecution
in the educational sector. Women have been encouraged through reasonable processes to positions of
accountability at all stages. This pledge has been cherished in the 1992 Constitution, and other government
intermediate strategies and programmes, which obviously lay down the concerns of gender equality and women's
political, social and economic empowerment in national development. Modifications in the educational sector have
ensured proficient delivery at all levels. The focus is more on educational output and institutions are given greater
dominion in achieving the national goals which focus on effectiveness (GOG, 2010).
      Discrepancies in gender equality are addressed by all actors in the world at all levels. The ministry of
education has been in the forefront in ensuring gender equity in the organizational positions in the country. Men
and women administrators are given the same opportunities to work and be useful in the delivery of services in the
country. However, there are still prejudices in various parts of the nation towards female administrators, which
have outlawed effective delivery of services. In Ghana, although there are many women in the teaching career, the
number that holds leadership positions has been low. There are a number of challenges facing women in
educational leadership compared to their male counterparts. There has been little focus on the challenges facing
women in educational leadership in the Municipality and the reasons why some of them perform below expectation.
      There are relatively fewer women managers and administrators in the Municipality compared to other parts
of the country. There are socio-cultural and managerial issues that are discriminating against women that
necessitate investigation and amicable solution so that they can be addressed harmoniously. Despite these, it should
be noted that there are opportunities that women in educational leadership can seize to enhance output of work,
which include learning of Information Communication and Technology (ICT), doing away with destructive
cultural practices and taking up opportunities to upgrade themselves.
      The study also sought to find out from women in educational leadership positions how they deal with the
challenges they faced in discharge of their duties in their institutions. The responses from the female head teachers
are discussed under sub-theme that emerged from the data.

Challenges facing women in educational leadership position
Kiruriti (2010) opines that women in educational leadership in most cases find themselves not fully being
established by the society they work with, making them feel their support to the society not imperative. At this
contemporary age, there are people who still believe that women are not suitably expert to contest successfully
with men for advanced job status in educational sector. Thus, such structure of beliefs devalues women liberation
efforts. Women therefore have had obscure time convincing men in some communities that they are competent of
leading. In most cases they have to work extra hard in their profession to be identified and established as compared
to their male counterparts who are gladly accepted in the community.
      Emory (2008) observed that, many women lose their drive to excel due to the many obstacles met along the
path of becoming a manager or leader. Moreover, men and women are generally not prepared to work under a
woman because they feel that the moment a woman becomes a manager she has lost all her femininity (Commbs,
2004). Women managers are always at fault if they are strong they are regarded as aggressive, tough not feminine,
if they are jovial they are permissive, if they cry they are emotional, if they make a mistake, remarks like” That
you can expect from a woman “are heard all over which irritating and discriminating means (Commbs, 2004).
      According to Emory (2008), obstacles that women face in discharge of their duties include discrimination,


                                                        26

Journal of Education and Practice                                                                          www.iiste.org
ISSN 2222-1735 (Paper) ISSN 2222-288X (Online)
Vol.11, No.31, 2020

stereotyping, prejudice, family demands and lack of opportunities. Ruth (1987) also observed that, a married
woman who works outside the home actually carries two jobs. There is evidence to show that most of the household
labour is done by an adult woman (Baxter, 2002). In the execution of managerial duties, both male and female
head teachers are saddle with similar challenges in the management of secondary schools (Nzeli, 2013). However,
female principals are often faced with societal demands and traditions that males do not face. The women
principals are expected to complete their family responsibilities, maternal as well as managing the schools
(Celikten & Yeni, 2004). In the African context, traditional beliefs and cultural attitudes regarding the role and
status of women in society are still prevalent and many women are part of this system finding it difficult to dislocate
from this culture and tradition.
     These challenges compound the problem of female prejudices as captured by the data from research question
3, and thus makes it difficult for female leadership. Hence, it may be argued that given a level playground, female
heads may perform equally well as their male counterparts if not better. The fact that women tend to face more
obstacles on their way up the ladder has been established by Ruderman and Ohlott (2002). Their research shows
the unique challenges women face as they develop as managers and leaders. After conducting 61 interviews and
collecting 276 surveys, they discovered 5 themes characterizing the challenges facing female managers, but which
are vital for female developmental needs. These are: authenticity, wholeness, self-clarity, connection and agency.
Among the many career barriers women encounter at all levels are prejudice, resistance to women’s leadership,
leadership style issues and family demands. For organisations that are keen to develop female leaders, these
obstacles must be addressed (Eagly & Carli (2007)). Success in the workplace as women in terms of balancing
work and family may come at a high cost in the form of stress (Easton, 2007). This stress, if not handled carefully,
could have dire effects on their careers and even their roles and obligations to their families. This study suggests
there are widespread effects of the discriminatory behaviour against women that may be derogatory to an
organization’s effectiveness and performance.
     Cultural and religious issues become more evident especially when a female head works in different cultural
set up (Johannes, 2010). Women in educational leadership positions in town and countryside areas are hard hit by
prejudices because most men in such areas are the custodians of customs (Johannes, 2010). Female heads in the
educational sector are scrutinized for their social behaviour more than men in some communities, making their
work difficult. Female heads of some secondary schools and in District Educational Directorate (DED) have
challenges when dealing with adolescence behavioral problems, mainly when there are discipline cases concerning
boy-girl relationship and drug abuse (Kiruriti, 2010). Students, particularly boys prejudice women decisions and
feel the heads of educational institutions are invading their secretive affairs, making disciplinary measures
complicated in such condition. This can cause unrest in the school such as demonstrations, burning and destroying
school properties.
     Eagly and Carli (2007) wrote that studies on gender and leadership reveal the concerns about interaction
between leader uniqueness and gendered stereotypes. Society frequently relates leader characteristics to
stereotypical male traits such as ambition, confidence, dominance, and boldness. Female stereotypical traits,
however, such as kindness, helpfulness, warmth, and gentleness do not make women effective leaders. However,
Keohane (2007) explains that this statement is deceptive because successful leaders ought to be able to opt for the
most suitable characteristics depending on the settings, problems being solved and audience.
     According to Kiruriti (2010) in many cases the female head in educational institutions is alleged to be inept
of instilling discipline in the school. This also gives female administrators in school’s hard time when reporting
the same to male superiors. Women have not been trained in capacity building. Women head teachers are not
empowered throughout competence construction to take up administrative responsibilities. Lack of capacity
building among women head teachers is seen as a major contributor to lack of appointment to administrative
positions. Due to lack of proper capacity building, few females are appointed to educational leadership positions.
     Acquah (2001) explained in a study he conducted on school attendance in some selected schools in Ashanti
Region where most of the schools he visited had classes without teachers. In some schools, teachers are late up to
about 30 minutes, especially for the first period and after break, teachers do not arrive in their classes when they
are expected to. The responses gathered indicate that teachers’ time of arrival to class had serious effects on
headteachers. This confirms the circumstance explained by The World Bank Report (2008) that teachers living
long distances from school’s experience transportation difficulties; they have to track long distances to school and
those, especially in rural areas, engage in farming activities; and all these confront the instructional time use. In
spite of the distances teachers ply before they get to school, it cannot be used as an excuse for affecting learning.
     World Bank (2008) which revealed that teacher-absenteeism is an issue of great concern in basic schools,
especially in sub-Saharan Africa and ranges from 11% in Peru to 27% in Uganda. Teachers’ attendance or
regularity in school also inhibits the use of instructional time, especially in terms of both students’ access to
education and the nature of that access. A widespread problem of teacher-absenteeism is likely to contribute to
poor student performance. The prevailing evidence is that teacher-absenteeism at basic school level in Ghana
appears to have worsened in the last 15 years (World Bank Report, 2008). The World Bank Impact Evaluation of


                                                          27

Journal of Education and Practice                                                                        www.iiste.org
ISSN 2222-1735 (Paper) ISSN 2222-288X (Online)
Vol.11, No.31, 2020

Basic Education (2003) found that, in Ghana, nearly 13% of teachers have been absent in the past months compared
to just over 4% in (1988). It was also observed that in (1988), 85% of schools did not suffer at all; whereas this
figure has now fallen to 61%, with 13% of schools with over one-third of the teachers being absent for reasons
other than sickness in the past months (World Bank, 2008). The study also found absenteeism to be significantly
worse in rural schools than in urban schools, and worse in public schools compared to private schools.

Overcoming the challenges facing women in educational leadership position
Holt (1981) advocates that mentors, both male and female, may be the top most important factor in a manager's
professional progress. Mentor can advocate policies and programs for career development, open doors, initiate
contact and make recommendations. Notwithstanding the importance of mentoring, research showed that there
appears to be a lack of accessible male or female mentors for women. When males do act as mentors, they tend to
sponsor male, or someone who is most like them (Gardener, 2011).
      One reason why mentoring may not be willingly available to women may be that women don't "fit" into the
comfort zone of male mentors (Galton, 2009). Another reason may be that women are still the unknown quantity
and are not perceived by some men as loyal or trustworthy and, therefore, may be seen as a great risk factor for
the mentor. Fleming points out another problem of men choosing women as protégés is the sexual connotation that
is attached to this relationship or the threat of actual sexual harassment in the form of sexual bribery. Michael
(2008) found out that one of the critical needs of female head teachers is to create a work environment where they
can reach out for support from superiors at all times.
      This assertion by women in educational leadership position are in support of Warring (2009) who suggests
that mentors both male and female, may be the single most important factor in an administrator's career
development. Mentors can suggest strategies for career mobility, open doors, initiate contact and make
recommendations Studies have confirmed the criticality of social relationships and mentorship in women’s career
advancement (Roe, 2013; Spencer, 2013). This is because women tend to generally advance through a combination
of critical social relationships and particular performance strategies (Ezzedeen & Ritchey, 2009). Mentors are of
importance because they offer two general types of behaviours or functions: career development functions, which
is believed to facilitate the protégé’s advancement in the organization, and psychosocial functions, which is
believed to contribute to the protégé’s personal growth and professional development (Roe, 2012). They are
associated with providing positive outcomes for protégés such as promotions; higher incomes; mobility and career
satisfaction than non-protégés. Women in leadership positions should institute mentorship scheme or program for
school girls and a debriefing programme on male dominance for school boys. Such programmes will propel women
to attain leadership positions and at the same time change male attitudes towards female leadership over time.
      In addition, research does indicate that male teachers may benefit more from an informal level of ‘mentoring’
than their female equivalents. Clearly, mentoring when it does happen is one way to break down the barriers that
women face, but it is not such a simple matter. Another way of overcoming barriers that is suggested in the
literature is through networking. Networks provide a widening circle of personal and professional references that
can assist in the promotion of women as candidates for positions. Networks can provide information through
newsletters or word of mouth on systems that have job openings and contacts, offer advice on benefits of positions,
salary, history and background of school boards (Roe, 2012). Women need to actively seek out networks with
men and other women to gain visibility, information, advice and receive moral support as they pursue their careers
(Rees). Various American networks such as Sex Equity in Educational Leadership (SEEL) and Women in School
Administration (WISA) have been established. In Canada, the Federation of Women Teachers' Association
(FWTA) provides different types of networking opportunities ranging from courses to prepare for the different
leadership positions, to conferences, resource booklets, and a regular newsletter.
      Additionally, The Canadian Teachers' Federation organizes an annual Status of Women conference. As Arhin
(2012) stated in their study of women's support organizations, women need time to grow together professionally
and to learn from other women. Arhin suggested that there is something special and celebratory for same sex
members of all races and ethnic groups to come together. Perhaps one of the most compelling and powerful
experiences that women have in the conferences and workshops for women is the camaraderie, the shared
unspoken assumptions, and the revelation of one's experience which is understood (Arhin, 2012).
      Gaining academic credentials is another way for women to overcome barriers to moving up the administrative
ladder. Evidence suggests that women are attending graduate school in record numbers. Preparing for the role of
principal, especially in higher institution, has been identified as a key in breaking down the barriers facing women.
Hopefully, the trend of increased enrollment in graduate programs by women will begin to have an effect on the
serious underrepresentation of women in leadership. It is important to remember, however, that to date the results
have not been that encouraging (Warring, 2009).
      A more formal way to decrease the barriers facing women seeking advancement in educational administration
is through employment equity programs or affirmative action initiatives. Employment equity programs involve
the systematic monitoring of who holds what jobs so that areas of concern, such as fair and representative work


                                                         28

Journal of Education and Practice                                                                         www.iiste.org
ISSN 2222-1735 (Paper) ISSN 2222-288X (Online)
Vol.11, No.31, 2020

force and equality of treatment and outcome, become public (Walby, 2006). It is important to note that although
hiring can be mandated by institutions, acceptance cannot. Promoting gender equity in the classroom is another
way to help remove barriers for women. Girls are under-represented in compensatory educational programs and
extracurricular programs. They are misrepresented and under-represented in co-curricular activities such as school
club head, texts, department head, unit-leader, vice-principal and school Principal (Walby, 2006). Moreover,
educators must be cognizant of the "hidden curriculum" and the devastating effects that gender inequality in school
can have on girls. Spencer (2013) outline various steps to a bias-free classroom. Some of them include: set and
enforce rules so boys do not monopolize attention and dominate all co-curricular activities.
      Referring to Maslow’s hierarchy of human needs, interpersonal relationships could be seen as resulting from
the need for belongingness (Garudzo-Kusereka, 2009). Environmental factors are thus, regarded as important
determinant of job satisfaction (Khan, Nawaz, Aleem & Hamed, 2012:2699). According to Ellickson and Logsdon
(2001) employee job satisfaction can be greatly affected by the social environment of the organization, especially,
relationship with co-workers because cooperative co-workers are modest source of job satisfaction to each
employee. It has also been proven that a good and supportive co-workers and interpersonal relationship in general,
makes the job easier and enjoyable. This in turn increases job satisfaction levels of workers (Saif, Nawaz & Jan,
2012).
      Naval and Srivastava (2004) maintain that open communication, task independence, feeling of belongingness
and coordination among employees increase the degree of job satisfaction (Saif, Nawaz & Jan, 2012) and
according to Hiroyuki, Kato and Ohashi (2007) and Karimi (2007) studies have shown that relation with colleagues
or co-workers is the largest predictor of academicians’ intention to leave an organization or not (Saif, Nawaz &
Jan, 2012). Chughtai and Zafar (2006) add by asserting that satisfaction with co-workers is an indicator of how
highly university academicians value the nature of working relationship with co-workers (Saif, Nawaz & Jan,
2012).
      Shann (2001) in a study, relationship with pupils was highly ranked among other factors as making teachers
satisfied with their job (Ngimbudzi, 2009). For Wood (2008) employees derive their job satisfaction from
supportive administration because an informative and consultative administration makes employees comfortable
with their jobs (Ngimbudzi, 2009:41). Woods and Weasmer (2002) also agree that collegial relationship ensures
workers’ job satisfaction, and that it is significant for teachers to have time to share experiences (Ngimbudzi, 2009).
      Spencer (2013) assertion in their study on women's support in administrations they noted that women need
time to grow together professionally and to learn from other women. Schmuck as cited by Spencer (2013)
suggested that there is something special and celebratory for same sex members of all races and ethnic groups to
come together. Besides, Dundas (2008) argued that work-life balance is the effective management and juggling
act between paid work and all other activities that are essential to people such as family, community activities,
voluntary work, personal development and leisure and recreation. Similarly, Greenhaus, Collins and Shaw (2003)
posit that work-life balance is the extent to which an individual is equally engaged in-and equally satisfied with
his or her work role and family role. Broers (2005) noted that it is very challenging to balance a successful career
with a personal or family life. This can have an impact on an employee’s satisfaction in his or her work and
personal life’s roles.
      Virick, Lily and Casper (2007) therefore contend that employees who experience high work-life balance are
those who exhibit similar investment of time and commitment to work and non-work domains. According to
Hughes and Bozionelos (2007) work-life balance, which refers to individuals determining the balance between
their work and non-work responsibilities, activities and aspirations is deemed a major factor in determining
employee job satisfaction, and that family obligations are not the only issues that bring about challenges in work-
life balance, but it includes activities such as hobbies which are outside work obligations. Throughout the world,
workers, including teachers, perceive the ability to balance between workplace’s needs and personal life’s needs
as an important issue (Mohd Noor, Stanton & Young, 2009). Scholaris and Marks (2004) see work-life balance
has important consequences for employee attitudes towards their organisations as well as for the lives of employees,
and for Guest (2002) it is possible to investigate the trend of work-life balance and its developments which
influence the well-being and job outcomes of employees at work. According to Deery (2008) much attention has
been given to the issues that relate to maintaining and obtaining a work-life balance, but researchers such as
Doherty and Manfredi (2006), Mohd Noor and Amat (2010), and Mohd Noor, Stanton and Young (2009) comment
that less attention, has however, been given to finding the reality of work-life balance satisfaction in higher
educational institutions. A lot of researches have been conducted to determine the association between work-life
balance and attitudinal job outcomes such as job satisfaction and organisational commitment (Doherty & Manfredi,
2006; Virick, Lily & Casper, 2007; Youngcourt, 2005; Zin, 2006). Virick, Lily and Casper (2007) study on layoff
survivors in a high tech company found that work-life balance is positively related to job satisfaction. Howard,
Donofrio and Boles (2004) in a study also concluded that work-family conflict which reflects work-life balance
issue is significantly related to satisfaction with job.



                                                         29

Journal of Education and Practice                                                                        www.iiste.org
ISSN 2222-1735 (Paper) ISSN 2222-288X (Online)
Vol.11, No.31, 2020

3. Methodology
The study utilized case study with women in educational leadership as the population. Fifteen (15) participants
comprising women in educational leadership position in the Municipality were selected for the study. This research
made use of the purposive sampling method. According to Tanor (2011) the most important theory underlying the
use of the purposive sampling is sampling with a purpose. Merriam (2002) argued that it is imperative to choose
individuals from which one can discover a great deal about the issues essential to the purpose of the study, thus
the term purposeful sampling. Therefore, to understand the challenges faced by women in educational leadership
in the Tano North Municipality, individuals who were able to provide worthy information on the topic were
selected. The most important aim was to get participants who were accessible, and willing to provide key
information. Semi-structured interview guide was used for the data collection. Interviews were conducted at the
respondents’ own convenience. The initial interview questions were associated with the research questions of this
study. Each interview lasted for about one hour and depended upon the participant’s response. Field notes were
taken on key points during the interviews. The field notes helped to track of the questions asked and where to go
next in the interview. Issues that required follow up or further probing was also noted.

4.0 Result and Discussion
For the purpose of analysis, the following were used to represent the various categories of the participants. HT-
Head teachers (women in leadership position).

Opposition from subordinates
The results indicated that head teachers were confronted with the problem of opposition from teachers. It was
commented by a HT-7:
                   Rebellious teachers on my staff normally create problems for me. The moment I suggest
                   something they rebel against my decision. It is hard to deal with these bad nuts because
                   they always do things negatively that affect my good intentions of helping the school to
                   progress. Due to this situations, some laudable plans have to be abandoned because
                   there is much opposition from teachers. I don’t know if because I am a woman? [Field
                   interview data, 2019].
The findings were clear that opposition from teachers affected the work of female head teachers and this was in
line with a study by Manu (2012) who found that both male and female head teachers faced opposition from their
subordinates, however, female head teachers were more likely to be opposed by their subordinates as compared to
their male counterparts.

Deviant nature of teachers
 Deviant nature of some teachers was reported as one of the challenge confronting women in educational leadership
positions. All the female superiors agreed that they were facing these challenges in their institutions. In line with
this, one of them said:
                   “I realized after my third year in this school that there were some two teachers who
                   were inciting others against me in the school. They did that to the former head teacher.
                   I realized that if I do not act fast, those teachers are likely to give me the same problem.
                   So I just moved to the office to report them and they were transferred”. [Field interview
                   data, 2019].
Another head teacher indicated:
                   “… Few teachers do not accord me the necessary respect. I am talking about two
                   Muslins teachers. You know with our Muslim brothers they don’t respect women. When
                   I assumed office as the head of the school, they were not obeying what I was trying to
                   bring on board. After talking to them, they have changed” [Field interview data, 2019].
She further explained:
                   “I think it is because of their culture or their religion. They do not respect women and
                   so they brought it to work place. But I made them to understand that our work is
                   different from their religion so they should not bring what they practice there to their
                   work place”. [Field interview data, 2019].
Another head teacher also explained that:
                   “When I came to this school, I noticed that teachers were not coming to school early.
                   They would wait for you to tell them what to do before they do it. When some of them
                   come to school, they can sit under the trees and be making calls throughout without
                   going to classroom to teach when it is time. There was a particular teacher, who was
                   not coming to school early. When comes she would be making calls throughout. At
                   times, she would even leave the school before we close. I saw it to be a problem because


                                                         30

Journal of Education and Practice                                                                      www.iiste.org
ISSN 2222-1735 (Paper) ISSN 2222-288X (Online)
Vol.11, No.31, 2020

                   that is not how a professional teacher should behave. You have to come to school on
                   time and help the students to clean the compound and classrooms. As teachers,
                   instructional period should be utilized well but teachers in this school were not teaching
                   as expected. I saw that to be a problem. I talked to them and with time they have
                   changed for the better”. [Field interview data, 2019].
     The data reveals that female school heads face difficulties in gaining acceptance and support from their
subordinates. Most of them indicated that female school heads face difficulties in gaining acceptance and support
from other administrators. One respondent in the interview indicated:
                 “I encounter some problems in dealing with my subordinates. The men who work under
                 me feel I’m a woman. At times they don’t take my instructions. The day that I will
                 complain about their attitudes towards work, it will be worse the next day” (HT-3).
                “…some of my teacher at times disobey my instructions which poses difficulty for the
                smooth running of the school administration” [HT-6]
     The interview data indicated further that some male subordinates do not cooperate with the female head
teachers. This could prevent them from functioning effectively. The views expressed above are a clear indication
that some female school heads do not get the needed support from their subordinates and other school
administrators. The findings is consistent with Emory’s (2008) who observed that, many women lose their drive
to excel due to obstacles along. Moreover, both men and women are generally not prepared to work under a woman
because they feel that the moment a woman becomes a manager she has lost all her femininity (Commbs, 2004).
Women managers are always regarded as aggressive, tough not feminine, if they are jovial they are permissive, if
they cry they are emotional.

Heavy workload
Some of the head teachers indicated that the problem they faced were as a result of the heavy workload associated
with their new positions as head. They said that the workload to some extent was too much and examples were
given as, filling of documents, compiling teachers’ profiles etc. They indicated that the work involved were not
easy at all and although the school close at 3:00 pm because of the workload, they could still be in school up to
5:00 pm
     The following are some of the views expressed by the head teachers:
                            “…as a married woman I have to go home on time and attend to my family.
                            But the work load does not permit me to do so and this can affect my marital
                            home”. [Field interview data, 2019].
                            “… at times I come to school at 7:00 am and close at 5: pm. As you can see I
                            am even filling a form about the students’ enrolment. [Field interview data,
                            2019].
                            “…The work that we do is very demanding. It becomes more challenging when
                            your teachers are not supportive. Have you seen the pile of lesson notes book
                            in front of me? I am going to inspect them and make the necessary corrections.
                            [Field interview data, 2019].
     The study showed that the lack of family support and interference from domestic responsibilities is another
key challenge to female heads. This is reflected in statements like:
                             “I don’t have enough time to perform duties as a homemaker. As a woman at
                            childbearing stage, I am concerned about catering for my children needs.
                            Most husbands do not compromise when it comes to the performance of roles
                            such as cooking, cleaning the house and caring for the children” [Field
                            interview data, 2019. HT-7].
     The data is consistent with Emory’s (2008) observation that, many women lose their drive to excel due to the
many obstacles met along the path of becoming a leader. According to Emory (2008), these obstacles include
family demands and lack of opportunities. Ruth (1987) also observed that, a married woman who works outside
the home actually carries two jobs. There is evidence to show that most of the household labour is done by an adult
woman (Baxter, 2002). In the execution of managerial duties, both male and female head teachers are saddle with
similar challenges in the management of secondary schools (Nzeli, 2013). However, female leaders are often faced
with societal demands and traditions including family responsibilities, maternal as well as managing the schools
(Celikten & Yeni, 2004).
     These challenges increased the problem of female prejudices as captured by the data from research question
3, and thus makes it difficult for female leadership. Hence, it may be argued that given the equal opportunity
female heads may perform equally well or better compare to their male counterparts. The challenges faced by
women in career progression is still established by Ruderman and Ohlott (2002). After conducting 61 interviews
and collecting 276 surveys, they discovered 5 themes characterizing the challenges face by female managers, but


                                                        31

Journal of Education and Practice                                                                          www.iiste.org
ISSN 2222-1735 (Paper) ISSN 2222-288X (Online)
Vol.11, No.31, 2020

which are vital for female developmental needs. These are: authenticity, wholeness, self-clarity, connection and
agency. Among the many career barriers women encounter are prejudice, resistance to women’s leadership,
leadership style issues and family demands these obstacles women face must be addressed (Eagly & Carli (2007)).
Success in the workplace as women in terms of balancing work and family may come at a high cost in the form of
stress (Easton, 2007). This study suggests there are widespread effects of the discriminatory behaviour against
women that may be derogatory to an organization’s effectiveness and performance

Interpersonal Relationship
It was cited by participants that in dealing with some of the challenges they encountered in their schools, female
head teachers mentioned that building strong interpersonal relationship with subordinates as well as creating a
working environment that foster friendly/interpersonal relationship among the subordinates themselves were the
strategies they have been using to deal with problems they faced. It was shared by HT-3 thus:
                             When there are good interpersonal relationships among teachers and the head I believe
                             most of the difficulties we (female head teachers) encounter will be reduced to the
                             barest minimum. The issue is that the head must come to the level of her subordinates
                             while her subordinates must also accord their head the maximum respect and needed
                             cooperation [Field interview data, 2019].
      Referring to Maslow’s hierarchy of human needs, interpersonal relationships could be seen as resulting from
the need for belongingness (Garudzo-Kusereka, 2009). Environmental factors are thus, regarded as important
determinant of job satisfaction (Khan, Nawaz, Aleem & Hamed, 2012). According to Ellickson and Logsdon
(2001) employee job satisfaction can be greatly affected by the social environment of the organization, especially,
relationship with co-workers because cooperative co-workers are modest source of job satisfaction to each
employee. It has also been proven that a good and supportive co-workers and interpersonal relationship in general,
makes the job easier and enjoyable. This in turn increases job satisfaction levels of workers (Saif, Nawaz & Jan,
2012).
      Naval and Srivastava (2004) maintain that open communication, task independence, feeling of belongingness
and coordination among employees increase the degree of job satisfaction (Saif, Nawaz & Jan, 2012) and
according to Karimi (2007) studies have shown that relation with colleagues or co-workers is the largest predictor
of academicians’ intention to leave an organization or not (Saif, Nawaz & Jan, 2012). For Wood (2008) employees
derive their job satisfaction from supportive administration because an informative and consultative administration
makes employees comfortable with their jobs (Ngimbudzi, 2009:41). Woods and Weasmer (2002) also agree that
collegial relationship ensures workers’ job satisfaction, and that it is significant for teachers to have time to share
experiences (Ngimbudzi, 2009:41).

Professional development
Professional development was one of the themes that was studied. Women in educational leadership position
explained that the district education directorate in collaboration with some Non-governmental organizations in the
district frequently organizes workshop on conflict resolution and management. They skills acquired at the
workshop have helped them to deal with challenges in the schools. This view by women in educational leadership
position in Tano North Municipality is in line with Irby and Brown (1998) assertion in their study on women's
support in administrations they noted that women need time to grow together professionally and to learn from
other women.
The following are some excerpts from the participants:
                             “…. Workshops on conflict management and resolution are at times
                             organized for head teachers in this district. I have acquired some skills which
                             helped me to tackle problems in my school.” [HT-7]
                             Am very thankful to my district director for organizing workshops on how to
                             deal with conflict situations in our schools [HT-2]
The views expressed give credence to the fact that the Ghana Education Service and gender-based organizations
should periodically organize leadership training programmes for women to prepare them professionally for
leadership positions.

Work-life Balance
It was noted by the head teachers during the interviews that an important strategy that could be used by female
heads in solving the challenges they encounter is by employing work-life balance strategies. HT-5 commented
that:
                           “Am a mother and a wife, a situation I have been managing for many years. I have to
                           structure my daily routines such that I can perform both roles effectively” [Field
                           interview data, 2019].


                                                          32

Journal of Education and Practice                                                                        www.iiste.org
ISSN 2222-1735 (Paper) ISSN 2222-288X (Online)
Vol.11, No.31, 2020

This concurs with Dundas (2008) views that work-life balance is the effective management and juggling act
between paid work and all other activities that are essential to people such as family, community activities,
voluntary work, personal development, leisure and recreation. Similarly, Greenhaus, Collins and Shaw (2003)
posit that work-life balance is the extent to which an individual is equally engaged in-and equally satisfied with
his or her work role and family role. Broers (2005) noted that it is very challenging to balance a successful career
with a personal or family life. This can have an impact on an employee’s satisfaction in his or her work and
personal life’s roles.
In relation to work-life balance HT-13 commented:
                             “I have a time schedule for when to end performance of administrative duties and when
                             to take care of home and other activities. Besides I take time to enjoy quality rest for
                             myself and this strategy has gone a long way to help me as a female head teacher”
                             [Field interview data, 2019].
Similarly, HT-10 stressed:
“. I have to practise effective time management in my work balance in order to achieve good results.” [Field
interview data, 2019]
      Virick, Lily and Casper (2007) contend that employees who experience high work-life balance are those who
exhibit similar investment of time and commitment to work and non-work domains. According to Hughes and
Bozionelos (2007) work-life balance, which refers to individuals determining the balance between their work and
non-work responsibilities, activities and aspirations is deemed a major factor in determining employee job
satisfaction, and that family obligations are not the only issues that bring about challenges in work-life balance,
but it includes activities such as hobbies which are outside work obligations.
      A lot of researches have been conducted to determine the association between work-life balance and
attitudinal job outcomes such as job satisfaction and organisational commitment (Doherty & Manfredi, 2006;
Virick, Lily & Casper, 2007; Youngcourt, 2005). Virick, Lily and Casper’s (2007) study on layoff survivors in a
high tech company found that work-life balance is positively related to job satisfaction. Howard, Donofrio and
Boles (2004) in a study also concluded that work-family conflict which reflects work-life balance issue is
significantly related to satisfaction with job.

Leadership and Administrative Support
The female head teachers reported that seeking administrative support from superiors was one sure way that could
be beneficial to female head teachers. Hence, another sub-theme emerged from the finding was seeking
administrative support. Some of the women in educational leadership indicated that they rely on superiors and
mentors for guidance to enable them deal with solve challenges that confront them. Sharing her experience HT-5
had this to say:
“I have a mentors who have deep knowledge in educational administration and educational leadership who I
consult in critical times.” [Field interview data, 2019]
     This implies that some female head teachers rely on their superiors for support in dealing with their challenges.
This result supports Michael (2008) who found that one of the critical needs of female head teachers is to create a
work environment where they can reach out for support from superiors at all times.
     This assertion by women in educational leadership position are in support of Holt (1981) who suggests that
mentors both male and female, may be the single most important factor in an administrator's career development.
Mentors can suggest strategies for career mobility, open doors, initiate contact and make recommendations. The
following are some of the excerpts from the participants:
                             “…. for a leader to be successful you need someone who will serve as a
                             mentor to you. My mentor has been guiding me when I am confronted with
                             challenges”. [HT-7]5
                             “.. I thank God that I have someone at the District Education Office who is
                             my mentor. This woman is like a mother to me. Sometime ago, I had a
                             problem with one of m5y teachers which nearly resulted into fight. But when
                             I discussed the issue with her she counsels me and the problem was resolved”
                             [HT-4]
                             “...I have people whom I confine in when the going is getting tough. I mean
                             when I’ m having challenges. They have been very helpful. They help me to
                             deal with problems in my school”. [HT-1]
     Studies have confirmed the criticality of social relationships and mentorship in women’s career advancement
(Burke & McKeen, 1990; Combs, 2003; Ibarra, 1993; Wentling, 2003). This is beca5use women tend to generally
advance through a combination of critical social relationships and particular performance strategies (Ezzedeen &
Ritchey, 2009). Mentors are of importance because they offer two general types of behaviours or functions: career
development functions, which is believed to facilitate the protégé’s advancement in the organization, and


                                                         33

Journal of Education and Practice                                                                      www.iiste.org
ISSN 2222-1735 (Paper) ISSN 2222-288X (Online)
Vol.11, No.31, 2020

psychosocial functions, which is believed to contribute to the protégé’s personal growth and professional
development (Ragins & Cotton, 1999). They are associated with providing positive outcomes. Women in
leadership positions should institute mentorship scheme or program for school girls and a debriefing programme
on male dominance for school boys. Such programmes will propel women to attain leadership positions and at the
same time change male attitudes towards female leadership over time.

5. Conclusions
This study concludes that some teachers do not accord female heads the necessary cooperation because of their
gender; this creates challenges for female heads. Some teachers do not accord women in educational leadership
the necessary respect due to their cultural orientation, religious background and perceptions. Also, the problem of
heavy workload associated with leadership positions pose challenges to women in educational leadership.
Premised on the findings of the study, it is concluded that mentoring, professional development coupled with social
support helped women in leadership positions to excel.

Acknowledgement
My acknowledgement will fall short of expectation without saluting the following people, my beautiful wife,
Josephine Twenewaa, my two lovely daughters, Nana Afia Boakye-Djan and Ohemaa Adubea Boakye-Djan, my
dear mother Comfort Adubea and all my siblings. Dr. Obeng Kwasi Camara, a Senior Lecturer at the University
of Cape Coast, Economics Department, Dr. Stephen Yeboah, a senior Research Scientist at the Centre for Scientific
and Industrial Research (Crop Research Institute) and Frederick Ameyaw a lecturer at Bagabaga College of
Education, Tamale. Finally, I am indebted to all the teaching staff, especially female head of schools in the Tano
North Municipality where the data was collected for the study.

References
Anigwe, J. (2013). Women in political positions in Nigeria. Ibadan: Houseman Publications.
Arhin, D. (2012). The success of private basic schools in Ghana: The case of three schools in
Acquah, A. (2001). Understanding state-organized education in Ghana. Accra: Black Mask.
Amoah, E. (1986). Women, witches and social change in Ghana. Accra. Adinkra Press.
Baah-Boateng, W. (2009). Gender perspective of labour market discrimination in Ghana: An Unpublished PhD
     Thesis, Department of Economics, University of Ghana. Accra: Ghana.
Banda, F. (2005). Women, law, and human rights: An African perspective. Oxford-Portland Oregon: Hart
     Publishing
Baxter, D. D. (2002). School context, student attitudes and behaviour, and academic achievement: an exploratory
     analysis. London: Sage Publications.
Broers, C. M. (2005). Career and family: The role of social support. (Published PhD Thesis), Oxford University.
     United Kingdom.
Celikten, S., & Yeni, W. (2004). Guidelines for managing motivation. Business Horizons, 23,      61-6.
Chin, J. L. (2007). Comment: Diversity and leadership. American Psychologist, 62(6), 608-609.
Chughtai, A. A., & Zafar, S. (2006). Antecedents and consequences of organizational commitment among
     Pakistani university teachers. Applied Human Resource Research, 11(1), 39-64.
Combs, R. (2003). Masculinity, Law and the Family. London: Routledge.
Deery, S. (2008). The double-bind dilemma for women in leadership: Damned if you do, doomed if you don't.
     Retrieved June 10, 2019, from http://www.catalyst.org/files/full/2007%20Double%20Bind.pdf
Eagly, A. H., & Carli, L. L. (2007). Through the labyrinth: The truth about how women become leaders. Boston,
     MA: Harvard Business School Press.
Easton, A. (2007). Successful women of the Americas: The same or different? Management Research News, 29(9),
     552-572.
Ellickson, K., & Logsdon, C. (2001). Goal setting and monetary incentives: Motivational tools that can work too
     well. Compensation and Benefits Review, 26(3), 41-46.
Elson, W. (2005). Women in economic development. London: Sage Publication.
Ely, R. J., Ibarra, H., & Kolb, D. (2011). Taking gender into account: Theory and design for women's leadership
     development programs. Insead - Working Paper, 10(3).
Emory, W. (2008). Leadership: Qualities that distinguish women [Electronic version]. Financial Executive, 21(6),
     32-36
Ezzedeen, G. T., & Ritchey, E. (2009). Women and the labyrinth of leadership. Harvard Business Review, 4, 63-
     71.
Galton L. (2009) Education, wage rates and the division of labour between husband and wife. Journal of Marriage
     and the Family, 38(74), 473-84.
Gardner, D. G. (2011). Role of transformational and transactional leadership on job satisfaction and career


                                                        34

Journal of Education and Practice                                                                   www.iiste.org
ISSN 2222-1735 (Paper) ISSN 2222-288X (Online)
Vol.11, No.31, 2020

     satisfaction. Business and Economic Horizons, 1(1), 29-38.
Garudzo-Kusereka, L. (2009). Factors influencing the motivation of Zimbabwean secondary School. Harare:
     Madson Publications.
Government of Ghana [GOG] (2010). Growth and poverty reduction strategy, 2006-2009. Accra; Policy
     Framework.
Greenhaus, S. W., Collins, L., & Shaw, G. (2003). Creating leadership organizations. San Francisco: Berrett-
     Koehler Publishers Inc.
Guest, M. (2002). Comparable worth and gender discrimination: An International Perspective: Geneva: ILO.
Hiroyuki, Y., L., Kato, G., & Ohashi, V. (2007). A new look through the glass ceiling: Where are the women?
     Retrieved                      June                    10,                    2019,                   from
     http://maloney.house.gov/documents/olddocs/womenscaucus/dingellmaloneyreport.pdf
Hort, J. (1981). A theory of family, economy, and gender. In R. L. Blumberg (ed.). Gender, family, and economy:
     The triple overlap. Newbury Park, CA: Sage Press.
Hughes, T., & Bozionelos, L. (2007). Power play: Women, leadership and the getting of power. Ivey Business
     Journal            Online.            Retrieved           May            10th          2018           from
     http://maloney.house.gov/documents/olddocs/womenscaucus/dingellmaloneyreport.pdf
Karimi, F. (2007). Gender-based barriers to senior management positions: Understanding the scarcity of female
     CEOs [Electronic version]. Journal of Business Ethics, 27, 321-334.
Keohane, N. (2007). Crossing the bridge: Reflections of women and leadership. San Francisco, CA: Jossey-Bass.
Kiruriti, H. (2010). Acknowledging the female archetype: Women managers' narratives of gender. Women in
     Management Review, 15(5/6), 296-303.
Merriam, S. B. (2002). Qualitative research in sociology. London: Sage publications.
Micheal, G. L. (2008). Women approach to management in schools. Nairobi. Puba Press.
Mohd, L., Noor, H., & Amat, F. (2010). Gender differences in leadership: Current social issues and future
     organizational implications. The Journal of Leadership Studies, 8(4), 88-99.
Mohd, L., Noor, H., Ztanton, N., & Young, F. (2009). Third possibility: The invisible edge that women have in
     complex organizations. The Learning Organization, 10(6), 77-97.
Nebolisa, E. (2009). Women and politics: Peace & conflict monitor. Ibadan: New page publications.
Ngaaso, C. K., & Attom, E. L. (2011). Gender issues and development in Ghana: Some policy implications. Accra:
     Yamens Press Ltd.
Ngimbudzi, A. (2009). The public nature of domestic violence: The discovery of domestic abuse. New York:
     Routledge Publications.
Rakins, B. R., Cotton, E. (1999). Gender and power in organizations: A longitudinal perspective. Psychological
     Bulletin, 105(1), 51–88. https://doi.org/10.1037/00332909.105.1.51
Roe, B. G. (2012). Reaching underserved populations with basic education in deprived areas of Ghana: Emerging
     good practices. Washington DC: World Bank.
Ruth, B. (1987). Sex segregation in the workplace. Annual Review of Sociology, 19,241-70.
Saif, S. K., Nawaz, A., & Jan, F. A. (2012). Predicting satisfaction among the School teachers: An education
     management perspective (Unpublished M.Ed dissertation), University of Port Harcourt. Port Harcourt.
Shane, S. A. (2001). Cultural differences in innovation championing strategies. Journal of Management, 21, 931–
     952.
Spencer, H. (2013). Study of sociology. Nairobi: Nebo Press.
Tanor, L. L. (2011). A guide to writing dissertations. Osu-Accra: Dieco Ventures.
The 1992 Constitution of the Republic of Ghana. Accra: Assembly Press.
Walby. R. P (2006). How women lead. New York. Sage publications.
Warring, J. (2009). Women and Leadership. London. Sage publications.
Wood, G. (2008). What does it take to get to the top: Do middle and senior managers agree? Women in
     Management Review, 18(3), 131-132.
Woods, F., & Weasmer, L. (2002). An alternative approach to measuring opportunity-to-lead in high schools.
     Alberta Journal of Educational Research, 52(1), 107–126.
World Bank. (2008). Engendering Development: Through Gender Equality in Rights, Resources, and Voice. New
     York: Oxford University Press; Washington, D.C.
Youngcourt, S. (2005). The academic achievement challenge. New York: Guilford Press.
Zin, A. (2006). Managers and leaders: Are they different? Harvard Business Review, 55(3), 67-76.
Burke, P. McKeen, L. (1990). Measuring unmet need: Wives, husbands or couples. International Family Planning
     Perspectives, 24(4), 172–80.




                                                      35