Journal of Education and Practice                                                                       www.iiste.org
ISSN 2222-1735 (Paper) ISSN 2222-288X (Online)
Vol.14, No.24, 2023


      The Core Values of Principals in School Management under
                     Chinese Education Reform
                          Yaxing Zhang Miao Yu Yangyang Liu Xinghua Wang*
                     Faculty of Education, Beijing Normal University, 19 Xinjiekouwai Street,
                                     Haidian District, Beijing 100875, China
                        * E-mail of the corresponding author: xinghua.wang@bnu.edu.cn

Abstract
The values of principals in school management play a pivotal role in shaping school leadership, teacher
behaviours, and student performance. However, research studies focusing on principals’ values are relatively
abundant in Western countries, yet still limited in the Chinese context. To fill this gap, this paper adopts a
qualitative research approach to investigate the fundamental values of Chinese principals in leading and
managing primary schools within the current education reform landscape. The findings reveal that the principals
in the study emphasised nine core values: equity, fairness, openness, respect, empowerment, encouragement,
recognition, trust, and democracy. These values were found to contribute to a positive school climate that
promoted the growth of teachers, students, and the school. The results have significant implications for policy
makers and principals in China, suggesting the necessity to foster ethical and relational skills among principals
and to acknowledge the invaluable contributions of teacher leaders and teachers in school development.
Keywords: principals, values, school management, education reform
DOI: 10.7176/JEP/14-24-09
Publication date:August 31st 2023

1. Introduction
With the deepening development of Chinese education reform, schools have become an increasingly complex
context, necessitating a transformation in their internal management modes (Shen & Chen, 2022). Schools are
value-driven organizations, where principals as leaders have the right and obligation to oversee all aspects,
including teachers, students, curriculum, teaching processes, and the environment. Therefore, only when
principals establish their own appropriate values can they lead the school to adapt to the development and
requirements of education, guide the transformation and renewal of the school’s values, and promote the
development of students and teachers (Aslanargun, 2012).
      As key policies in the current curriculum reform in China, the Professional Standards for Principals of
Compulsory Education Schools in 2013 and the Opinions on Comprehensively Deepening the Reform of Teacher
Team Building in the New Era in 2018 have both stipulated that principals should focus on democratic
management, respect teachers’ democratic rights to participate in school management, and care about teachers’
physical and mental health. It can be seen that Chinse education policies require principals to adopt democratic
and decentralised values in school management practices.
      The principals’ values play a pivotal role in determining their own behavioural choices and the quality of
school leadership (Notman, 2014; Bottery et al., 2013). This is based on an increasing awareness that leadership
is a moral endeavour and principals are morally and ethically responsible actors. Indeed, much of the literature
on principal leadership emphasises that principals can be viewed as moral actors responsible for the processes of
decision-making in their schools (i.e., Starratt, 2009). When encounter substantial and complex role dilemmas
and issues, the principals’ values are able to shape their professional identity and help them realise how to use
their skills and strategies in different contexts (Crow & Møller, 2017; Hallinger, 2013). Once principals practice
values such as integrity, fairness, democracy, empathy in school management, it not only drives them to work
diligently but also enables them to gain respect and trust within the school community, leading to their success as
leaders (Gurr, 2015). This is especially true in the face of sudden crises. For instance, principals developing their
own empathy and fostering teacher collaboration are effective strategies to address the negative impacts of
COVID-19 on educational leadership, serving as strong safeguards for the regular teaching process (Constantia
et al., 2023).
      The principals’ values also serve as a powerful role model for the teacher community (Liu, 2023) and
significantly affect students’ performance (Copeland, 2014). For example, previous research indicated that the
principals’ openness to change could influence teachers’ organisational citizenship behaviour, while the
principals’ self-transcendence values are related to teachers’ in-role performance (Abd El Majid & Cohen, 2015).
Furthermore, the positive values exhibited by the principals in their leadership practices also have a crucial
impact on shaping students’ personal values (Berson & Oreg, 2016). Additionally, they help students develop
prosocial behaviour, create a positive disciplinary atmosphere in the school, and ultimately improve students’
learning (Branson, Baig, & Begum, 2015).


                                                        58

Journal of Education and Practice                                                                       www.iiste.org
ISSN 2222-1735 (Paper) ISSN 2222-288X (Online)
Vol.14, No.24, 2023

      It is worth mentioning that one prominent ingredient in Confucianism closely related to Chinese education
is known as encouraging individuals to build virtues and then developing morally binding groups. According to
Confucianism, there are five virtues (Wu Chang) including benevolence (Ren), righteousness (Yi), ritual (Li),
wisdom (Zhi), and integrity (Xin) (Mu, 2016). The principles of the first three virtues tied directly to each other
are proposed in The Analects of Confucius. Benevolence (Ren) as the core of Confucianism focuses on “to love
all humanity” (Lai, 2017, p. 24), which is regarded as the foundation of being a human being from the moral
perspective. To be specific, benevolence has the sense of “empathy or kindness between human beings” (Mou,
2008, p. 121). Thus, harmonious and healthy social relationships are able to be established among principals and
their subordinates. For Confucius, the virtue of benevolence (Ren) should be particularly adopted by rulers who
should govern their subjects by benevolence instead of force.
      In the reviewed literature, values have been emphasised as an essential element in leadership (Hutton, 2018).
In particular, Hopkins (2003) emphasises that defining the values and purposes of the school is one main domain
in instructional leadership practices. According to Hopkins (2003), the key concerns of values which infuse
effective leadership refer to learning from a broader and deeper view and empowering teachers. This view
assumes that values have profound implications for the moral purpose of leadership and also in fostering an
environment within the school as a learning community for teachers and students. In addition, when the role of
professional principals is grounded in shared values and knowledge, they become more adept at addressing extra
demands beyond the scope of schooling’s mission and are better prepared to manage conflicting requirements
(Brauckmann, Pashiardis, & Ärlestig, 2023).
      Many scholars have recognised the significance of principals’ values in school management and have
conducted a series ofsstudies on this topic. Different scholars employ different ways to categorise the dimensions
of principals’ values. Berson and Oreg (2016) ustilised the Portrait Values Questionnaire to investigate four
types of principals’ values, including conservation, self-transcendence, openness, and self-enhancement. Larsen
and Hunter (2014) summarised three core values of principals: prioritising student needs, handling affairs
flexibly, and valuing relationships. They also suggested that middle school principals should continuously weigh
their decisions based on their values and beliefs when making authorisation-related decisions. According to
interviews with principals, Aslanargun (2012) found that principals share some common values, involving
justice, confidence, school rules, and diligence. Gurr (2008) contends that the values held by principals should be
characterised by equity, social justice, empowerment, encouraging participation, commitment to the school,
people orientation, fairness, and respecting others.
      Previous studies have also found that some values receive particular attention from principals. Kafa and
Pashiardis (2019) identified several personal identity values that primary school principals value most in their
practice, such as equality, honesty, authority, and innovation. Hansen and Lárusdóttir (2018) surveyed the values
of compulsory education school principals and found that almost all principals emphasised moral values such as
care, equality, democracy, autonomy, tolerance, and justice. Some other values of principals, such as recognition,
trust, and democracy, are also highlighted by principals (e.g., Novak, 2009). Thus leadership which reflects these
values focuses on promoting teachers and school development, supporting school members to participate in
activities, and being led by fairness and equity. In this leadership role, through their actions, principals transmit
their views and values and subtly influence the behaviours of teachers and students (Gurr, 2008).
      Extant literature indicated that compared to the relatively abundant research in Western countries, the
related studies on Chinese principals’ values are still scarce. There is a lack of research that systematically
categorises the values of Chinese primary and secondary school principals, and there is also limited exploration
into the impact of different types of principal values on teacher leaders, teachers, and students. Therefore, this
study adopts a qualitative research approach to understand the core values of Chinese principals in primary
schools and explore how principals promote schools’ overall progress through their practical actions guided by
these values.

2. Research method
The study employed a qualitative research method to explore the thoughts, feelings, and perceptions of principals
regarding their values in leading and managing schools. The descriptive and exploratory nature as an important
feature of qualitative research is highlighted in this study (Yin, 2017). Two cities, City W and City Z, located in
Shandong province of China, were selected as the research sites for this study. Five principals were selected
from five public schools of City W and five were drawn from five public schools of City Z. All ten principal
participants were from urban primary schools, with designations from P01 to P10. According to stratified
purposeful sampling (Cohen et al., 2017), participants should possess a number of characteristics. As a means of
comparison, principals were matched according to gender and years of service in similar positions. There were a
greater number of female principals (i.e., six) than male principals (i.e., four) in the sample. This reflects the
current situation in China where an increasing number of females occupy the position of principal in urban
primary schools. Years of service ranged from 1.5 to 18.5 years. This represents principals at different stages in


                                                        59

Journal of Education and Practice                                                                       www.iiste.org
ISSN 2222-1735 (Paper) ISSN 2222-288X (Online)
Vol.14, No.24, 2023

their development. Finally, these principals were drawn from ten schools, ranging from 860 students to 1800
students in size, which provides a diversity of different school sizes by Chinese standards.
     Semi-structured interviews were utilised to investigate the principals’ values in school management. The
interview questions were formulated based on insights from the literature to ensure content validity. For example,
one of the questions was “How do you perceive your values in leading and managing schools?” The interviews
followed predetermined interview protocols, while allowing interviewers to ask follow-up questions based on the
significant information provided by the interviewees. Each interview lasted between 60 to 135 minutes. All
interviews were conducted in Chinese, and audio recordings were made and transcribed to enhance the accuracy
and reliability of the data.
     By utilising thematic analysis, the interview data in this research was carefully analysed to reveal
significant insights (Howitt & Cramer, 2014). The data was coded following Creswell and Guetterman’s (2019)
model, leading to the identification of key themes that illuminate the values embraced by principals. Themes
were derived from the interviews through an iterative process that involved reading and rereading the material to
determine critical issues contained in it. Specifically, each segment of the transcript was assigned a code using
the researcher’s or interviewees’ words to describe it. Similar codes were then grouped together to form major
ideas, which were labeled as themes in the database.

3. Findings
All of the interviewed principals emphasised the significance of principals’ values in leading and managing
schools. They believed that this ‘valuing’ aspect of their leadership contributed to fostering excellence in the
school. The principals in the study highlighted nine core values, including equity, fairness, openness, respect,
empowerment, encouragement, recognition, trust, and democracy. Each of the values is now discussed.

3.1 Equity, fairness, and openness
Half of the principals (five of ten) in the interviews argued that they promoted strongly the adoption of the
principles of equity, fairness and openness in every aspect of school management. Equity highlights that all
school staff are treated equally and no one has an unfair advantage. Fairness means that principals treat school
staff in a way that is right or reasonable, and not allow personal opinions to influence their judgment. Openness
refers to principals’ quality of being honest, willing to talk about things, and not hiding information or feelings.
This approach to embedding equity, fairness, and openness in their work with staff was viewed as a vital way to
improve the enthusiasm of teachers and the effective implementation of school directives. These three values
have been identified in existing literature. Many researchers from Western countries have underscored the
importance of fairness and equity as a goal not only for education but also for relationships with staff in schools
(Buluc & Gunes, 2014; Gurr, 2008). Moreover, Gurr et al. (2006) identified equity as a key value of school
principals that is demonstrated through being open and flexible.
      An example that was provided by principals to demonstrate equity and openness in practice was via the
annual teacher appraisal system. Here five of the ten principals referred to how they adopted a number of
processes underpinned by equity and openness. According to one principal, teachers were encouraged to “get
deeper understanding about themselves, enhance self-reflection, pinpoint their own development problems, and
then identify effective solutions” (P09). The principals in the study also indicated they encouraged teachers to
develop their own personalised teaching styles and think carefully about their career development.

3.2 Respect
All interviewed principals agreed that respect was one of the most important values that principals held towards
teachers and students. This is in line with the findings in some Western studies where respect for all people in
schools is a central value of principals (Kheir-Faddul, Bibu, & Nastase, 2019; Novak, 2009). In the current study,
this belief was reflected by comments made by principals regarding the way they respected teachers’ work and
opinions. Principals also respected students’ interests whilst expressing a broader desire to support teachers and
students in achieving excellent performance. For example, principals asserted that such respect was based on an
equal relationship between teachers, students and principals, rather than conceptualising the position of the
principal as an authority figure superior to teachers and students. Yet, they also recognised that they were the
formal leaders in the school which required them to use their legitimate authority to oversee and manage the
school’s operations at times.
      In addition, principals suggested that when teachers were well respected in the school, their self-confidence
would grow and this would contribute towards high levels of teacher enthusiasm, motivation, and innovative
work. In a case study by Day et al. (2001), a number of ‘personal values’ of principals were demonstrated as
underpinning principals’ practices. One of these values referred to the modelling and promotion of respect for
individuals. The following paragraph provides a good illustration of one of the Chinese principal’s views about
respect:


                                                        60

Journal of Education and Practice                                                                       www.iiste.org
ISSN 2222-1735 (Paper) ISSN 2222-288X (Online)
Vol.14, No.24, 2023

As both teachers and students with whom I am confronted have complex thoughts, any word and deed of mine
may exert effects on their mind. Therefore, it is necessary to first respect each school member on an equal level,
such as listening to and accepting their comments and suggestions. Otherwise, it will become easy for me to
stand too high and lose the truth of the matter. (P02)

3.3 Empowerment
All of the interviewed principals stated that they had delegated their power and responsibilities to other teachers,
especially teacher leaders. Empowering teachers has been identified as an important value and practice by
principals in Western schools (King, 2011; Harris, 2012). In the current study, principals indicated that they were
aware of the increasingly complex schooling environment in which teachers now work. In this environment, a
principal could not be an omniscient and omnipotent leader and manage all the responsibilities of administering
and leading a school. Principals accepted that they needed to rely on others, especially their teacher leaders, to
assist them in making the school run effectively. They indicated that they provided teacher leaders with many
opportunities to develop their autonomy with full trust and support. The findings from the interview data
revealed that teachers’ motivation, efficiency, and creativity were stimulated by this approach that enabled them
to make a greater contribution to their school’s development. One principal described her approach to
empowering staff:
     I always encourage teacher leaders and teachers to carry out more tasks with courage. They can learn from
working to improve their leading and managing abilities and working quality. At the same time, I also make
efforts to think and observe teachers’ work in order to provide them ongoing advice and guidance. The teachers
and I could achieve the enhancement together during this process. (P05)
     The ten principals also proposed three strategies they used to empower their staff. First, principals claimed
that it was essential to clearly identify the roles and responsibilities taken by principals and teacher leaders.
Principals emphasised the importance of having an in-depth understanding of teacher leaders’ work in order to
effectively arrange the work of the school in each phase. According to one principal, “as a school principal, I
need to stand high and look far so that I can have a clear mind in most aspects of school management and make
a proper arrangement of distributing responsibilities to teacher leaders” (P10).
     Second, principals stated that they not only delegated power to teacher leaders in the school hierarchy, but
also indicated clearly the levels of accountability that came with accepting increased levels of leadership
responsibility and the consequences of unintended outcomes. For this reason, teacher leaders could experience
principals’ trust and support whether they finally achieved success or failure. Conversely, principals could also
gain support and loyalty from their subordinates. Principals indicated that this approach to empowerment
contributed to a school’s sustainable development. One principal said, “as long as teacher leaders make great
efforts to do things with careful consideration, it does not matter when unexpected problems emerge. I will take
the blame for them” (P07).
     Finally, all principals pointed out that it was necessary to supervise teachers’ work when authority and
power had been distributed in the school. Principals were alert to problems that may emerge in leading and
managing, should unsupervised teachers abuse their authority. Principals indicated that they were kept informed
of teachers’ work by means of regular inspection, discussion, and meetings. More specifically, as one principal
mentioned, “I offered the recognition of teachers’ achievements, pointed out the shortcomings in their work, and
coordinated the arrangement of school work to ensure teacher leaders were using their power properly” (P03).

3.4 Encouragement
Most principals (eight of ten) noted that they provided encouragement to the leadership team and the teacher
group in the school. Encouraging staff as a core value of principals was also identified by Saleem et al. (2020)
and Gurr (2008) in Western schools. The significance of this was noted by one principal in the sample who
stressed that “the principal’s encouragement and support to teachers is the most important component in
teachers’ development” (P01). A principal’s encouragement was also seen as significant for prompting the inner
working passion and energy of teacher leaders. The eight principals were mindful that if teachers were not
interested in their work or lacked commitment and passion, they would find it difficult to deal with increased
levels of responsibility regardless of their acceptance of training or discussion activities in the school.
     From the interviews, it was evident that principals adopted two main approaches to encourage teachers. One
approach focused on verbal encouragement, for instance, principals showed their acknowledgment and praise
through comments such as “well done” (P03) or “you did a good job” (P08) to encourage teachers in their daily
work. Principals realised that their encouragement and praise, even through brief comments, could prompt
teachers’ motivation and commitment to practice. The second approach involved was offering various rewards to
teachers, such as issuing them with certificates or awards in different areas, including “outstanding teachers,
outstanding form teacher, subject experts, excellent teachers in teaching, and moral model” (P10). Principals
believed that selecting and publicly acknowledging some teachers with excellent performance each semester,


                                                        61

Journal of Education and Practice                                                                                               www.iiste.org
ISSN 2222-1735 (Paper) ISSN 2222-288X (Online)
Vol.14, No.24, 2023

enabled them to be more diligent and thoughtful in their work. Principals indicated that this approach to
encouragement was an effective way to reward excellent teachers and encouraged less able or underperforming
teachers to be aware of professional standards.

3.5 Recognition
More than half of the principals (six of ten) indicated that their recognition of teachers had a significant effect on
the implementation of teachers’ work. These principals reflected that although the background and abilities of
teachers were diverse, principals should recognise their teachers’ achievements, regardless of their level of
significance. It has also been demonstrated by Ogina (2021) that in order to create an environment for learning
and growth, principals should acknowledge teachers’ desire for achievement and recognition. As Kouzes and
Posner (2010) pointed out, the leader needs to recognise the contributions of others by sharing appreciation. This
was the case in this study as one principal explained that “as each teacher has a particular way of pursuing
success, teachers expect their principal to recognise their efforts and devotion” (P02).
     Thus, principals remarked that their recognition of teachers’ work gave teachers confidence and made them
feel their efforts were valued. Such recognition also contributed to teachers who approached their work with
commitment and enthusiasm. These principals suggested that when teachers experienced recognition they were
more likely to work actively and creatively. They drew a contrast with teachers who might require constant
monitoring and supervision. Moreover, the six principals claimed that by recognising different teachers’ work
efforts, principals were able to draw from teachers’ strengths, thereby contributing to the overall development of
the school.

3.6 Trust
All principals asserted that they trusted teacher leaders and other teachers to carry out their work. One principal
said that “if the principal always keeps an eye on teachers’ shortcomings, it will dampen their working
enthusiasm and initiative” (P06). Thus, principals underlined the necessity to establish a relationship of trust
between themselves and teachers through open and honest communication. Likewise, principals in Western
schools not only trust staff, but also require trust from them (Browning, 2014; Cansoy, Polatcan, & Parlar, 2020).
In the study, principals stressed that mutual trust was of particular importance in the operation of the leadership
team. In this context, the principal and teacher leaders could work closely to contribute to the development of the
whole school.
      Principals believed that as long as they listened to teachers’ opinions and provided genuine and sincere
guidance, teachers would experience a sense of trust and reassurance at work. They indicated it was important
that they would demonstrate their trust towards and support of teachers, even if a teacher acted improperly or
incorrectly. Principals also indicated that by building trusting relationships with teachers, they would be enabled
to do their best to meet school requirements. The following comment comes from a principal who referred to the
importance of trust:
      As a principal, I fully trust my teachers in our school. So teachers can do their work with a sense of
responsibility. Although most working tasks are very common, teachers can still feel the glory and sacredness of
the work and they are achieving success during the process. (P06)

3.7 Democracy
Most principals (eight of ten) stressed that they endeavoured to provide a democratic environment for teachers
and students by adopting a tolerant and relaxed leadership style within the school. Democratic concepts, as
evident in the trend towards decentralisation of school management that has emerged globally (Kwan & Li,
2015), have become a relatively new feature of principals’ values in China. As an example, these principals
claimed that they identified the increasingly important role of teacher leaders in teaching and managing to carry
out the current curriculum reforms. Accordingly, those principals who indicated they adopted a democratic style
of leadership in their schools reported that they actively listened to teachers’ points of view and were not
perturbed if teachers disagreed with their views. The following statement illustrates this idea:
      In order to prepare for Education Bureau’s supervision last year, teacher leaders talked about how to display
school achievements and provided a plan. However, as I had another plan to carry out, we could not reach an
agreement. After my adequate consideration, I found that their suggestions were indeed good and I finally
accepted their ideas. (P01)
      Principals highlighted their responsibility to fulfil the requirements of school staff through specific
strategies such as staff representative meetings1. In the current study, this scheduled formal meeting with staff
representatives was viewed as an effective strategy through which principals could respond democratically to

1
  A staff representative meeting is usually organised by a principal to discuss school affairs with those staff who serve as representatives of
the entire school staff.


                                                                     62

Journal of Education and Practice                                                                       www.iiste.org
ISSN 2222-1735 (Paper) ISSN 2222-288X (Online)
Vol.14, No.24, 2023

staff concerns. Principals indicated that they utilised different strategies at these annual meetings to communicate
with staff. For example, some principals indicated they collected staff feedback in the form of anonymous
teacher comments and suggestions about school affairs, while other principals said they encouraged teachers to
participate in face-to-face conversations with them. Principals referred to the categorisation of the feedback
raised at such meetings such as those issues that revolved around problems in school management. For example,
staff raised concerns about “the principal should provide teachers with more support for family-school
communication, and the principal should offer teachers more external training opportunities” (P07). Some
principals also indicated that they attempted to address those problems raised by staff, by proposing and
implementing strategies which were then itemised as specific tasks and allocated to those teacher leaders who
were in charge of different areas, such as teaching or moral education.

4. Discussion and conclusion
In this study, principals claimed that the effective exercise of principal leadership was driven by their values
concerned with equity, fairness, openness, respect, empowerment, encouragement, recognition, trust, and
democracy. According to the principals’ indications, these values were found to contribute to a positive school
climate that fostered the development of teachers, students, and the school. Principals underscored the necessity
of constructing these values for school improvement. One important finding that emerged from the interviews is
the uniqueness of the value of “democracy”, which the principals mentioned as a relatively new aspect within the
Chinese context. The movement to shared decision-making between principals and teachers under school-based
management is a recent phenomenon in China. Principals in the study acknowledged this and highlighted that
their role had changed considerably with the advent of teacher leaders and teachers taking a more active role in
school-based decision-making.
      Researchers have identified the great importance of values in understanding school leadership (Warwas,
2015; Harris & Johnston, 2010; Sverdlik, Oreg, & Berson, 2022). This may be caused by the increased
awareness that principals should assume their obligations in moral and ethical ways in their practice (Garza et al.,
2014; Hicks & Wallin, 2013; Aslanargun, 2012). In addition to confirming the values identified by Gurr (2008),
such as equity, fairness, respect, empowerment, and encouragement, this study revealed another four values and
these included openness, recognition, trust, and democracy. These findings highlight the complexity and richness
of values that play a crucial role in shaping effective school leadership and fostering positive school climates.
      However, principals admitted that the formation of values was a gradual and continuous process with
ongoing improvements. During this process, they stressed the prerequisite was to first adopt a principle that
focused on carrying forward good school traditions and then creating a new school culture. Most principals
recognised the significance of values in the current education context and endeavoured to develop them within
their schools. By prioritising the cultivation of values, these principals demonstrated their dedication to shaping
effective school leadership and contributing to the improvement of the entire school community.
      It is worth noting that globalisation and the advent of the knowledge economy have exercised a great impact
on the transformation of school education in China. The concepts of democracy and the decentralisation of
power that have emerged within the context of globalisation (Olssen, 2020) provide principals and teacher
leaders with new opportunities to undertake increased responsibilities in leading and managing their schools.
This shift in direction has influenced the way principals interact with teacher leaders and teachers, moving away
from traditional autocratic approaches and incorporating democratic elements into their practice. However, this
push for democratisation exists within a larger overarching frame of surveillance from education bureaus and
political authorities.
      The Chinese cultural context exclusively relates to the traditional and enduring values and norms of Chinese
society. In contemporary society, Chinese education is still bounded to the traditional culture of China, with
Confucianism as the dominant cultural force for centuries continues to exert an impact on the values of school
principals (Zhang, 2004). Related to the key place of learning, the message conveyed was that principals held
personal values such as respect, care, and openness towards staff and actively put these values into practice by
developing harmonious and effective relationships within the school community. Cultivating virtues and morally
binding relationships with others aligns with the core beliefs of Confucius (Wang et al., 2020).
      To some extent, the formation of the positive values of principals can be drawn from some educational
thoughts of Confucius. For example, Confucius highlighted the necessity for a modest attitude towards learning,
so that principals, teacher leaders, and teachers would learn from each other and appreciate each other’s merits
(Bu Chi Xia Wen). According to Confucius, principals are expected to treat colleagues and students with
humaneness (Ren). Hence, principals’ values such as care, respect, and concern for other teachers and students
can be attributed to Confucius’ notion of humaneness (Ren). School culture in the contemporary Chinese society
has further expanded the meaning of humaneness (Ren) to love, which includes love for students, teachers, and
the school. As a result, principals’ values align with Confucian principles and reflect a commitment to fostering a
positive and nurturing school culture based on mutual respect and care.


                                                        63

Journal of Education and Practice                                                                        www.iiste.org
ISSN 2222-1735 (Paper) ISSN 2222-288X (Online)
Vol.14, No.24, 2023

      The principals in this study offered rich accounts of their values as they led their schools. Their detailed
descriptions provided important insights into a crucial aspect of school leadership within China. Thus, an
essential implication of this study for policy makers is that leadership is not a technical or simplistic process; it
needs to be understood as a moral and human endeavour that relies on goodwill and positive relationships
between principals, teacher leaders, and other members of the school community. Therefore, policies and
initiatives aimed at improving school leadership should prioritise the development of ethical and relational skills
in principals. This includes providing training and support that emphasises the importance of empathy, effective
communication, and collaborative decision-making. Another important implication of the study for principals is
the recognition that teacher leaders and teachers are invaluable members of a school community, as their support
to school principals is vital for effective school functioning and good school performance. Principals should
promote a democratic school environment by adopting a tolerant and relaxed leadership style. This entails being
receptive to different perspectives, making unbiased judgments, and avoiding a hierarchical approach. By
fostering an inclusive and collaborative culture, principals can promote shared decision-making, encourage
active participation, and nurture a sense of ownership and shared responsibility for the school’s success.
      There are two main limitations to consider in this research. On the one hand, the study’s sample size is
limited to ten principals from two cities in Shandong province of China, which may restrict the generalisability
of the findings to other regions or contexts. Future studies should include a larger and more diverse sample to
ensure a more comprehensive representation of the values and experiences of principals in various geographical
locations and school settings. On the other hand, the research relies solely on interviews as the primary data
source. While interviews are a valuable research method, they have limitations in terms of potential biases,
subjective interpretations, and limited scope of information. In future research, incorporating additional data
collection methods, such as observations or surveys, could yield different sets of insights.
      Given the substantial disparities between regions and between schools in China, it is recommended that
future studies be conducted to explore the core values of principals in rural areas and less developed regions.
Research that focuses on these less developed regions would create a broader understanding regarding
principals’ values in different school contexts and lead to more effective resolutions for greater equity and
quality. Moreover, it is evident that there are many factors that impact on the development of principals’ values
in education system. It is recommended that future studies explore a wider range of factors that help to shape
core values as it is enacted by principals under Chinese education reform.

References
Abd El Majid, E., & Cohen, A. (2015), The role of values and leadership style in developing OCB among Arab
     teachers in Israel, Leadership & Organization Development Journal, 36(3), 308–327.
Aslanargun, E. (2012). Principals’ values in school administration. Educational Sciences: Theory &
     Practice, 12(2), 1339–1344.
Berson, Y., & Oreg, S. (2016). The role of school principals in shaping children’s values. Psychological Science,
     27(12), 1539–1549.
Bottery, M., Ngai, G., Wong, P. M., & Wong, P. H. (2013). Values, priorities and responses: Comparing English
     headteachers’ and Hong Kong principals’ perceptions of their work. School Leadership & Management,
     33(1), 43–60.
Branson, C. M., Baig, S., & Begum, A. (2015). Personal values of principals and their manifestation in student
     behavior: A district – level study in Pakistan. Educational Management Administration & Leadership,
     43(1), 107–128.
Brauckmann, S., Pashiardis, P., & Ärlestig, H. (2023). Bringing context and educational leadership together:
     Fostering the professional development of school principals. Professional Development in Education, 49(1),
     4–15.
Browning, P. (2014). Why trust the head? Key practices for transformational school leaders to build a purposeful
     relationship of trust. International Journal of Leadership in Education, 17(4), 388–409.
Buluc, B., & Gunes, M. (2014). Relationship between organizational justice and organizational commitment in
     primary schools. The Anthropologist, 18(1), 145–152.
Cansoy, R., Polatcan, M., & Parlar, H. (2020). Paternalistic school principal behaviours and teachers’
     participation in decision making: the intermediary role of teachers’ trust in principals, Research in
     Educational Administration and Leadership, 5(2), 553–584.
Cohen, L., Manion, L., & Morrison, K. (2017). Research Methods in Education (8th ed.). Routledge.
Constantia, C., Christos, P., Glykeria, R., Anastasia, A. R., & Aikaterini, V. (2023). The impact of covid-19 on
     the educational process: The role of the school principal. Journal of Education, 203(3), 566–573.
Copeland, M. K. (2014). The emerging significance of values-based leadership: A literature review.
     International Journal of Leadership Studies, 8(2), 105–135.



                                                         64

Journal of Education and Practice                                                                    www.iiste.org
ISSN 2222-1735 (Paper) ISSN 2222-288X (Online)
Vol.14, No.24, 2023

Creswell, J. W., & Guetterman, T. C. (2019). Educational research: Planning, conducting, and evaluating
     quantitative and qualitative research. New York, NY: Pearson.
Crow, G. M., & Møller, J. (2017). Professional identities of school leaders across international contexts: An
     introduction and rationale. Educational Management Administration & Leadership, 45(5), 749-758.
Day, C., Harris, A., & Hadfield, M. (2001). Challenging the orthodoxy of effective school leadership.
     International Journal of Leadership in Education, 4(1), 39–56.
Garza, Jr, E., Drysdale, L., Gurr, D., Jacobson, S., & Merchant, B. (2014). Leadership for school success: lessons
     from effective principals. International Journal of Educational Management, 28(7), 798–811.
Gurr, D. (2008). Principal leadership: What does it do, what does it look like, and how might it evolve?
     Winmalee, NSW: Australian Council for Educational Leaders.
Gurr, D. (2015). A model of successful school leadership from the international successful school principalship
     project. Societies, 5(1), 136–150.
Gurr, D., Drysdale, L., & Mulford, B. (2006). Models of successful principal leadership. School Leadership and
     Management, 26(4), 371–395.
Hallinger, P. (2013). Leadership for learning: Models and key dimensions. Educational Research, 34(12), 118–
     128.
Hansen, B., & Lárusdóttir, S. H. (2018). The role and values of Icelandic compulsory school principals.
     Icelandic Journal of Education, 27(2), 111–133.
Harris, A. (2012). Distributed leadership: Implications for the role of the principal. Journal of Management
     Development, 31(1), 7–17.
Harris, M., & Johnston, M. A. (2010). Values-based leadership: At the heart of sustaining school reform and
     improvement. In S. Huber (Ed.), School Leadership - International Perspective (pp. 145–159). vol 10.
     Springer, Dordrecht.
Hicks, C. W., & Wallin, D. C. (2013). Values and ethics in the decision-making of rural manitoba school
     principals. Journal of Educational Administration and Foundations, 23(1), 49–63.
Hopkins, D. (2003). Instructional leadership and school improvement. In A. Harris (Ed.). Effective leadership for
     school improvement (pp. 55–71). London, New York: Routledge Falmer.
Howitt, D., & Cramer, D. (2014). Introduction to research methods in psychology (4th ed.). Harlow England:
     Prentice Hall.
Hutton, D. M. (2018), Critical factors explaining the leadership performance of high-performing principals.
     International Journal of Leadership in Education, 21(2), 245–265.
Kafa, A., & Pashiardis, P. (2019). Exploring school principals’ personal identities in Cyprus from a values
     perspective. The International Journal of Educational Management, 33(5), 886s902.
Kheir-Faddul, N., Bibu, N., & Nastase, M. (2019). The principals’ perception of their values and the
     organizational culture of the junior high schools in the druze sector. Review of International Comparative
     Management, 20(3), 210–225.
King, F. (2011). The role of leadership in developing and sustaining teachers’ professional learning.
     Management in Education, 25(4), 149–155.
Kouzes, J. M., & Posner, B. Z. (2010). The leadership challenge (5th ed.). San Francisco: Jossey-Bass.
Kwan, P., & Li, B. Y. (2015). Empowerment or impediment? School governance in the school-based
     management era in Hong Kong. Asia Pacific Journal of Education, 35(3), 319–330.
Lai, K. (2017). An introduction to Chinese philosophy (2nd ed.). Cambridge University Press.
Larsen, D. E., & Hunter, J. E. (2014). Separating wheat from chaff: How secondary school principals’ core
     values and beliefs influence decision-making related to mandates. National Council of Professors of
     Educational Administration Journal of Educational Leadership Preparation, 9(2), 71–90.
Liu, Y. (2023). Role models, guidance, and care: Three hard skills for principal leadership in the new era.
     Primary and secondary school management, 36(03), 21–24.
Mou, B. (Ed.). (2008). History of Chinese Philosophy. Hoboken: Taylor & Francis.
Mu, G. M. (2016). Learning Chinese as a heritage language: An Australian perspective. Bristol/Buffalo/Toronto:
     Multilingual Matters.
Notman, R. (2014), A values-led principalship: The person within the professional, In C. Day, & D. Gurr (Eds),
     Leading Schools Successfully: Stories from the Field (pp. 117–128). London: Routledge.
Novak, J. M. (2009). Invitational leadership. In B. Davies (2nd Ed.), The Essentials of School Leadership (pp.
     53–73). London: SAGE Publications.
Ogina, T. A. (2021). School principals’ leadership in managing low and high performing teachers: A South
     African case study. The Independent Journal of Teaching and Learning, 16(2), 8–21.
Olssen, M. (2020). Neoliberalism, globalisation, democracy: Challenges for education. In B. Lingard (Ed.),
     Globalisation and Education (pp. 28–72). Routledge.



                                                       65

Journal of Education and Practice                                                                   www.iiste.org
ISSN 2222-1735 (Paper) ISSN 2222-288X (Online)
Vol.14, No.24, 2023

Saleem, A., Aslam, S., Yin, H., & Rao, C. (2020). Principal leadership styles and teacher job performance:
     Viewpoint of middle management. Sustainability, 12(8), 3390.
Shen, S., & Chen Z. (2022). Exploration on the reform of primary and secondary school education management
     in the new era: From the perspective of teacher role transformation. Educational Science Research, (12),
     32–38.
Starratt, R. J. (2009). Ethical leadership. In B. Davies (2nd Ed.), The Essentials of School Leadership (pp. 74–
     90). London: SAGE Publications.
Sverdlik, N., Oreg, S., & Berson, Y.(2022). The power of benevolence: The joint effects of contrasting leader
     values on follower-focused leadership and its outcomes. Journal of Organizational Behavior, 43(6), 1001–
     1014.
Wang, Y., Bao, Q., & Guan, G. (2020). History of Chinese philosophy through its key terms. Singapore: Springer.
Warwas, J. (2015). Principals’ leadership behaviour: Values-based, contingent or both? Journal of Educational
     Administration, 53(3), 310–334.
Yin, R. K. (2017). Case study research and applications: Design and methods (6th ed.). Los Angeles: Sage.
Zhang, Q. (2004). Traditional Chinese culture. Beijing: Foreign Languages Press.

First author: Yaxing Zhang is an associate professor in the Faculty of Education at Beijing Normal University,
China. She got her PhD from Queensland University of Technology in Australia. Her research interests include
principal leadership, teacher leadership and professional development, and student development. Email:
zhangyaxing@bnu.edu.cn
Second author: Miao Yu is a master’s student studying in the Faculty of Education at Beijing Normal
University, China. Her research interests include school leadership and student development.
Third author: Yangyang Liu is a master’s student studying in the Faculty of Education at Beijing Normal
University, China. Her research interests include school leadership and student development.
Corresponding author: Xinghua Wang is an associate professor in the Faculty of Education at Beijing Normal
University, China. She got her PhD from University of Munich in Germany. Her research interests include
teacher professional development, child development, and early childhood education. Email:
xinghua.wang@bnu.edu.cn




                                                      66