The Canadian Journal for the Scholarship of Teaching and
Learning
Volume 15 | Issue 3                                                                                           Article 17


Winter 12-31-2024


The Emergence of Formalized Educational
Leadership in Higher Education
Diane Symbaluk
MacEwan University, symbalukd@macewan.ca
Tiffany Potter
University of British Columbia, Tiffany.Potter@ubc.ca
Brad Jackson
University of British Columbia, bradjack@student.ubc.ca
David M. Andrews
University of Windsor, dandrews@uwindsor.ca




Follow this and additional works at: https://www.cjsotl-rcacea.ca
https://doi.org/10.5206/cjsotlrcacea.2024.3.17715


Recommended Citation
Symbaluk, D., Potter, T., Jackson, B., & Andrews, D. M. (2024). The emergence of formalized educational leadership in higher
education. The Canadian Journal for the Scholarship of Teaching and Learning, 15(3).
https://doi.org/10.5206/cjsotlrcacea.2024.3.17715

The Emergence of Formalized Educational Leadership in
Higher Education
Abstract
In Canada, educational leadership is a term often used to describe specific types of academic and
scholarly work in universities, colleges, CEGEPs, other post-secondary institutions (and in K-12
contexts, where the term’s usage is entirely distinct). Our interest is in how educational leadership is
framed in the specific context of Canadian universities. While most universities recognize exemplary
teachers through promotional criteria and often through awards, the academic literature provides little
guidance on what exactly constitutes educational leadership in university settings. To trace the
emergence of educational leadership as a formalized construct, we gathered data from Collective
Agreements and other public-facing resources such as awards criteria from 48 Canadian universities to
examine ways in which educational leadership was defined and/or enacted. Our national review
identified several categories of activities commonly cited as examples of educational leadership,
including significant forms of curricular development, formal leadership initiatives, the dissemination
of public forms of teaching-related research or teaching-based resources, engagement in the
scholarship of teaching and learning, and the carrying out of various forms of mentorship. Our review
also found that educational leadership is constituted not only by these types of activities, but also by the
capacity to demonstrate impact of these activities beyond the classroom. In addition to examples of
ways to illustrate impact, we offer a working definition of educational leadership that reflects how it is
emerging within the specific context of contemporary Canadian universities.

Au Canada, le leadership pédagogique est un terme souvent utilisé pour décrire des types spécifiques
de travaux universitaires et de recherche dans les universités, les collèges, les cégeps et d’autres
établissements postsecondaires (et dans les contextes primaires et secondaires, où l’utilisation du
terme est entièrement différente). Nous nous intéressons à la manière dont le leadership pédagogique
est défini dans le contexte spécifique des universités canadiennes. Alors que la plupart des universités
reconnaissent les enseignants exemplaires par le biais de critères de promotion et souvent par des prix,
la littérature universitaire fournit peu d’indications sur ce qui constitue exactement le leadership
pédagogique dans les milieux universitaires. Pour retracer l’émergence du leadership pédagogique en
tant que construction formalisée, nous avons recueilli des données provenant de conventions
collectives et d’autres ressources accessibles au public, comme les critères d’attribution de prix, auprès
de 48 universités canadiennes afin d’examiner les façons dont le leadership pédagogique était défini
et/ou mis en œuvre. Notre examen national a identifié plusieurs catégories d’activités couramment
citées comme exemples de leadership pédagogique, notamment des formes importantes de
développement de programmes, des initiatives formelles de leadership, la diffusion de formes publiques
de recherche liée à l’enseignement ou de ressources fondées sur l’enseignement, l’engagement dans
l’érudition de l’enseignement et de l’apprentissage et la mise en œuvre de diverses formes de mentorat.
Notre étude a également révélé que le leadership pédagogique ne se résume pas seulement à ce type
d’activités, mais aussi à la capacité de démontrer l’impact de ces activités au-delà de la salle de classe.
En plus d’exemples de façons d’illustrer l’impact, nous proposons une définition pratique du leadership
pédagogique qui reflète la façon dont il émerge dans le contexte particulier des universités canadiennes
contemporaines.

Keywords
educational leadership, awards criteria, tenure and promotion criteria, 3M National Teaching
Fellowship; leadership pédagogique, critères de récompenses, critères de titularisation et de promotion,
bourse nationale d'enseignement 3M

Cover Page Footnote
The authors wish to express their gratitude to Emma Metcalfe Hurst, Michael Fagbohun, and Syeda Hina
Batool for their research assistance in locating awards criteria and collective agreement contract
language on educational leadership. Funding for the research assistants was provided through a 3M
National Teaching Program – cohort led teaching and learning grant.




   This research paper/Rapport de recherche is available in The Canadian Journal for the Scholarship of Teaching and Learning:
                                                                          https://doi.org/10.5206/cjsotlrcacea.2024.3.17715

                               Symbaluk et al.: The Emergence of Formalized Educational Leadership in Higher Education



                What constitutes educational leadership is a topic of debate in Canadian universities as
       institutions revamp their criteria for demonstrating excellence in teaching, particularly in relation
       to the eligibility for awards, tenure, and promotion. As institutional criteria evolve, faculty
       members are also simultaneously striving to improve, develop professionally, and become leaders
       to serve as catalysts of change. This article traces the emergence of “educational leadership” (EL)
       as a descriptive and contractual umbrella term for a collection of initiatives, practices and fields of
       critical study. We seek to extend the findings from an earlier collaborative project involving the
       3M 2020 National Teaching Fellowship cohort which highlighted the lack of clarity with which
       the term educational leadership is typically defined at a range of post-secondary institutions in
       Canada. Symbaluk et al. (2024) note that the sorts of teacher-scholars whose teaching is recognized
       with awards like the 3M National Teaching Fellowship and the forms of leadership they enact have
       always existed, but their educational leadership, in terms of who they are (traits) and what they
       have done (in practice), is less clear from a definitively measurable standpoint. This earlier project
       identified traits shared by recognized educational leaders (“innovation,” “responsiveness,”
       “reflectiveness,” “positive opportunism,” “persistence,” and “curiosity”) and documented
       common ways in which educational leadership was demonstrated through a range of practices (that
       were “community-engaged,” “trailblazing,” “bridge building,” “shared freely,” “action-oriented,”
       involved “applied methods,” and were enacted in advocacy toward greater causes) (Symbaluk et
       al., 2024).
                Some disambiguation is needed from the beginning of our investigation of the emergence
       and growth of the concept of educational leadership within award criteria and tenure and promotion
       guidelines at Canadian universities. The term educational leadership as used in this context is
       distinct in scope and meaning from the usage in scholarship related to K-12 education, where the
       term is broadly associated with school administration and educational management in both
       Canadian and international contexts. There is a well-established body of existing scholarship on
       educational leadership in that context, including series such as the Studies in Educational
       Leadership and Critical Studies in Educational Leadership, Management and Administration, as
       well as both specialist (e.g., Educational Leadership; Contemporary Issues in Educational
       Leadership; Educational Leadership and Management) and generalist Education journals (e.g.,
       Journal of Curriculum and Pedagogy).
                While educational leadership is becoming increasingly important as an umbrella term in
       Canadian universities for many of the expected contributions and practices engaged in by
       exemplary teachers, there is no standard definition of educational leadership in this context, and
       the literature is lacking on what does or does not constitute educational leadership in practice: how
       does an individual or a university distinguish teaching, administration, curriculum development,
       and educational research within a practice of educational leadership? This paper examines
       examples of instances of the term “educational leadership,” as well as its explicitly related
       practices, in a series of influential sites in Canadian universities: contracts and tenure criteria,
       research grants, national teaching awards, internal institutional teaching awards, and public-facing
       communications from resources such as centres for teaching and learning. We seek to help bridge
       the gaps in the literature and to provide some clarity within the current movement to formalize
       definitions of EL and modes of evidence of its impact.




Published by Scholarship@Western, 2024                                                                                   1

                               The Canadian Journal for the Scholarship of Teaching and Learning, Vol. 15, Iss. 3 [2024], Art. 17



                                                                         Method

                Our review undertakes an archival analysis of existing information on educational
        leadership gathered from collective agreements, awards criteria, centres for teaching and learning,
        and other publicly available resources pertaining to a sample of 48 Canadian universities as of
        January 1, 2023. Though post-secondary institutions extend far beyond universities into colleges,
        CEGEPs, First Nations and Indigenous Institutes, and private training institutions, the breadth of
        mission and practices in higher education in Canada necessitates beginning this conversation about
        post-secondary definitions of educational leadership in a narrowed frame in order to establish a
        foundation for future, wider conversation. The 48 Canadian universities in our review are those
        included in national rankings as identified by Maclean’s magazine as part of its annual analysis of
        universities in Canada: included universities had more than 1000 full-time students, were members
        of the national association Universities Canada, and were not subject to special restrictions (e.g.,
        based on religion or newly acquired status as a university) (Dwyer, 2023). Universities included
        in the Maclean’s sample are ranked yearly based on 12 publicly available performance indicators
        related to faculty members such as teaching awards and research grants, students (e.g., academic
        awards), resources (e.g., operating budgets and library acquisitions), student supports, and overall
        reputation (Dwyer, 2023).
                Maclean’s divides universities in its assessments into three categories: those designated as
        medical/doctoral (i.e., University of Alberta, University of British Columbia, University of
        Calgary, Dalhousie University, Université de Laval, University of Manitoba, McGill University,
        McMaster University, Université de Montréal, University of Ottawa, Queen’s University,
        University of Saskatchewan, Université de Sherbrooke, University of Toronto, and Western
        University), comprehensive (i.e., Brock University, Carleton University, Concordia University,
        University of Guelph, Memorial University, University of New Brunswick, Université de Québec
        a Montréal, University of Regina, Simon Fraser University, Toronto Metropolitan University,
        University of Victoria, University of Waterloo, Wilfrid Laurier University, University of Windsor,
        and York University), and primarily undergraduate (i.e., Acadia University, Bishop’s University,
        Brandon University, Cape Breton University, St. Francis Xavier University, Lakehead University,
        Laurentian University, University of Lethbridge, University of Moncton, Mount Allison
        University, Mount Saint Vincent University, Nipissing University, University of Northern British
        Columbia, Ontario Tech University, University of Prince Edwards Island, Saint Mary’s University,
        St. Thomas University, Trent University, and University of Winnipeg). We searched publicly
        available websites such as those for centres for teaching and learning and publicly available
        documents including awards criteria and collective agreements at the 48 universities included in
        our sample to locate any reference to educational leadership. This review summarizes what we
        found for ways in which educational leadership was defined and/or used in the available public-
        facing information for our sample.

                                                                         Findings

        Educational Leadership as Defined in Contract Language

                In terms of individual scholars, the highest impact site of definitions of EL is in language
        related to contracts, promotion, and tenure. While specific practices associated with EL (such as
        curriculum development and scholarly work on teaching and learning) have long been considered



https://doi.org/10.5206/cjsotlrcacea.2024.3.17715                                                                                   2

                               Symbaluk et al.: The Emergence of Formalized Educational Leadership in Higher Education



       more or less silently in such criteria, the expansion of increasingly formalized tenurable teaching-
       intensive faculty (TTFF) ranks in recent decades has not necessarily been accompanied by explicit
       articulations of the work and impacts of educational leadership as part of the criteria for tenure and
       promotion. To our knowledge, we are the first to review EL language within Collective
       Agreements at Canadian universities. Although we examined public-facing documents for 48
       universities in Canada in our 2023 national review, we could only locate four that explicitly define
       EL within a Collective Agreement (i.e., University of British Columbia, Lakehead University,
       University of Toronto, and Western University). McGill University is not included in this count as
       it does not include a formal definition, but McGill University does include the term educational
       leadership in its Collective Agreement, with a list of ways in which it can be enacted within tenure
       and promotion processes.
               With 358 appointments in a tenurable Teaching Professor track as of November 2023,
       (constituting some 12.5% of all tenurable appointments), the University of British Columbia
       (UBC), in many ways, spearheads the movement towards more teaching-focused faculty positions
       (UBC, 2024a; Symbaluk et al., 2024). In fact, UBC’s leadership publishes a “Guide to
       Reappointment, Promotion and Tenure Procedures at UBC” that seeks to formally “summarize and
       supplement” for faculty, Department Heads, Deans, and the Senior Appointments Committee the
       Collective Agreement’s expectations for promotion and tenure across ranks, including to the rank
       of Professor of Teaching and Associate Professor of Teaching, in what is termed the Educational
       Leadership stream. This guide includes further explanation of EL as a form of scholarship and
       descriptions of how EL can be demonstrated through various activities (UBC, 2023). The account
       of EL in UBC’s Collective Agreement that this guide illuminates is itself the most substantive in
       Canada as it includes a separate definition along with multiple examples of what EL looks like in
       practice:

                 a) Educational leadership is activity taken at UBC and elsewhere to advance innovation
                    in teaching and learning with impact beyond one’s classroom. Educational leadership
                    includes but is not limited to such things as:
                    • application of and/or active engagement in the scholarship of teaching and learning;
                    • significant contributions to curriculum development, curriculum renewal, course
                    design, new assessment models, pedagogical innovation and other initiatives that
                    extend beyond the member’s classroom and advance the University’s ability to excel
                    in its teaching and learning mandates;
                    • teaching, mentorship and inspiration of colleagues;
                    • formal educational leadership responsibility within Department/ Program/
                    Faculty;
                    • organization of and contributions to conferences, programs, symposia, workshops and
                    other educational events on teaching and learning locally, nationally and
                    internationally;
                    • contributions to the theory and practice of teaching and learning, including
                    publications such as textbooks, print and electronic publications, book chapters, articles
                    in peer- reviewed and professional journals, conference proceedings, software, training
                    guidelines, instructional manuals or other resources; and
                    • other activities that support evidence-based educational excellence, leadership and
                    impact within and beyond the University.




Published by Scholarship@Western, 2024                                                                                   3

                               The Canadian Journal for the Scholarship of Teaching and Learning, Vol. 15, Iss. 3 [2024], Art. 17



                   b) Judgment of educational leadership is based mainly on the quality and significance of
                      the individual’s contributions (University of British Columbia Faculty Association,
                      2022, pp. 78-79).

                This agreement provides an expansive, but specifically articulated range of activities
        through which one can demonstrate impactful practices of educational leadership. These activities
        are centred on significant forms of curriculum development and pedagogical innovation, as well
        as contributions to the Scholarship of Teaching and Learning (SoTL). In addition, UBC points to
        the importance of mentorship as an element of EL, and to impacts stemming from formal
        leadership responsibilities. Moreover, UBC’s description includes ways in which an educational
        leader can contribute to teaching-focused educational dissemination through conferences,
        workshops, and other educational events. Finally, UBC’s framing of EL includes contributions to
        the theory and practice of teaching and learning. To support this research across both its campuses,
        UBC offers up to three million dollars annually in competitive research and innovation funding
        for investigations of teaching and learning through their Teaching and Learning Enhancement
        Fund (UBC, 2024b), Institute for the Scholarship of Teaching and Learning’s Linkage and
        Dissemination Grants (UBC, 2024c), Open Educational Resource Grants, and other programs
        specific to faculties like the Science Centre for Learning and Teaching’s Skylight Development
        Grants (UBC, 2024d). There are also additional competitions for special initiatives like online
        learning projects and teaching and learning elements of the Indigenous Strategic Plan (UBC,
        2024e). Among the other universities offering internal grants specifically for educational
        leadership work, the University of Calgary has a similar series of funding programs for EL
        research in its Development and Innovation Grants (up to $10,000), SoTL Grants (up to $40,000),
        and Educational Leadership Grants (up to $40,000) (University of Calgary, 2024).
                Lakehead University’s Faculty Association (LUFA) Collective Agreement also lists EL as
        a requirement for teaching-focused faculty members. According to the LUFA Collective
        Agreement, “the responsibilities of Teaching-Focused faculty members at Lakehead University
        shall encompass an appropriate combination of teaching, educational leadership and
        administrative activities and/or service to the profession and community” (Lakehead University,
        2020, p. 145). The LUFA Collective Agreement goes on to define educational leadership not with
        a separate statement like UBC, but through the use of the same extensive list of examples created
        by UBC, as quoted above (see Lakehead University, 2020, pp.145-146).
                The University of Toronto’s (2021) policy on promotions in the teaching stream includes a
        section titled “Attributes of Educational Leadership and/or Achievement and Ongoing
        Pedagogical/Professional Development” which states, “Sustained over many years, educational
        leadership and/or achievement is often reflected in teaching-related activities that show significant
        impact in a variety of ways, for example: through enhanced student learning; through creation
        and/or development of modes of effective teaching; through engagement in the scholarly
        conversation via pedagogical scholarship, or creative professional activity; through significant
        changes in policy related to teaching as a profession; [and] through technological and other
        advances in the delivery of education as a discipline or profession” (University of Toronto
        Governing Council, 2021, p. 4).
                Western University also notes that for members in the “Teaching Scholar Track,” scholarly
        performance is measured by “curriculum development and/or educational leadership and/or
        mentoring, presentations and scholarship on teaching or pedagogy, mentoring, or research into the
        efficacy of different pedagogical approaches. Impact of educational leadership and/or achievement



https://doi.org/10.5206/cjsotlrcacea.2024.3.17715                                                                                   4

                               Symbaluk et al.: The Emergence of Formalized Educational Leadership in Higher Education



       could be demonstrated through innovation of methods that enhance student learning; through
       creation and/or development of models of effective teaching; through advances in the delivery of
       education in a discipline or profession; through engagement in the scholarly conversation via
       professional activity and/or publications.” As part of the assessment, Western University also
       indicates that the written opinion of at least three external referees is sought and that, in addition
       to the candidate’s area of specialty, these individuals may comprise “experts in the scholarship of
       teaching and learning” (Western University, 2018, 200–201).
               Finally, employment regulations at McGill University (2016) pertaining to tenure track and
       tenured academic staff also include in its “Guidelines for Developing a Teaching Portfolio,” under
       a section titled “Teaching development and educational leadership,” several practices that may be
       “undertaken to develop and enhance teaching, particularly in the broader context.” Similar to
       examples of educational leadership used at UBC and Lakehead, McGill’s list includes:

                 •    development and sharing of teaching innovations, materials or strategies;
                 •    advising and mentoring colleagues about teaching-related issues;
                 •    TA mentoring (unless this is included under ‘Other contributions’ in the dossier);
                 •    contributions through teaching support units, teaching committees, associations;
                 •    organizing or facilitating seminars, workshops or conferences on teaching and learning;
                 •    contributions to the development of policies on teaching and learning; [and]
                 •    teaching related publications – both discipline-specific and general (McGill University,
                      2016, p. 21).

               Other institutions also include EL as a requirement for promotion and tenure within their
       teaching- and/or research-intensive streams, but do not define EL within their Collective
       Agreements and/or provide less guidance on what the work category entails (e.g., Brock
       University, Simon Fraser University, and the University of Victoria). For instance, Simon Fraser
       University refers to EL as a criterion for tenure and promotion for lecturers, senior lecturers, and
       university lecturers and notes that “a university lecturer will have responsibilities that encompass
       the normal requirements of classroom teaching plus activities in the area of education leadership,
       teaching mentorship, and curriculum development. University lecturers will focus on
       accomplishments in teaching and educational innovation and the impact on student learning”
       (Simon Fraser University, 2024, p. 58).
               Given its legal function, contract language is limited in the degree to which it can be
       inclusive, flexible, or contextual, and thus provides only one part of the data that can be developed
       into a sense of a national definition of EL. To consider the full extent of the conversation around
       EL as a concept, other forms of national and institutional communications on EL must be added.

       Educational Leadership as Defined in Canada’s National Teaching Award

               National recognition of the sort conferred by a 3M National Teaching Fellowship is another
       notable impetus in the emergence of formalized definitions of EL. Canada’s Society for Teaching
       and Learning in Higher Education (STLHE) is committed to the improvement of higher education
       in Canada through the dissemination and sharing of educational ideas and resources (STLHE,
       2024a, Resources section). The organization publishes scholarship on teaching and learning, hosts
       a national conference, and provides a series of grants and awards for individuals and teams that
       include faculty members, graduate students, undergraduates, and teaching and learning staff


Published by Scholarship@Western, 2024                                                                                   5

                               The Canadian Journal for the Scholarship of Teaching and Learning, Vol. 15, Iss. 3 [2024], Art. 17



        specialists. However, it is most widely recognized for awards based on exemplary contributions to
        teaching and learning in higher education: the 3M National Teaching Fellowship (3MNTF) and
        3M National Student Fellowship (3MNSF) (STLHE, 2024b, Awards section).
                Created in 1985, the 3MNTF is Canada’s only national teaching award, awarded to up to
        ten post-secondary teachers each year. Consequently, it is recognized among teachers, educational
        developers, and senior administration as having a variety of positive impacts on recipients
        (personally and professionally), other faculty members, students, centres of teaching and learning,
        and award-winners’ affiliated post-secondary institutions more broadly (e.g., see Stockley et al.,
        2019; Acai et al., 2018). The award’s criteria have long had a dual emphasis on excellence in
        teaching and leadership in teaching (Ahmad et al., 2013). The high-profile status of the award
        (announced each year in a national general readership magazine Maclean’s), and the national
        impact of STLHE as an organization, grants weight to the way in which STLHE defines the
        profession and its roles.
                From its inception, up to and including 2019, nominees were required to submit a dossier
        to illustrate traits and practices that comprise their teaching excellence and their educational
        leadership–weighted equally in the adjudication process. Award committees were then challenged
        to discern from among the nominees in different disciplines and working in different institutional
        infrastructures a cohort of the best. This process necessitated fuller criteria, including a focus on
        innovation. As Acai et al. (2018) eloquently put it:

                   The high standard of the fellowship is also reflected in the criteria that define what counts
                   as evidence of teaching excellence and educational leadership. These criteria have evolved
                   over the years so they represent not only a checklist that nominators can tick off, but also
                   a compelling story about a teacher who is deserving of the highest honour a national
                   recognition can bestow. As mentioned in one of the program artefacts, an essay written by
                   the 3M Program Coordinator in 2008, the selection committee was challenged by the fact
                   that most of the nominees met the stated criteria, which led to the development of “meta”
                   criteria that helped to further differentiate candidates with attributes such as, “creative,
                   authentic, fresh, genuine, authoritative, super energetic, captivating, convincing, versatile,
                   different,    innovative,    path-finding,     way-breaking,      pioneering,      passionate,
                   transformational, and deep!” (p.61).

                 From 2020, the STLHE/3M revised criteria included an equal emphasis on teaching
        excellence, educational leadership, and innovation. One challenge in articulating a broadly
        applicable definition of educational leadership is differentiating EL from both administration and
        exceptional teaching, a process that depends on the distinction and overlap in definitions. For
        STLHE, teaching excellence centres on classroom practice: “the intentional actions of an instructor
        to create an exceptional learning environment through engaging in pedagogical practices designed
        to maximize student learning. Excellent teachers engage in inclusive practices, scholarly teaching
        and ongoing reflection of their own teaching practice” (STLHE, 2024c, The Criteria section).
                In contrast, educational leadership functions at a broader level and “involves leading
        significant transformation in teaching and learning at an institutional, disciplinary, community,
        and/or societal level. Educational leadership fosters and supports change, and leads to a more
        inclusive, equitable, and diverse post-secondary landscape” (STLHE, 2024c, The Criteria section).
        This definition of EL denotes what a leader does, with emphasis on that person being a key catalyst
        for transformation and change at multiple levels. In a chapter on the history and origins of the



https://doi.org/10.5206/cjsotlrcacea.2024.3.17715                                                                                   6

                               Symbaluk et al.: The Emergence of Formalized Educational Leadership in Higher Education



       3MNTF, Ahmad et al. (2013) state: “Examples of leadership evidence include the candidate’s
       statement of what leadership in teaching excellence means and how it is accomplished; this is
       supported by actual contributions including workshops on teaching and learning, mentorship,
       research on teaching, and impact on educational development with the institution and beyond” (p.
       184).
               STLHE’s definitions of teaching excellence and educational leadership are distinctive in
       the creation of “innovation” as a third criterion, removing innovation from the umbrella of EL and
       shifting it into its own category, weighted equally with the other two: “the novel execution of ideas
       that contribute to more effective teaching and learning practices. The result of educational
       innovation impacts people in academia and beyond to reach mutual goals” (STLHE, 2024c, The
       Criteria section). In our earlier research on educational leadership in traits and practices among the
       2020 3MNTF cohort, innovation was the most prevalent theme identified in the EL dossiers: at a
       time when innovation was not a separate part of the award criteria, there were 84 identifiable
       examples of innovation amongst the cohort (Symbaluk et al., 2024). Whether innovation is a sub-
       category of EL or is included in a separate parallel category, as in the current 3MNTF criteria,
       there is an emphasis in certain definitions on novel teaching strategies and educational
       contributions that “impact people in academia and beyond.”

       Educational Leadership as Defined in Internal Teaching Award Criteria

               Another source of data in an emerging definition of educational leadership is the public-
       facing criteria for teaching awards within Canadian universities, often described and administered
       through centres for teaching and learning. Internal teaching awards are a common means through
       which exemplary teachers are evaluated and recognized at post-secondary institutions (Carusetta,
       2001). As evidence of the impact of STLHE’s definition, a few institutions have directly adopted
       the 3MNTF criteria as their own (Stockley et al., 2019). For example, the criteria for the University
       of Toronto’s University Teaching Award are arranged under the same framing of educational
       leadership, teaching excellence, and educational innovation, incorporating much of the STLHE
       language into its criteria (University of Toronto, 2024). Brock University’s Distinguished Teaching
       Award was also defined using these three categories when we did our analysis in 2023, but the
       university has recently revised their criteria to singularly emphasize teaching excellence (Brock
       University, 2024).
               Extending STLHE’s general conception of “significant transformation in teaching and
       learning,” the University of Guelph’s (2024) John Bell Award recognizes “outstanding educational
       leadership,” demonstrated both within and beyond the University through:

             •    evidence of outstanding contributions in course and curriculum design including the
                  development and assessment of learning outcomes or curriculum improvement processes;
             •    evidence of outstanding contributions to pedagogical innovations including the
                  development of high-impact practices;
             •    substantial evidence of contributions to the scholarship of teaching and learning
                  (University of Guelph, 2024, Eligibility and Criteria section).

       Here, faculty members are provided with a little more direction as to how they might bring about
       change in the form of “outstanding contributions” to curriculum, pedagogy, and/or the scholarship
       of teaching and learning.


Published by Scholarship@Western, 2024                                                                                   7

                               The Canadian Journal for the Scholarship of Teaching and Learning, Vol. 15, Iss. 3 [2024], Art. 17



               Memorial University’s President’s Award for Distinguished Teaching also points to
        expected contributions by the educational leader based on “a continued record of excellence in
        teaching” where the nominee provides evidence of “outstanding achievement in teaching and
        engagement in educational leadership and the scholarship of teaching and learning.” To fulfill the
        educational leadership component:

                   The nominee will have made a significant contribution to practices, policies, or processes
                   that enhance teaching effectiveness, the quality of student learning experiences, and/or
                   teaching and learning environments. The nominee will have undertaken a variety of roles,
                   such as advocate, mentor, facilitator of teaching development opportunities, member of
                   committee or working groups, and leader of special initiatives. The ability to inspire,
                   engage and support colleagues in their teaching development will be evident. Leadership
                   roles and activities may have been undertaken while in a formal leadership position or
                   beyond appointed roles and responsibilities, and will have impact at the department,
                   faculty, or institutional level and, perhaps, beyond. (Memorial University, 2022, p. 2).

                 The University of Victoria’s Harry Kickman Alumni Award for Excellence in Teaching and
        Educational Leadership is unique in its inclusion of “Educational Leadership” in its title, as well
        as in its criteria. In this award, a leader is an innovative, student-centred instructor (teaching) who
        also enacts practices and processes that have an impact both within and beyond the institution
        (educational leadership). Specifically, a successful candidate:

                   •    promotes student-centred learning in practices that actively engage students in the
                        learning process and are focused on learning and mentoring beyond the classroom.
                   •    creatively enhances teaching by including innovative teaching methods and learning
                        strategies, effective assignment development, incorporation of educational
                        technologies and providing formative assessment.
                   •    provides innovative course design/redesign and engagement in curriculum
                        development and is actively engaged in scholarship of teaching and learning (SoTL)
                        research, collaborating with peers, students and TAs.
                   •    is an educational leader within and beyond the university, involved in activities such
                        as: participating in learning and teaching related committees or presentations, serving
                        as a consultant on government policy bodies, writing media reviews or articles,
                        publishing in academic journals or obtaining grants for teaching and learning research
                        (University of Victoria, 2024a, Awards Criteria section).

                The University of Windsor goes further still, with an award that is exclusively the
        “Educational Leadership Award.” It “honours the contributions of individuals who have led
        significant and sustained initiatives to improve teaching, curriculum, teaching spaces and
        resources, and policies and procedures that promote effective teaching. Each of these areas of
        leadership is likely to involve the establishment and fostering of strong collaborative networks
        among educators and educational leaders, at the University of Windsor and beyond” (University
        of Windsor, 2024). The University of Windsor criteria’s emphasis on the importance of “sustained”
        contributions is, we believe, unique among the award descriptions, though it echoes the use of the
        term in the University of Toronto’s collective agreement. The description also includes a plethora




https://doi.org/10.5206/cjsotlrcacea.2024.3.17715                                                                                   8

                               Symbaluk et al.: The Emergence of Formalized Educational Leadership in Higher Education



       of examples that illustrate the kinds of achievements an educational leader might have, many of
       which are now identifiable as recurring in examples from across Canada:

                 •    made direct contributions to improving the quality of education our students
                      experience, beyond the context of their own classrooms;
                 •    developed new and effective curricula, programs, or courses;
                 •    successfully established institutional infrastructure to facilitate effective teaching and
                      learning and its implementation (e.g., new technologies, new learning spaces, etc.);
                 •    engaged in or led collaborative efforts leading to innovation in teaching approaches,
                      pedagogical materials development, and assessment of student learning;
                 •    inspired teaching improvement in others (including other faculty members,
                      administrators, graduate students, and teaching assistants) through collegial support,
                      mentorship, professional development leadership, teaching resource development, and
                      other systematic efforts;
                 •    actively sought to improve teaching and learning networks and to expand
                      collaborations within and across institutional units, either academic or administrative;
                 •    organized or played another leadership role in workshops, symposia, courses, or
                      conferences on university education;
                 •    led or made major and identifiable contributions to the creation or improvement of
                      institutional policies related to teaching and learning (e.g., teaching evaluation,
                      promotion and tenure guidelines, academic advising, accessibility, and inclusion);
                 •    functioned in systematic ways as advocates for the value of teaching and learning in
                      post-secondary contexts;
                 •    engaged in community outreach activities that involve teaching (e.g., leading
                      international educational support initiatives, undertaking media advocacy for the value
                      of teaching and learning in universities or at the University of Windsor);
                 •    led or made major contributions to inter-institutional initiatives related to teaching and
                      learning or to learning environments;
                 •    contributed to the scholarship of teaching and learning (SoTL) beyond the University
                      of Windsor;
                 •    served in leadership roles on regional, national or international organizations dedicated
                      to teaching of a disciplinary or general focus (University of Windsor, 2024, Educational
                      Leadership Award Purpose section).

               Since awards are often a precursor to promotion, their criteria serve an essential function
       in working toward a nationally understood definition of educational leadership. From the review
       of the sources outlined above, Figure 1 summarizes current elements of definitions of educational
       leadership in Canadian universities:




Published by Scholarship@Western, 2024                                                                                   9

                               The Canadian Journal for the Scholarship of Teaching and Learning, Vol. 15, Iss. 3 [2024], Art. 17



        Figure 1
        Activities that Comprise EL


                                                                                 Curriculum
                                                                                Development
                                                                            (e.g., new courses,
                                                                              new programs)

                                           Mentorship and
                                                                                                               Formal Leadership
                                         Collaborative Efforts
                                                                                                                   Initiatives
                                           (eg. TA training
                                                                                                             (e.g., new policies and
                                        programs, mentorship
                                                                                                                    processes)
                                        of graduate students)




                                 Scholarly Teaching
                                (e.g., applications of
                                                                                EL                                      Public Teaching-
                                                                                                                        Related Research
                                                                                                                       (e.g., conferences,
                                 SoTL and pedadogy                                                                      teaching-related
                                research, innovative                                                                      events, peer-
                                 teaching practices)                                                                        reviewed
                                                                                                                          publications)




                                                                 SoTL
                                                         (e.g., peer-reviewed                     Public Teaching
                                                            publications on                         Resources
                                                          teaching practices,                   (e.g., Open-access
                                                          systematic inquiry                  resources, textbooks,
                                                         into student success                  instructor manuals)
                                                               strategies)




        Seeking Further Clarity: What is and is not “Educational Leadership” in Canadian
        Practice

                 Based on the language provided in collective agreements, criteria for tenure and promotion,
        and awards, educational leadership is most often defined as “significant” activities or contributions
        that extend beyond what is expected from regular teaching roles and service obligations. A key
        challenge in both tenure and awards situations is to articulate where any given activity might fall
        on a continuum between service/administration and EL, or between teaching and EL.
                 One of the most commonly cited examples of what constitutes EL is a major contribution
        to curricular development. In this capacity, educational leaders might spearhead new courses as
        noted earlier, at the Department level, or by establishing new majors or minors. But they also might
        play a key role in the development of new programs at the Faculty level, for example, or work to
        enact change at the level of the institution by helping to revise degree requirements. Curricular
        work might even extend beyond the institution through interdisciplinary, provincial, or national
        initiatives such as accreditations. While most instructional faculty members reflect on curriculum
        in an ongoing way through the creation and updating of materials they use in their courses, current


https://doi.org/10.5206/cjsotlrcacea.2024.3.17715                                                                                            10

                               Symbaluk et al.: The Emergence of Formalized Educational Leadership in Higher Education



       educational leadership language often stipulates impact beyond one’s own classroom to
       differentiate teaching from EL. As such, significant forms of curriculum development that are
       typically shared with, or impact other instructors, would constitute educational leadership. An
       example of this would be someone designing a novel approach to teaching that was then widely
       adopted throughout an academic unit or outside of one’s own institution.
                Mentorship is similarly consistently listed in the sources we reviewed as a form of
       educational leadership. Educational leaders share their successful strategies or novel ideas with
       their students, their colleagues, and the wider academic community. Mentorship involving students
       might entail supervision of undergraduate or graduate research projects or the training and
       mentoring of teaching assistants. Mentorship of colleagues could include sharing resources or
       advising faculty members about teaching-related issues. Educational leaders also facilitate
       educational events by planning and hosting conferences, preparing workshops, and facilitating
       events in collaboration with centres for teaching and learning.
                Two other aspects of educational leadership that are more complicated in their function,
       and which occur in definitions of educational leadership, are scholarship of teaching and learning
       and the concept of innovation. Engagement in SoTL is one of the most frequently recognized
       means by which educational leadership is illustrated in practice. Potter and Kustra (2011) define
       SoTL as “the systematic study of teaching and learning, using established or validated criteria of
       scholarship, to understand how teaching (beliefs, behaviours, attitudes, and values) can maximize
       learning, and/or develop a more accurate understanding of learning, resulting in products that are
       publicly shared for critique and use by an appropriate community” (p. 2). Common examples of
       engagement in SoTL include formal investigation and analysis of the impact of a teaching method,
       a curricular framework, a learning technology, or a university policy related to teaching and
       learning, disseminated through conference presentations or peer-reviewed publications.
                One challenge to address is the slippage that is sometimes noted between SoTL and EL;
       some have complained that SoTL, educational development, and educational leadership are
       becoming blurred in a way that is a “thorn in the flesh of educational research” and damaging to
       educational research (Canning & Masika, 2022, p. 1084). However we might think of the impact
       of a misconception, there can indeed be a misconception that SoTL scholarship is EL, and EL is
       SoTL, to the exclusion of the other criteria we have documented here: the slippage needs to be
       addressed. In fact, the Canadian universities’ definitions of EL that we examined are consistent in
       the recognition that EL and its impact may be demonstrated in many documentable ways, only one
       of which is peer-reviewed publication of work connected to previous literature. As noted herein,
       there are myriad ways in which faculty members might contribute to teaching and learning in
       higher education, including forms of research and publication that would technically fall outside
       of the realm of SoTL by most of its definitions. Creating and disseminating learning materials that
       facilitate teaching by others is an important part of EL, for example: authoring a textbook as an
       expert in a discipline, creating an instructor manual to mentor others in one’s discipline, or
       developing software to facilitate teaching courses or skills in a novel way, would all likely have an
       impact beyond one’s classroom, and be considered forms of EL. Nevertheless, even the published
       parts of these kinds of work, if they are not assessment-based research, might not technically fall
       under the umbrella of SoTL. Similarly, disciplinary discovery research not related to teaching and
       learning would fall under neither EL nor SoTL, even when completed by scholars in teaching-
       based employment ranks.
                Lastly, the question of innovation needs to be addressed. The term appears in some award
       criteria and definitions as described above, and is granted status outside of, but equal to,



Published by Scholarship@Western, 2024                                                                                   11

                               The Canadian Journal for the Scholarship of Teaching and Learning, Vol. 15, Iss. 3 [2024], Art. 17



        educational leadership in the 3M criteria. Still, it is clear from our review that innovation is one of
        the ways in which EL may be demonstrated, but it is not in and of itself an essential criterion for
        EL, nor is it of its core. For example, mentorship is by definition the sharing of experience and
        disciplinary or institutional knowledge and need not meet a standard of “innovation” to have
        impact. Similarly, a leader may lead workshops or publish about effective teaching practices and
        student success strategies that are based on well-developed research methods and scholarly
        literature: clearly impactful but not by definition innovative. See Table 1 for an overview of how
        and whether innovation is described in relation to EL within Collective Agreements and awards
        criteria at the institutions mentioned earlier.

        Table 1
        Innovation as a Criterion for Educational Leadership
              Institution                    Source                                                           Examples
         Brock University       Distinguished Teaching Award                                  Included separate criteria for EL,
                                                                                              teaching excellence, and innovation
                                                                                              until its revision in 2024. EL is no
                                                                                              longer listed and educational
                                                                                              innovation is now optionally
                                                                                              included within teaching excellence
                                                                                              (Brock University, 2024).

         Lakehead University                Collective Agreement                              EL listed alongside teaching and
                                                                                              administrative forms of service (see
                                                                                              Lakehead University, 2020, p. 145).
                                                                                              No mention of innovation.

         McGill University                  Collective Agreement                              EL defined as practices including, as
                                                                                              one example, the “development and
                                                                                              sharing of teaching innovations,
                                                                                              materials or strategies” (McGill
                                                                                              University, 2016, p. 21).

         Memorial University                President’s Award for                             No mention of innovation in
                                            Distinguished Teaching                            examples of the EL component
                                                                                              (Memorial University, 2022).

         University of British              Collective Agreement                              EL defined as “activity” to “advance
         Columbia                                                                             innovation in teaching and learning
                                                                                              with impact beyond the classroom”
                                                                                              (University of British Columbia
                                                                                              Faculty Association, 2022, p. 78).

         University of Guelph John Bell Award                                                 Includes “pedagogical innovation” as
                                                                                              an example of EL (University of
                                                                                              Guelph, 2024).




https://doi.org/10.5206/cjsotlrcacea.2024.3.17715                                                                                     12

                               Symbaluk et al.: The Emergence of Formalized Educational Leadership in Higher Education



              Institution                            Source                                             Examples
         University of                   Collective Agreement                           EL reflected “in teaching-related
         Toronto                                                                        activities that show significant
                                                                                        impact in a variety of ways”
                                                                                        (University of Toronto Governing
                                                                                        Council, 2021, p. 4).
                                                                                        No mention of innovation.

         University of                   President’s Teaching Award                     Treats EL and innovation as parallel
         Toronto                                                                        criteria for excellence “demonstrated
                                                                                        through a sustained commitment to
                                                                                        educational leadership, teaching
                                                                                        excellence, and educational
                                                                                        innovation” (University of Toronto,
                                                                                        2024).

         University of                   Harry Kickman Alumni Award                     “A leader is an innovative, student-
         Victoria                        for Excellence in Teaching and                 centered, instructor.”
                                         Educational Leadership                         “Creatively enhances teaching by
                                                                                        including innovative teaching
                                                                                        methods…” (University of Victoria,
                                                                                        2024a).

         University of                   Educational Leadership Award                   EL award based on “sustained
         Windsor                                                                        initiatives.”
                                                                                        Includes as one example, “engaged
                                                                                        in or led collaborative efforts leading
                                                                                        to innovation in teaching
                                                                                        approaches” (University of Windsor,
                                                                                        2024).

         Western University              Collective Agreement                           EL listed among performance
                                                                                        measures.
                                                                                        Various impacts including as one
                                                                                        example, “innovation of methods
                                                                                        that enhance student learning”
                                                                                        (Western University, 2018, p. 201).

                In addition to the clarification needed to the functions of innovation and SoTL in the usage
       of the term educational leadership in Canadian universities, other examples may help to illuminate
       the distinctions between teaching and EL or service and EL. Creating content for or designing or
       revising one’s own courses and using pedagogical skills to deliver them to one’s own students
       contributes to one’s own excellent teaching, but it is not considered to be EL in the resources we
       examined, as the impact is contained to one’s own students in one’s own classroom. However,
       designing a new standardized course that will be taught by several instructors, or mentoring a team
       of colleagues teaching that course for the first time, would be EL under most definitions. Similarly,



Published by Scholarship@Western, 2024                                                                                            13

                               The Canadian Journal for the Scholarship of Teaching and Learning, Vol. 15, Iss. 3 [2024], Art. 17



        imagining a new course, pitching it to one’s department, and shepherding it through curriculum
        processes so that it can appear in the Calendar as a permanent contribution to the department’s
        curriculum would typically be understood as EL. Developing and publishing or disseminating
        innovative methods for teaching subject matter within a discipline at conferences or symposia
        would typically be considered EL, as would convening and leading such teaching-related events.
        However, blogging, YouTubing, posting to social media, or other non-peer-reviewed online
        conversations—while often fruitful—would not necessarily qualify as formal EL, just as posting
        about one’s discovery research is valuable, but would not typically count toward tenure (even
        though it might meet the criteria of certain kinds of awards if public outreach is required).
                With respect to service, completing student-facing work that is a part of an administrative
        role (scheduling, registration, advising) would typically be service, but researching or undertaking
        formal processes to make evidence-based changes to practices or frameworks might fall into what
        STLHE calls “leading significant transformation in teaching and learning at an institutional [or]
        disciplinary…level” (STLHE 2024c, The Criteria). Similarly, sitting on a committee to adjudicate
        internal teaching awards would be service, but it could be EL to be involved in the reflective
        process to articulate the institution’s values around teaching for a new award, or to serve as the
        inaugural chair of a committee developing a policy and laying the groundwork for new activities
        that support teaching and learning.

        Measuring the Impact of Educational Leadership

                 Once individuals and institutions have considered the kinds of distinctions noted above in
        coming to terms with their agreed understandings of educational leadership, there is a need to
        reflect upon ways to document and assess this kind of work for promotion or awards. To trace the
        emergence of the ideas and language of educational leadership, our brief review highlights not
        only practices and processes that EL encompasses, but also the important challenge of
        demonstrating the impact of educational leadership activities and initiatives. Faculty members are
        increasingly being required to demonstrate not only that they have enacted forms of EL, but also
        that these activities have had some kind of impact beyond the classroom (e.g., on their departments,
        on other faculty members, on schools and faculties, on their institutions, on their professional
        disciplines, and even at the level of society). As a nominee for an award or a faculty member
        seeking tenure or promotion, documenting impactful EL can be a daunting task, particularly if their
        institution does not provide a definition of EL or refers generally to only a few of the many
        activities that constitute EL. For instance, Memorial University’s President’s Award for
        Distinguished Teaching includes as examples for demonstrating the impact of EL: “letters of
        support that speak to the nominee’s educational leadership contributions and impact; descriptions
        of contributions to teaching and learning related committees, working groups, or task forces; and
        media coverage related to teaching and learning initiatives the nominee has led” (Memorial
        University, 2022, p.2).
                 The most substantial investigation into the measurable impact of EL is a discussion paper
        by Welsh et al. (2018), which seeks to support faculty members going forward for promotion and
        tenure. They provide specific examples of activities undertaken by instructors in the Faculty of
        Science at the University of British Columbia that do and do not constitute educational leadership
        based on their “scope of impact” under UBC’s terms of collective agreement (Welsh et al., 2018).
        In one sample case discussed, an instructor created an online teaching package of case studies for
        illustrating key concepts in biology. This example is considered educational leadership because it



https://doi.org/10.5206/cjsotlrcacea.2024.3.17715                                                                                   14

                               Symbaluk et al.: The Emergence of Formalized Educational Leadership in Higher Education



       shows evidence of impact on practice (re: the development of an instructor guide that enables
       others to make use of case studies in the teaching of biology), impact on student success (re:
       improved student engagement with course materials), and even impact on other instructors (who
       benefit from using case studies in their courses with their students) (Welsh et al., 2018, p. 11).
       Conversely, they argue that an organized series of math and engineering lectures for high school
       students would be considered “meaningful service” but not educational leadership because this
       activity encourages students to pursue STEM in high school and be qualified applicants to
       university. It is not educational leadership, as defined by the Collective Agreement, since the
       impact of the educational leaders’ activity does not extend beyond this lecture series, which in this
       case, would be considered the instructor’s ‘classroom.’ “To be considered educational leadership,
       the course design model of involving the community in the course’s development and evaluation
       would need to be published and/or adopted by other educators” (Welsh et al., p.18).
               A second resource that helps to guide us on how to demonstrate and validate the impact of
       educational leadership work comes in the form of centres for teaching and learning. For example,
       the University of Victoria’s Faculty Institute of Teaching (FIT) offers an STLHE-accredited three-
       part program for faculty members on multiple aspects of teaching: Research-informed course
       design principles (FIT 1), discovery research and related teaching (FIT 2), and a program focusing
       on educational leadership (FIT 3). FIT 3 is designed to help faculty members understand, through
       a variety of means such as readings and guest presentations, what EL is and what it looks like in
       practice “at the local, national, and international level” (University of Victoria, 2024b). For
       instance, some of the authors designed and led a workshop as a guest presentation for FIT 3 to
       explain the ways in which EL is manifested in the practices of teacher-scholars recognized by 3M
       for work in the field, including curricular projects, published teaching materials (e.g., textbooks,
       teaching guides, and open access resources), and innovative capacity building (e.g., through
       collaborative efforts, mentoring colleagues, and supervising graduate and undergraduate students)
       (Symbaluk et al., 2022).
               The University of British Columbia’s Centre for Teaching, Learning and Technology
       (CTLT) has the most comprehensive resources we have found to date in Canada on educational
       leadership and its assessment. In addition to a definition, examples, and an overview of how the
       teaching ranks are established through EL, there are other tools to assist faculty members in
       understanding EL and for documenting EL in practice. One key resource, the Educational
       Leadership Mapping (ELM) tool, provides a process for reflecting upon and illustrating various
       dimensions of EL within components of teaching (see Figure 2) and locating individual activities
       as practitioner (in one’s own teaching), manager (administrative), and leader (influencing beyond
       one’s own scope of practice). UBC recommends using this tool as the first phase of a reflection on
       educational leadership: the “ELM helps you specify your activities across dimensions of teaching
       (delivery, design, professional development and dissemination) and levels of enactment (what the
       individual does, what is enabled, what is changed / led by the individual)” (UBC, 2024f).




Published by Scholarship@Western, 2024                                                                                   15

                               The Canadian Journal for the Scholarship of Teaching and Learning, Vol. 15, Iss. 3 [2024], Art. 17



        Figure 2
        Educational Leadership Mapping Tool (UBC)




                UBC’s CTLT also provides a Teaching and Learning Impact Framework (TLIF) to assist
        faculty members in describing and portraying their EL accomplishments in terms of their
        corresponding impact. Evidence for EL is framed as having an impact on “people,” “process”
        and/or “product” (UBC, 2024g). Impacts on people can be related to “practice” (where there is a
        creation and dissemination of resources that assist individuals or departments) or they can include
        more direct impacts on “students” (e.g., through enhanced engagement and learning). Impacts on
        process include “approaches and priorities,” where initiatives support programs, schools/ faculties,
        and institutional goals or they take the form of “support” directed at capacity building (e.g.,
        workshops, training programs). The impact of EL work on product is evident through “curriculum”
        efforts such as the development of new courses and modes of delivery, or via “literature” where
        EL efforts are disseminated through various forms of presentations and publications (UBC,
        2024g). The TLIF identifies “tangible outputs” as:

                   •    What new learning opportunities / teaching materials / courses / programs / assessment
                        strategies did a particular activity create?



https://doi.org/10.5206/cjsotlrcacea.2024.3.17715                                                                                   16

                               Symbaluk et al.: The Emergence of Formalized Educational Leadership in Higher Education




                 •    What does the individual / their colleagues / the Department / the institution /
                      colleagues beyond the institution now do differently as a result of the activity?
                 •    What supports, resources, events, workshops, capacities / partnerships now exist as a
                      result of the activity?
                 •    What publications, conference proceedings / presentations or other dissemination or
                      knowledge mobilization mechanisms now exist as a result of the activity? (UBC,
                      2024g).

       Finally, the TLIF document provides a useful starting point for finding sites of evidence for impact:

                 •    Quantitative data, e.g. number of participants, performance or other measures of
                      learning, enrollments, degree pathways, placements, views, users, purchasers, citations
                      and impact factors.
                 •    Qualitative data, e.g. course / program evaluations of effectiveness through student
                      surveys, analysis of writing activities, focus group, interviews.
                 •    Awards, Recognition and Distinctions in the area of teaching and learning (e.g. UBC
                      Killam Teaching Awards, Department / Faculty teaching awards, external Fellowships,
                      3M National Teaching Fellowship).
                 •    Student evaluations of teaching (quantitative and qualitative data).
                 •    Evidence of impact on students (reflective e-mails, social media).
                 •    Evidence of impact on other colleagues, Departments, institutions (emails, letters,
                      communications indicating adoption of practices, materials, designs, assessments etc.).
                 •    Materials, activities or feedback from workshops, panels, conferences, invited
                      presentations, networks, communities of practice.
                 •    Publications, proceedings, podcasts, digital artifacts and media articles.
                 •    Grants and awards for development and enhancement. (UBC, 2024g).

       These frameworks are by far the most detailed in the Canadian post-secondary landscape. We cite
       them here at length to facilitate further conversation about educational leadership and to help
       formalize the definition and assessment of educational leadership in Canadian universities.

                            Conclusion and Unifying Definition of Educational Leadership

                Site-specific discussions on the nature and definitions of EL are ongoing, and while there
       are many consistencies, not all are moving in identical directions. As we document above, many
       institutions and programs are closely aligned in many areas, though the function of SoTL as a
       category and the question of innovation as a defining element are sites of some inconsistency
       within the timeline described by this work. The specific phrase educational leadership is present
       in several of the collective agreements for Canadian universities, and language around the work it
       represents is even more common. Our goals with this analysis are to provide a 2023 snapshot of
       how educational leadership is articulated in Canada, and to spark a conversation about EL, how it
       is defined, and what it means within the Canadian university context, by way of their institutional,
       contractual, and scholarly practices, as well as in terms of its role in expanding function in
       definitions of award-worthy teaching.
                Among existing definitions of EL, the University of British Columbia has laid the most
       groundwork, providing examples of activities that demonstrate EL in practice, and formalizing it


Published by Scholarship@Western, 2024                                                                                   17

                               The Canadian Journal for the Scholarship of Teaching and Learning, Vol. 15, Iss. 3 [2024], Art. 17



        within contract language and awards criteria. It also has a plethora of supporting resources for
        categorizing and assessing the impact of EL. Recall UBC’s core definition: “Educational
        leadership is activity taken at UBC and elsewhere to advance innovation in teaching and learning
        with impact beyond one’s classroom.” Its impact is clear in that other institutions, such as
        Lakehead University, have incorporated sections of UBC’s definition into their own collective
        agreements. It may be that we do not see EL consistently defined in other ways because UBC was
        the first to use terms like “impact beyond the classroom” and to formally define “educational
        leadership” and its assessment in contractual terms (see UBC, 2014, pp. 65–66). The general
        outline of this definition helps universities to enable recognition and facilitation of a wide range
        of activities reflective of different disciplinary practices.
                Two influential existing definitions, STLHE’s and UBC’s, foreground the concept of
        innovation. We suggest recognizing the influence of these definitions but changing the language
        of innovation to a language of advancement to acknowledge that educational leaders may use
        innovative means, such as newly developed pedagogies, but they may also use other means such
        as tried and true practices and research on teaching, to advance excellence in teaching with lasting
        impact. Advancement may include innovation, but it encompasses a broader set of impacts that
        more fully represent the range of definitions and criteria that we have documented in the Canadian
        context. Hence, as we look ahead to considerations and reconsiderations of this emerging criterion
        for promotion, tenure, and awards in Canadian universities, we recommend a working definition
        of EL as follows: Educational leadership consists of research and practice-based activities
        undertaken to advance knowledge and excellence in teaching and learning, as measured through
        lasting impact beyond one’s own classroom. Such activities may, but need not, include engagement
        in the scholarship of teaching and learning (SoTL), dissemination of teaching-related research,
        the development of teaching-based resources, scholarly teaching practices, various forms of
        mentorship, significant forms of curriculum development, and formal leadership initiatives.
        Educational leadership work may be disseminated in various ways, but need not extend to formal
        publication. While this definition can be used as a unifying framework for articulating what is and
        is not currently considered educational leadership at the Canadian universities in our sample,
        additional research is needed to determine if the term “educational leadership” and its affiliated
        activities are included in criteria for tenure, promotion, and/or teaching-based awards at
        universities and other types of Canadian post-secondary institutions outside of the scope of
        Maclean’s rankings.

                                                                       References

        Acai, A., Ahmad, A., Fenton, N., Graystone, L., Phillips, K., Smith, R., & Stockley, D. (2018). The
              3M National Teaching Fellowship: A high impact community of practice in higher
              education. Teaching and Learning Inquiry, 6(2), 50–66.
              https://doi.org/10.20343/teachlearninqu.6.2.5
        Ahmad, A., Stockley, D., & Moore, R. (2013). 3M Fellows making a mark in higher education. In
              D. J. Salter (Ed.). Cases on quality teaching practices in higher education (pp. 182–190).
              IGI Global.
        Brock University (2024). Distinguished Teaching Award. Centre for Pedagogical Innovation.
              https://brocku.ca/pedagogical-innovation/awards-grants/distinguished-teaching-
              award/#1578680961082-90d997d2-b971




https://doi.org/10.5206/cjsotlrcacea.2024.3.17715                                                                                   18

                               Symbaluk et al.: The Emergence of Formalized Educational Leadership in Higher Education



       Canning, J., & Masika, R. (2022). The scholarship of teaching and learning (SoTL): the thorn in
              the flesh of educational research. Studies in Higher Education, 47(6), 1084–1096.
              https://doi.org/10.1080/03075079.2020.1836485
       Carusetta, E. (2001). Evaluating teaching through teaching awards. New Directions for Teaching
              and Learning, 88, 31–40. https://doi-org.ezproxy.macewan.ca/10.1002/tl.35
       Dwyer, M. (2023, October 12). Maclean’s university rankings 2024: Our methodology. Maclean’s
              Education. https://education.macleans.ca/feature/macleans-university-rankings-2024-our-
              methodology/
       Lakehead University (2020). An agreement between the board of governors of Lakehead
              University and The Lakehead Faculty Association: September 1, 2020 to August 31, 2022.
              https://www.lakeheadu.ca/sites/default/files/uploads/63/LUFA%20Collective%20Agreeme
              nt%202020%20through%202022%20-Signed%20%281%29.pdf
       McGill University (2016). Regulations relating to the employment of tenure track and tenured
              academic staff. Appendix A: Guidelines for developing a teaching portfolio.
              https://www.mcgill.ca/secretariat/files/secretariat/employment_of_tenure_track_and_tenur
              ed_academic_staff_regs_relating_to.pdf.
       Memorial University (2022). President’s Award for Distinguished Teaching. General information,
              eligibility, and criteria. https://www.citl.mun.ca/TeachingSupport/DT_General.pdf
       Potter, M. K., & Kustra, E. D. H. (2011). The relationship between scholarly teaching and SoTL:
              Models, distinctions, and clarifications. International Journal for the Scholarship of
              Teaching and Learning, 5(1). https://doi.org/10.20429/ijsotl.2011.050123
       Simon Fraser University (2024). Collective agreement: Simon Fraser University Faculty
              Association and Simon Fraser University. https://www.sfu.ca/content/dam/sfu/faculty-
              relations/collective-agreement/CA2019_2022.pdf
       STLHE (2024a). Resources. Society for Teaching and Learning in Higher Education.
              https://www.stlhe.ca/resources/
       STLHE (2024b). Awards. Society for Teaching and Learning in Higher Education.
              https://www.stlhe.ca/awards
       STLHE (2024c). The criteria for the 3M fellowship. Society for Teaching and Learning in Higher
              Education. https://www.stlhe.ca/the-criteria-for-the-3M-fellowship/
       Stockley, D., Smith, R., Ahmad, A., & Hastings Truelove, A. (2019). Making a difference: Three
              decades of Canada’s only national teaching award. The Canadian Journal for the
              Scholarship of Teaching and Learning, 10(1).
              https://doi.org/10.5206/cjsotl-rcacea.2019.1.7998.
       Symbaluk, D. G., Andrews, D. M., & Potter, T. (2022, December 6). Leading with Brain and
               Heart: Documenting and activating educational leadership. Invited workshop. Faculty
               Institute of Teaching (FIT), Victoria, British Columbia.
       Symbaluk, D. G., Andrews, D. M., Potter, T., & Zecevic, A. A. (2024). Documenting and activating
               best practices of educational leadership and authentic teaching. Collected Essays on
               Teaching and Learning, 15(1). https://doi.org/10.22329/celt.v15i1.7848
       University of British Columbia (2014). Collective agreement between the University of British
               Columbia and the Faculty Association of the University of British Columbia: July 1, 2014
               - June 30, 2016. https://www.facultyassociation.ubc.ca/wp-content/uploads/Faculty-CA-
               2014-to-2016.pdf
       University of British Columbia (2023). Guide to reappointment, promotion and tenure procedures
              at UBC. https://hr.ubc.ca/sites/default/files/documents/SAC%20Guide.pdf



Published by Scholarship@Western, 2024                                                                                   19

                               The Canadian Journal for the Scholarship of Teaching and Learning, Vol. 15, Iss. 3 [2024], Art. 17



        University of British Columbia (2024a, January 29). PAIR reports. Office of Planning and
              Institutional Research. https://pair.ubc.ca
        University of British Columbia (2024b). About. Teaching and Learning Enhancement Fund.
              https://tlef.ubc.ca/about/
        University of British Columbia (2024c). Services. Institute for the Scholarship of Teaching and
              Learning (ISoTL). https://isotl.ctlt.ubc.ca/services/
        University of British Columbia (2024d). Skylight development grants. UBC Skylight: Science
              Centre for Learning and Teaching. https://skylight.science.ubc.ca/grants/skylight
        University of British Columbia (2024e). Indigenous Strategic Plan.
              https://indigenous.ubc.ca/indigenous-engagement/indigenous-strategic-plan/
        University of British Columbia (2024f). Educational leadership mapping (ELM) tool. Centre for
              Teaching, Learning and Technology.
              https://ctlt.ubc.ca/programs/all-our-programs/teaching-and-educational-leadership/an-
              educational-leadership-mapping-elm-tool-for-teaching-and-educational-leadership/
        University of British Columbia (2024g). Teaching and learning impact framework (TLIF). UBC
              resources to understand educational leadership.
              https://ctlt2013.sites.olt.ubc.ca/files/2022/11/teaching-and-learning-
              framework_form1_2022.pdf
        University of British Columbia Faculty Association (2022). Collective agreement between the
               University of British Columbia and the Faculty Association of the University of British
               Columbia: July 1, 2022 to June 30, 2025. Article 4.04 Educational Leadership.
               https://www.facultyassociation.ubc.ca/collective-agreement/
        University of Calgary (2024). Apply to the Teaching and Learning Grants Program. Taylor
               Institute for Teaching and Learning. https://taylorinstitute.ucalgary.ca/grants/apply
        University of Guelph (2024). Guidelines for the awarding of the John Bell Award. Eligibility and
              Criteria. https://www.uoguelph.ca/secretariat/menu/university-honours-awards/john-bell-
              award/guidelines-awarding-john-bell-award
        University of Toronto (2024). Criteria. President’s Teaching Award.
              https://www.provost.utoronto.ca/awards-funding/presidents-teaching-award
        University of Toronto’s Governing Council (2021). Attributes of educational leadership and/or
              achievement and ongoing pedagogical/professional development section. Policy and
              procedures governing promotion in the teaching stream.
              https://governingcouncil.utoronto.ca/system/files/2021-
              01/Policy%20and%20Procedures%20Governing%20Promotions%20in%20the%20Teachi
              ng%20Stream%20Jan%201%202021.pdf
        University of Victoria (2024a). Award criteria. Harry Kickman Alumni Award for Excellence in
              Teaching and Educational Leadership.
              https://teachanywhere.uvic.ca/teaching-awards/harry-
              hickman/#:~:text=The%20Harry%20Hickman%20Alumni%20Award,in%20teaching%20
              and%20educational%20leadership.
        University of Victoria (2024b). Teach anywhere: Resources and supports for teaching in the
              classroom and beyond. Faculty Institute of Teaching (FIT).
              https://teachanywhere.uvic.ca/enhance-your-teaching/teaching-programs/faculty-institute-
              of-teaching-fit/
        University of Windsor (2024). Educational Leadership Award. Centre for Teaching and Learning
              (CTL). https://www.uwindsor.ca/ctl/422/educational-leadership-award



https://doi.org/10.5206/cjsotlrcacea.2024.3.17715                                                                                   20

                               Symbaluk et al.: The Emergence of Formalized Educational Leadership in Higher Education



       Welsh, A., Sherman, S., Harris, S., Campbell, A., Birol, G., & Allen, S. (2018). Examples of
             educational leadership from the Faculty of Science, University of British Columbia: A
             discussion paper. University of British Columbia.
             https://science.ubc.ca/sites/science.ubc.ca/files/FacultyofScience_EL_DP.pdf
       Western University (2018). Faculty collective agreement between the University of Western
             Ontario and the University of Western Ontario Faculty Association: July 1, 2018 – June 30,
             2022. https://www.uwo.ca/facultyrelations/pdf/collective_agreements/faculty.pdf




Published by Scholarship@Western, 2024                                                                                   21