Vrije Universiteit Brussel




Educational leadership styles and practices perceived by academics: An exploratory study of
selected Chinese universities


Cheng, Zhao; Zhu, Chang

Published in:
Educational Management Administration & Leadership


DOI:
10.1177/17411432241294171


Publication date:
2024


License:
Unspecified


Document Version:
Accepted author manuscript


Link to publication




Citation for published version (APA):
Cheng, Z., & Zhu, C. (2024). Educational leadership styles and practices perceived by academics: An
exploratory study of selected Chinese universities. Educational Management Administration & Leadership, 1-19.
Article DOI: 10.1177/17411432241294171. https://doi.org/10.1177/17411432241294171




Copyright
No part of this publication may be reproduced or transmitted in any form, without the prior written permission of the author(s) or other rights
holders to whom publication rights have been transferred, unless permitted by a license attached to the publication (a Creative Commons
license or other), or unless exceptions to copyright law apply.



Take down policy
If you believe that this document infringes your copyright or other rights, please contact openaccess@vub.be, with details of the nature of the
infringement. We will investigate the claim and if justified, we will take the appropriate steps.

Download date: 11. Apr. 2026

Educational leadership styles and practices perceived by academics: an exploratory study of
selected Chinese universities


Zhao Cheng, Chang Zhu



Department of Educational Sciences, Vrije Universiteit Brussel (VUB), Brussels, Belgium



Corresponding author:

Zhao Cheng, Department of Educational Sciences, Vrije Universiteit Brussel, Pleinlaan 2, 1050 Brussels,
Belgium. Email: zhao.cheng@vub.be

ORCID Number: https://orcid.org/0000-0003-4252-2141



Authors biographies

Zhao Cheng is a postdoctoral researcher in the Department of Educational Sciences, Vrije Universiteit Brussel
(VUB). His research mainly focuses on higher education governance, academic leadership, learning strategies
and learning motivation. ORCID Number: https://orcid.org/0000-0003-4252-2141


Chang Zhu is a professor in Educational Sciences at Vrije Universiteit Brussel (VUB). Her research mainly
focuses on higher education governance and academic leadership, the implementation of educational
innovations in schools and higher education and the examination of cultural, organizational culture, and
innovations in higher education. ORCID Number: https://orcid.org/0000-0002-0057-275X




Cite article:
Cheng, Z., & Zhu, C. (2024). Educational leadership styles and practices perceived by
academics: An exploratory study of selected Chinese universities. Educational Management
Administration & Leadership, 0(0). https://doi.org/10.1177/17411432241294171

Educational leadership styles and practices perceived by academics: an exploratory study of
selected Chinese universities


                                                      Abstract


Universities have faced enormous challenges in China, requiring educational leaders to meet the demands of

change. The purpose of this study is to explore academic members’ descriptions of their personal educational

leadership styles, leadership practices, the influence of organizational structure features on educational leadership

practices, and to examine the effect of educational leadership practice on teaching and learning at selected Chinese

universities. Through qualitative research design, we inquired about the views of 15 academic members from nine

Chinese universities. A content analysis method by MAXQDA2022 is used in this study. The findings provide a

comprehensive picture of educational leadership styles, practices, and the perceived effects of educational

leadership practices on teaching and learning in the context of selected Chinese universities. The results can be

helpful for educational leaders in optimizing educational leadership practices to improve teaching and learning at

higher education institutions.


Keywords

Educational leadership practice, leadership styles, higher education, teaching and learning, organizational
structure



Introduction



The field of higher education (HE) is plagued by challenges including technological development and political

issues, as well as demands on the education sector worldwide (Cheng et al., 2023, 2024). This has challenged the

educational leaders to respond education related problem, and there is an urgent need for educational leaders to

develop new competencies, knowledge and skills in addition to their traditional expertise, as they are critical to

advancing and shaping education in universities (Tran and Nghia, 2020; Cheng et al., 2023, 2024). According to

Cheng and Zhu (2021), educational leadership at Chinese higher education institutions (HEIs) was defined as a

significant impact on learning and teaching in way of mentoring, disseminating scholarship, sharing knowledge

etc. Zheng et al. (2018) concluded that the published literature relevant to educational leadership in China still

leans towards two forms of non-empirical work, namely prescription (telling educational leaders about what the

reform should do) and commentary (focusing on the challenges and problems confronting by the educational

leaders). Educational leaders in China need to accommodate the demands of reform in the top-down decision

making and appointment context; and their emotional responses, as they implement reform programmes (Zheng

et al., 2018). Many articles have been written exploring different aspects of educational leadership in China, for

example Wang (2008) compared the Chinese concept of educational leadership with that of the West (Dimmock,

2020). There is limited research of educational leadership in the HE context. We believe it is essential for solving

current higher education challenges as it resonates with the participation of internal and external stakeholders in

formulating strategies to deal with complex challenges (Burkhardt, 2002).




Many higher education institutions around the world are striving to survive and seek competitive advantages

through innovation (Gaspar and Mabic, 2015). Therefore, the factors affecting the innovation, knowledge sharing,

institute development of higher education institutions have always represented the most important areas in the

field of organizational research (Elrehail et al., 2018), especially the previous studies on higher education

emphasized educational leadership practice and knowledge sharing practices have played an important role (Lu

and Smith, 2020). However, educational leadership is often mentioned as an adjunct factor or practical implication

for theoretical development, the concept of educational leadership has only received limited systematic and

analytical understanding in the study of institute development (Frisk et al., 2023). The foregoing also shows that

extensive research on educational leadership has been neglected in Chinese HE. Research by social constructivists

has shown that the environment is not only a given situation, but also actively created, that is, placed by the leader

(Schiffecker and McNaughtan, 2022). Although scholars have outlined the agenda in the context of educational

leadership practice (Grootenboer and Hardy, 2017), the relationship between them has not yet received sufficient

attention in leadership research. International evidence from different contexts suggests four broad categories of

successful educational leadership practices that are appropriate for most contexts (Zheng et al., 2018): (1)

identifying directions; (2) developing talent; (3) improving and adapting the organisation; (4) improving the

learning and teaching programme. Zheng et al. (2016) validated these four dimensions in the context of China,

with results supporting its psychometric quality (Zheng et al., 2018). In Chinese HE, academic members play

important roles in the educational leadership practice in the teaching and research groups (Jiaoyanshi) (Qiao et

al., 2018). They discuss issues and materials together, observe model courses and provide feedbacks (Lu and

Smith, 2020). Yet the important role of Jiaoyanshi has not yet received adequate attention in empirical leadership

studies (Lu and Smith, 2020), especially its effect on educational leadership practice and then on teaching and

learning.

Theoretical background and literature review



Conceptualisation of educational leadership



Educational leadership in HE is defined as exerting a noteworthy impact on students and fellow educators through

various activities, including mentoring, knowledge sharing, scholarship disseminating, innovation promoting,

establishing social support networks, and delivering social services (Cheng and Zhu, 2021). The main difference

between educational and academic leadership is that educational leadership places a greater emphasis on

leadership in teaching and learning in HE (Cheng and Zhu, 2021).




Educational Leadership in Chinese HE




Educational leadership practice in Chinese HE is related to the leaders’ title in the leadership mechanism. There

are three vice-deans for research, teaching and administration in the faculty organizational structure, educational

leadership practices of department heads underneath and Jiaoyanshi under each department, including several

academic members, take place at different levels.


In higher education, educational leaders are expected to generate new knowledge, disseminate it quickly, and

leverage their connections and resources in society for this purpose, according to Hannah and Lesterm (2009).

Cheng and Zhu (2021) suggest that in Chinese universities, educational leadership has a significant impact on

students and other teachers by providing mentorship, disseminating scholarship, sharing knowledge, etc.

However, in Chinese higher education, educational leadership is typically characterized by top-down decision-

making and appointments. In order to enhance the quality of teaching and learning while steering culture,

community, and practice in the right direction, it is imperative to gain a more profound comprehension of the

traits associated with educational leadership, as emphasized by Fields et al. (2019) and Cheng and Zhu (2021). It

is worth noting that our understanding of work organization leadership comes mainly from Western research, in

contrast, similar studies are rare in developing countries, such as China (Zhou and Deneen, 2020), where the

institutions and cultural systems are different from those in the West. This situation raises concerns about the

transferability of leadership structures and concepts from the West to the East (Akanji et al., 2020). As far as our

understanding goes, research studies on leadership styles for the higher education sector in China are significantly

underdeveloped.




Educational Leadership and leadership styles




In education, researchers have noted that leadership is exercised not only by individuals but also by teams (Bush

& Glover, 2003). Following that, educational leadership has been viewed from a broader perspective than the

instructional perspective (Daniëls, et al., 2019). As such, educational leadership is considered to be the process of

influencing academics, fellow educators and students (Cheng and Zhu, 2021) and is not necessarily limited to

individual leadership (Daniëls, et al., 2019). Ideally, the process of influencing can lead to an effective academic

teaching and learning climate where all stakeholders (e.g., students, fellow educators, and the community)

experience added value and maintains the organizational processes (monitoring the teaching and learning

processes, developing study programs and allocating resources) running smoothly. In this process, leadership style

is defined as “the nexus of all their behaviours and practices that educational leaders employ to influence the

behaviour of others” (Brauckmann, & Pashiardis, 2011). In this study, this definition was used to guide the

analytical process for leadership styles.




Regarding specific leadership styles, scholars posit that authoritarian and democratic leadership types are situated

at opposite ends of the spectrum of leadership styles, which reflects the varying degrees to which followers are

permitted to participate and the level of dominance exerted by the leader in decision-making (Schoel et al., 2011).

Authoritarian leadership is characterized by the concentration of authority, power, and decision-making in the

hands of the leader (De Hoog et al., 2015). Authoritarian leaders view subordinates “as either contributors or

obstacles to the effort to achieve their goals” (De Luque et al., 2008). Transformational leadership can be

introduced as elements that mitigate the perceived rigidity of authoritarian leaders. This approach aids in

establishing clear expectations while cultivating a sense of personal responsibility among employees, thereby

promoting higher-quality work output (Mustafa, 2020). On the other hand, democratic leaders assign

responsibilities, delegate authority to subordinates, and involve them in the decision-making process (Gastil,

1994). Regarding sharing of control, Goleman (2000) indicate affiliative leaders build relationships in the

workplace, which involves learning how to build trust with others in a given context and requires learning about

harmonized control (Gagnon et al., 2012). Similarly, servant leadership can be used as a basis for staff satisfaction,

increasing their loyalty and willingness to stay in the organization (Harris et al., 2016). Aspects of the

transformation style can be adopted for democratic leaders who value the decision-making process involving all

group members, it can also be adopted for affiliative leaders who value building relationships group members, so

as to further enhance this inclusivity and making every member feel more engaged (Avolio & Bass, 2002).

Research confirmed that leaders should be able to utilise a repertoire of leadership styles (Goleman et al., 2004),

such as transformational leadership style, servant leadership style, affiliative leadership styles, etc. In this study,

the authors aim to explore the features of academic members’ educational leadership styles reflected by their

leadership behaviours.




Leadership practices of educational leaders in HE



Given that educational leaders at all levels are usually responsible for achieving results (Davies et al., 2001), their

views on promoting student learning would reflect this. Therefore, increasing students’ academic performance

may be a top priority for educational leaders (Stensaker et al., 2020). Quality challenges, programs and curriculum

forming also need to be understood through a specific discipline and professional perspective (Young, 2013). As

learning plans and educational products vary in content, teaching styles, and student learning styles, it is expected

to find important differences in what quality challenges educational leaders find in their plans (Biggs and Tang,

2011). In addition, one can also expect, from the perspective of stakeholders, to improve the connection with the

labour market, and the development of programme features that emphasize students’ vocational skills and abilities

are issues that can be regarded as important quality challenges (Stensaker et al., 2020). These are important

agendas for many educational leaders in how to further develop student learning (Stensaker et al., 2020).

Faculty organizational structures related educational leadership practices at Chinese HEIs




                            Figure 1. Faculty organizational structure in Chinese HE.



Educational organizations of teaching and research groups (Jiaoyanshi/Jiaoyanzu) in Chinese HE reflects the

cultural value of collectivism, which is a group of academic members work together on the same subject (Lu and

Smith, 2020; Cheng and Zhu, 2021). Educational leadership practice in Chinese HE is related to the leaders’ title

in the leadership mechanism. As Figure 1 shows, there are three vice-deans for research, teaching and

administration in the faculty organizational structure. And department heads underneath and Jiaoyanshi under

each department, including several academic members, different educational leadership practices take place at

different levels.


In teaching and research groups (Jiaoyanshi), academic members discuss issues and materials together, observe

model courses and provide feedback (Lu and Smith, 2020), which is a common educational leadership model

among Chinese HEIs, having the advantage of offsetting and regulating formal authority (Bush, 2006). Yet despite

we have a basic understanding of the faculty organization structure and its centrality feature, as a critical context,

empirical leadership studies have not sufficiently addressed the crucial significance of Jiaoyanshi’s role (Lu and

Smith, 2020). The effects of educational leaders’ leadership practices among colleagues have rarely been explored

(Zheng et al., 2016). Therefore, the present study aims to explore the educational leadership practice in the faculty

organisational structure and then to examine its effects on teaching and learning.

Effects of educational leadership practices on teaching and learning



Scholars acknowledged that the role of educational leadership is the most important factor affecting education

efficiency and student performance (Jambo and Hongde, 2020). Their research further shows that educational

leaders create and maintain an environment that maximizes the teaching ability of academic members and the

learning ability of students by focusing first on personnel, organizational structure and policies, and finally on

academic achievement. In addition, effective educational leadership can promote innovation and motivate faculty,

staff and students to achieve higher levels of academic achievement (Grunes et al., 2014) thereby ultimately

improving the organization’s innovation capabilities and competitive advantages (Schiffecker and McNaughtan,

2022). Educational leadership has received attention from the Chinese government (Liu et al., 2017). The effects

of educational leadership practices on academics’ communities, individual academic member, teaching and

learning in Chinese HE, however, have been underexplored (Zheng et al., 2019).




Research questions




Attempting to fill these gaps in the above literature, this research aims to investigate, in a contextual manner, the

relationship between organisational structure and educational leadership practices. The primary objective of the

current study is to enhance our comprehension of various leadership styles of educational staff in Chinese

universities, explore their educational leadership practices, and the effects of contextual factors on educational

leadership practices. Accordingly, the following research questions are being addressed:


    1.   What are the (personal) educational leadership styles as illustrated by academic members at selected

         Chinese universities?

    2.   What are the (personal) educational leadership practices reported by academic members at selected

         Chinese universities?

    3.   How do the faculty organizational structure features affect educational leadership practices perceived by

         academic members at selected Chinese universities?

    4.   What are the effects of educational leadership practices on teaching and learning perceived by academic

         members at selected Chinese universities?

Method



Design and Data collection

This study is an exploratory study on the perceptions of academic staff in Chinese universities. Currently there is

limited literature available in Chinese context regarding educational leadership. Consequently, an exploratory

study could prove beneficial for scholars delving into this subject, offering valuable insights to the research

community. These findings may be relevant to other particular context and can provide some useful insights for

the contexts of other Chinese universities.


This study uses qualitative research methods to facilitate this exploration (Creswell, 2009). Semi-structured

interviews (Creswell, 2007) were conducted with 15 academic members (Guest et al., 2006) who were selected

across nine Chinese universities, including north, south, east and west of China to reflect the diversity and

inclusivity of the sample. Guest et al. (2006) suggest that in qualitative studies, 12 interviews could be sufficient

to reach data saturation. Purposive sampling was used to select universities from different parts of China. After

that, convenience sampling was used to select universities in each region and academics to participate in this

exploratory research. This approach was chosen due to its cost-effectiveness (Etikan et al., 2016; Marshall, 1996),

simplicity, and practicality in rapidly gathering data (Bornstein et al., 2013), as well as its straightforward

implementation (Creswell and Creswell, 2017). Moreover, convenience sampling is particularly valuable in

exploratory research for quickly collecting data to generate initial insights (Teddlie and Yu, 2007; Marshall, 1996),

formulate hypotheses, and identify trends (Onwuegbuzie and Leech, 2007). The nine sample universities are

among the same or similar types of universities including provincial level and national level universities and all

of them are public universities.


During the data collection phase, to ensure data saturation, we engaged in continuous, iterative analysis of the

interview data. This approach involved transcribing and reviewing interviews as they were conducted. After each

interview, the data were transcribed and initially coded, and the data were analyzed for emerging themes, patterns,

and insights. These codes were compared with those from previous interviews to identify recurring themes. The

research team held regular meetings to reflect on the findings, adjust interview questions if needed, and ensure

that the emerging data were sufficiently rich and diverse.

Each interview lasted between 40 to 60 minutes, and all of them were recorded in audio and transcribed word-for-

word and translated into English. The transcripts were reviewed by each interviewee in order to ensure that their

narrative was accurately captured, aligning with the rigorous research process advocated by Patton (2002).


Data analysis



The data was analyzed using qualitative content analysis by MAXQDA2022, which was utilized in the initial

stages of coding and visualizing the results, aiding in the creation of codes and categorization. The purpose of

content analysis is to acquire knowledge and comprehend the phenomenon being studied (Hsieh and Shannon,

2005). In order to derive codes from the data as well as the following categories and themes, an inductive approach

was used (Merriam, 2009). As the interviews progressed, we monitored for thematic redundancy— data saturation

was formally recognized when the same themes recurred consistently across different interviews. This indicated

that new data were no longer adding significant value to the emerging patterns. In our study, 13 interviews were

initially planned, data saturation was achieved after conducting 12 of interviews, as no new themes were identified

after 12 interviews, and the data appeared comprehensive and rich in covering the research questions. We

continued with three additional interviews to confirm this observation, at which point data saturation was

determined to be fully achieved. The primary coding and writing tasks were undertaken by the first author, while

the second author handled coding, proofreading, and full-text review. Following the coding phase, the codes

generated were quantified through frequency calculations. Both authors participated in the coding process, and

MAXQDA2022 was employed to assess interrater reliability, yielding a calculated Kappa = 0.72 (McHugh, 2012).

Table 1 presents the demographic characteristics of the participants.




Table 1. Demographic characteristics of the participants.

 Number           Gender           Age            Academic title                Administrative position


 P1               M                44             Associate Professor           Department level


 P2               F                43             Professor                     Faculty/middle level


 P3               F                57             Associate Professor           Jiaoyanshi/lower level


 P4               F                40             Lecturer                      Jiaoyanshi/lower level

 P5                 F                 56          Professor                     Faculty/middle level


 P6                 F                 41          Lecturer                      Jiaoyanshi/lower level


 P7                 M                 54          Associate Professor           Jiaoyanshi/lower level


 P8                 M                 41          Professor                     Faculty/middle level


 P9                 M                 33          Lecturer                      Jiaoyanshi/lower level


 P10                F                 38          Lecturer                      Jiaoyanshi/lower level


 P11                M                 35          Lecturer                      Jiaoyanshi/lower level


 P12                F                 40          Lecturer                      Jiaoyanshi/lower level


 P13                F                 39          Associate Professor           Jiaoyanshi/lower level


 P14                F                 44          Lecturer                      Jiaoyanshi/lower level


 P15                F                 43          Associate Professor           Jiaoyanshi/lower level


P=Participant, Jiaoyanshi=teaching and research office.




Ethical considerations



All interviewees were informed about the confidentiality of their responses, the research purpose, its application,

and the study design, as well as the voluntary nature of their participation. Informed consent was obtained from

all participants for the use of their data.




Results



Educational leadership styles reported by academic members at Chinese universities (RQ1)

                             Figure 2. Reported personal educational leadership styles



Personal leadership styles were identified by Chinese academic members as shown in Figure 2. The most cited

category is transformational leadership style. Regarding the category of affiliative leadership style, the participants

reported them being amiable to students, being patient with the students, building trust with the students and

colleagues and being easy-going with students and colleagues. In addition, interviewees also reported them

possessing the features of democratic leadership style, servant leadership style and laizze-faire leadership.


In this section, based on answers from participant 2 and participant 9, attributes of transformational leadership,

such as showing empathy for students and building mutual trust, are highlighted below; and attributes of affiliative

leadership, such as leading based on a close relationship, is highlighted below.


         I like to empathise with other people’s ideas, and I often think differently when I make decisions. I often

         have this reflection......with a mutual trust. (Transformational leadership) (P2, female, 43 years old,

         professor)


         I'm not far from the students, I'm receptive to young people's ideas, and I lead purely on the basis of

         energy and equality of mind and a closer relationship with them. (Affiliative leadership) (P9, male, 33

         years old, Lecturer)




Educational leadership practices reported by academic members at Chinese universities (RQ2)

Five categories were assigned when the participants answered questions about the educational leadership practices

of academic members based on the interview transcripts as reported in Figure 3.




                                    Figure 3. Educational leadership practices




Participants highlighted leading in teaching behaviours, leading in education planning and administration and

leading in education collaboration as their perceived educational leadership practices. In this section, we selected

leadership practices of leading in teaching behaviours, leading knowledge spillover and leading in education

collaboration in educational leadership practices, their perceptions can be illustrated as below:


         Transferring knowledge to students; supervision for students’ research, ...... we also have practical

         teaching, leading practical teaching for summer postgraduate students. (Leading in teaching

         behaviours and Leading knowledge spillover) (P3, Female, 57 years old, Associate Professor)


         We have Jiaoyanshi discussions, problems we may encounter, around the teaching aspect, and a lot of

         exchange activities. (Leading in education collaboration) (P1, male, 44 years old, associate professor)




Faculty organizational structure’s impact on educational leadership practices (RQ3)



There are two uniqueness of the faculty organizational structure, namely, one vice-dean especially takes charge

of teaching affairs in the faculty and departments and several Jiaoyanshi under each department. Educational

leadership practices are related to the educational leadership levels in the leadership mechanism in a hierarchical

structure. The set-up of the Jiaoyanshi has enabled academic members to learn and grow together in their teaching,

but on the other hand under such an organisational mechanism of educational leadership, tasks are distributed

sequentially from top to bottom, resulting in a heavy workload for young academic members. For example:


         There are several Jiaoyanshi under a department each Jiaoyanshi includes several academic members,

         who have discussions and ideas to solve problems in teaching and student guidance from time to time,

         ...... decisions made at the faculty level, then specific tasks assigned to specific Jiaoyanshi and academic

         members, tasks such as applications, and demonstrations. Young academic members usually do more

         in this session. (P9, 33 years old, male, lecturer)




Effects of educational leadership practices on teaching and learning (RQ4)




                 Figure 4. Effects of educational leadership practices on teaching and learning




As reported in Figure 4, the two themes leading teaching and leading student learning under seven categories of

the effects of educational leadership practice were emphasized by the participants. In this section, the effects of

educational leadership practices on institute development through programs orientation and developing new

programs are underscored, and effects on educational leadership in institute development, teaching innovation

and learning innovation through stimulating human potential are highlighted based on answers from participant 9

and participant 10. Their perceptions are illustrated below:

         Good educational leadership practice is reflected in the concept of leadership, which can stimulate

         human potential, for example, teachers will be open-minded and creative in their teaching mode if there

         is less-controlling educational leadership, students will be more interested and more conducive to the

         stimulation of ideas. (Teaching innovation and learning innovation) (P9, male, 33, lecturer)


         The educational leadership has an important influence on future development orientation, improving or

         starting new programs according to market and social needs, the enrolment ratio, the employment

         prospects of students, the organisation culture, and also the subtle influence on the atmosphere among

         colleagues. (Educational leadership in institute development) (P10, female, associate professor, 38)




Discussion and implications



Personal educational leadership styles of academic members at Chinese universities (RQ1)



With regard to participants reported personal leadership styles, the most reported category is transformational

leadership. The findings indicate that academic members in China hold potential for both understanding and

conceptualizing the transformative changes to students (Aguirre and Martinez, 2006). Moreover, their style of

transformation may be very suitable for leading the awareness and organizational learning process necessary for

changes to occur (Kezar, 2014). Further study can be conducted with regard to how transformational leadership

styles lead to students learning outcomes and organizational learning process.


Of those other emphasized leadership styles, reported affiliative leadership style is one of the main personal

leadership styles of academic members in Chinese HE, compare to previous studies by (Saxena et al., 2017), this

finding does not show senior leaders do not use affiliative styles, future studies can further investigate this

relationship in Chinese higher education context. Affiliative leadership is unique due to Chinese seniority culture

(Cheng and Zhu, 2021), while enjoying the respect brought by this cultural tradition, academic members would

also bear this tacit obligation to care for the younger generation and promoting harmonious and personal

relationships (Lu and Smith, 2020). With such leadership, the relationship between teachers and students is further

brought closer (Gagnon et al., 2012) and facilitates communication between teachers and students, thus better

facilitating teaching and learning. It would be interesting to conduct further study regarding the relationship among

affiliative leadership style, teacher-student communication and relationship, and eventually student learning

outcomes.


Transformational and affiliative leadership styles may contribute to a focus on future professional development.

Effective leaders need to understand when to employ each style can enhance leadership effectiveness and adapt

their leadership styles based on the specific context and challenges. A balance of leadership styles can be

beneficial. For example, combining elements of transformational leadership with democratic decision-making can

create a dynamic leadership approach that fosters both innovation and inclusivity. While providing autonomy is

essential, educational leaders need to be cautious about the potential drawbacks of laissez-faire leadership, such

as a lack of direction. Clear communication and support mechanisms should be in place to mitigate any negative

impact. Educational leaders, particularly those adopting transformational and servant leadership, can play a crucial

role in cultivating a culture of ethical behaviour and values within the academic community.




Educational leadership practices of academic members at Chinese universities (RQ2)



The educational leadership practices that interviewees perceived are well supported by the literature on

educational leadership in HE, where leading in teaching behaviours is presented as the critical educational

leadership practice for an educational leader in HE context and is reconciled with the study of Fields et al. (2019).

As a theoretical contribution, other sorts of educational leadership practices are suggested as essential for

academic members in Chinese HE. Among them, educational leaders must offer solutions to curriculum-related

obstacles like logistics, resources, etc. (Sudirman and Gemilang, 2020), formulate reward and punishment

schemes for teachers, and make recommendations on how to encourage the development of disciplines. All of

these demonstrate educational leadership practices in relation to leading in education planning and administration

and leading education collaboration.


Educational leaders can encourage innovative and effective pedagogical practices by supporting faculty

development programs, promoting active learning strategies, and fostering a culture of continuous improvement

in teaching methodologies, ensuring that educators have the necessary skills and knowledge to excel in their

teaching roles. Besides, educational leaders play a crucial role in developing and implementing strategic plans for

academic institutions, they need to make informed decisions about resource allocation, including budgeting,

staffing, and infrastructure. Strategic planning in this area can contribute to the overall effectiveness and

sustainability of the academic institution. Processes and systems can be implemented to ensure quality assurance

in academic programs. This may involve accreditation efforts, program assessments, and continuous improvement

initiatives. In addition, educational leaders can encourage collaboration across academic disciplines, fostering

interdisciplinary initiatives that address complex challenges. This can lead to a more holistic and integrated

approach to education and research.


Regarding the category of leading teaching and research nexus, the balance between teaching and research is an

important issue for academic members, and their imbalance was also revealed by Cheng and Zhu (2021). Leading

teaching and research nexus is one approach to solve this issue. In a way, this also requires academic members to

reform the curriculum they teach. This educational leadership practice places emphasis on inclusion,

multidisciplinary learning, student-centered assessment, and operational culture, as highlighted by Tian and Risku

(2019) while the curriculum reform establishes academic conditions that enhance students’ academic

achievements, instructional methods, and assessment practices (Ma and Shouse, 2019). Further study is suggested

on whether and how leading teaching and research nexus can motivate educational leaders on teaching

commitment and students’ involvement and learning outcomes. Academics need to strike a balance between

promoting high-quality research and maintaining a commitment to excellence in teaching. Institutional strategic

planning and resource allocation are required to support academic members’ engagement in both domains.

Institutions should consider mechanisms for recognizing and rewarding academics’ contributions to both research

and teaching and enhance their motivation and job satisfaction. Educational leaders should facilitate opportunities

of professional development programs for academic members to enhance their skills in both research and teaching

and help them integrate their research expertise into their teaching practices and vice versa. For instance, the

institution can encourage the development of curricula that integrate cutting-edge research findings into teaching,

promoting a dynamic and relevant educational experience for students. A culture of inquiry and curiosity can be

fostered among academic members and students. Encouraging academics to involve students in research projects

or to share their research insights in the classroom enhances the teaching and research connection.


In addition, providing social services and using social media to spread knowledge can lead to knowledge spillover.

To respond to tough competitions in the global challenges, effective coordination and productivity at a heightened

level play a crucial role in the adept management of higher education by educational leaders. Thus, it is imperative

for these leaders to articulate the relationship between organizational collaboration and the resulting outcomes

(Sudirman and Gemilang, 2020). This educational leadership practice contributes to uniting the community

(Fields et al., 2019; Sudirman and Gemilang, 2020). Further research is recommended on the subject of how much

the practice of leading knowledge spillover can contribute the organization and the community. Incentives for

academic members can be created to engage them in interdisciplinary research, collaborative projects, and

knowledge-sharing activities. Furthermore, fostering collaborations with external organizations, industry partners,

and other academic institutions can lead to a broader impact of research and the transfer of knowledge beyond the

academic setting.




Faculty organizational structure features affect educational leadership practices (RQ3)



As the findings show in this study, educational leadership practice is related to the leaders’ title or authority in the

leadership mechanism in Chinese HEIs context. Bush and Haiyan (2000) illustrated that there are certain Chinese

Confucian traditions influence educational leadership in China, and this study enhances and broadens the

framework of leadership and Chinese culture originally proposed by Bush and Haiyan (2000) by contextualising

the educational leadership practice specified in faculty organizational structure in Chinese HE. There are different

leadership practices at different levels based on the findings. Accordingly, practices and faculty organizational

structure features represent two sides of the same coin; they need to be conceived concurrently (Lovett, 2023). On

the other hand, under such an organisational mechanism of hierarchy, tasks are distributed sequentially from top

to bottom, resulting in a heavier workload for young academic members. It’s important to ensure fairness in

assigning responsibilities, taking into account the skills, expertise, and capacity of each academic member

(Khumalo, 2019). The institution should aim for a more equitable distribution of tasks by assessing workloads

regularly, providing support mechanisms for junior members, and ensuring that responsibilities are distributed in

a fair and transparent manner. Besides, leaders should communicate expectations clearly by involving young

members in decision-making processes and be transparent about the reasons behind task assignments. This can

help build trust and mitigate potential concerns. The organizational structure and leadership mechanisms should

remain responsive to the evolving needs of the academic members.


Working in Jiaoyanshi (teaching and research group) requires academic members to share responsibility for

“designing or implementing curriculum innovations in the form of (re)design of a course or entire curriculum

and/or improving of teaching and learning” (Gast et al. 2017). As a result of “stressing collectivism” in Chinese

culture (Bush and Haiyan, 2000), collectivism is manifested within higher education through the establishment of

Jiaoyanshi (Lu and Smith, 2020). Within collectivistic Jiaoyanshi, purposeful identification of different

viewpoints can help teams of academic members move beyond their daily work and allow them to develop new

knowledge and solutions on a joint basis (Koeslag-Kreunen et al., 2021). This can enhance the overall teaching

quality and effectiveness within the institution. The collaborative nature of Jiaoyanshi can contribute to the

creation of a supportive community among academic members. This sense of community can positively impact

job satisfaction and overall well-being. In addition, striking a balance between collaborative learning and

individual autonomy is important as well (Vangrieken et al., 2017). While collaboration is valuable, individuals

should also have the autonomy to manage their workloads and pursue their professional goals.




Effects of educational leadership practices on teaching and learning (RQ4)



With regard to effects of educational leadership practices on teaching and learning, under the theme of teaching,

educational leadership in institute development bear the most impact from the educational leadership practice,

which is consistent with Jambo and Hongde’s (2020) research. The role of educational leadership is to create and

maintain an environment that can have a positive impact on faculty development, thereby maximizing academic

members and students’ abilities (Jambo and Hongde, 2020). Educational leadership practice was reported to have

impact on teaching knowledge sharing, teaching innovation, teaching and mentoring and teaching motivation as

well, which is corresponded with the findings of previous studies (Yada and Jäppinen, 2019; Sudirman and

Gemilang, 2020) on knowledge sharing. The educational leadership practices lead to teaching innovation (Elrehail

et al., 2018) and strengthened creativity and innovations (Sudirman and Gemilang, 2020). Educational leadership

practices may promote organizational innovation by motivating employees (Bass and Riggio, 2006) and creating

a good atmosphere for cultivating their creativity and innovative skills, thereby ultimately improving the

organization’s innovation capabilities and outstanding competitive advantages (Schiffecker and McNaughtan,

2022). Together with educational leadership practices, knowledge sharing practices have a major impact on the

organization’s innovation capabilities (Ritala et al., 2015). The findings highlight the importance of providing

opportunities for collaborative research, interdisciplinary projects, and professional development, as this can

enhance the exchange of ideas and expertise among educators (Vangrieken et al., 2017).


Educational leadership practices in HE are reported to impact on student learning as well. The educational

leadership successfully fostered a culture that welcomed the entire community, students included, to actively

participate in the transformative processes (Vuori, 2019). Educational leadership is also recognized as the most

significant determinant of the academic achievement of students (Lovett,2023). Furthermore, learning innovation

is the other category emerged, academic members may exhibit completely different behaviours and practices when

interacting with different students, which is supported by Andriopoulou and Prowse (2020). And as a result, it

ultimately affects students’ learning and research design. Further study is recommended on the relation of how

educational leadership practices can impact on teaching motivation, commitment, effects and students’ academic

outcomes. The findings suggest establishing systems for assessing teaching quality and providing constructive

feedback both from teachers and students can be beneficial. Educational leaders can implement evaluation

mechanisms that focus on both qualitative and quantitative measures to ensure ongoing improvement in teaching

practices and students’ achievement. Additionally, professional development opportunities for academic members

should be provided, including workshops, conferences, and collaborative projects. This helps academics stay

current in their fields and enhances their ability to deliver high-quality instruction.




Limitations and recommendations



There are some limitations to be noted in our research. Our findings draw on reported perceptions rather than

observed behaviours, and therefore these need to be interpreted with caution and cannot be generalised to other

contexts without considering the specific situations. Another limitation lies in the sample size, and participants’

demographic features were not considered as specific variables investigated in the scope of this study, future

studies can include a larger sample size with a more targeted scope and focus on in-depth exploration of this

research topic specifically regarding the differences of educational leadership styles and practices among

demographic variables, such as participants’ positions and disciplines, university regions and levels. Such

investigations could offer valuable perspectives on how educational leadership styles and practices vary among

these variables. While the results’ details may not be directly applicable, the underlying principles and themes

identified in this study can be transferable to similar universities facing similar challenges and issues. Future

comparative analyses can be conducted between this study and existing research from other contexts to help

enhance the transferability and applicability of the results. By identifying commonalities, differences, and patterns

across different settings, researchers can gain a more nuanced understanding of educational leadership and its

development. In addition, quantitative research can also be applied to complement these findings by providing

broader trends and patterns.




Conclusion and contribution

In conclusion, five main educational leadership styles of academic members are identified at selected Chinese

universities in this study, including transformational leadership, affiliative leadership, democratic leadership,

followed by servant leadership, laissez-faire leadership. It also revealed five main categories of educational

leadership practices and the positive role of the Jiaoyanshi of being able to promote exchange and learning among

academic members. In addition, it investigated the educational leadership practices affected by faculty

organizational structure features and the effects of educational leadership practices on teaching and learning.


This study represents a pioneering empirical investigation into educational leadership styles and practices in

Chinese universities. It not only fills a critical gap in the existing literature but also expands the understanding of

how leadership is enacted and perceived in diverse educational settings. The identification of five predominant

educational leadership styles offers a nuanced understanding of the leadership dynamics within higher education.

These findings not only corroborate and extend the foundational theories of Avolio and Bass (2002) and Gagnon

et al. (2012) but also suggest the need to reconsider how these leadership styles manifest in non-Western contexts,

thereby challenging the universality of existing leadership models. Moreover, this study contributes significantly

by uncovering the pivotal role of the Jiaoyanshi in fostering professional exchange and learning among academic

staff, highlighting a culturally specific mechanism that enhances collaborative leadership practices, which has

been overlooked in previous research. By bringing this aspect to light, the study encourages a re-evaluation of the

structures that support leadership development in higher education institutions globally. Additionally, the

exploration of how faculty organizational structure influences leadership practices and, in turn, affects teaching

and learning outcomes offers valuable insights for the design of leadership training and development programs.

The study’s results advocate for a more contextualized approach to leadership development, where training is

tailored to address the specific organizational and cultural contexts of educational institutions.


The study underscores the importance of equipping educational leaders with the requisite knowledge, skills, and

competencies to navigate the complexities of their roles. Furthermore, it opens new avenues for future research to

explore the interplay between leadership styles, cultural contexts, and organizational structures, ultimately

contributing to the advancement of educational leadership theory and practice on a global scale.




Acknowledgements


We would like to show our grateful thanks to the participants who supported this study.

Declaration of conflicting interests

The authors declare no potential conflict of interest related to the research, authorship and/or publication of this

article.




Funding

This research has not received specific funding from any funding body in the public, commercial or non-profit

sectors.




References



Aguirre A and Martinez RO (2006) Diversity Leadership in Higher Education. ASHE-ERIC Higher Education
     Report, 32 (3). San Francisco, CA: Jossey-Bass.

Andriopoulou P and Prowse A (2020) ‘Towards an effective supervisory relationship in research degree
     supervision: insights from attachment theory.’ Teaching in Higher Education, 25(5), 648–661.
     https://doi.org/10.1080/13562517.2020.1731449

Avolio BJ and Bass BM (2002) Developing potential across a full range of Leadership TM: Cases on transactional
     and transformational leadership. London: Psychology Press.

Bass BM and Riggio RE (2006) Transformational Leadership. 2 nd ed. Mahwah, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum
     Associates.

Bassey M (2007) Case studies. In Research methods in educational leadership and management, ed. A. Briggs
     and M. Coleman, 142–55. London: sage.

Biggs J and Tang C (2011). Teaching for quality learning, Berkshire: McGraw-Hill.

Bonesso S, Cortellazzo L and Gerli F (2023) Developing leadership behaviours in higher education: A quasi-
     experimental study on the effect of experiential learning, Innovations in Education and Teaching
     International, 1-15. DOI: 10.1080/14703297.2023.2214125

Bornstein MH, Jager J and Putnick DL (2013) "Sampling in developmental science: Situations, shortcomings,
     solutions, and standards." Developmental Review, 33(4), 357-370.

Brauckmann and Pashiardis P (2011) A validation study of the leadership styles of a holistic leadership theoretical
     framework.       International   Journal      of     Educational       Management,          25(1),     11–32.
     https://doi.org/10.1108/09513541111100099

Brennan RL and Prediger DJ (1981) Coefficient Kappa: Some Uses, Misuses, and Alternatives. Educational and

      Psychological Measurement, 41(3), 687–699. https://doi.org/10.1177/001316448104100307

Bron R, Endedijk MD, van Veelen R and Veldkamp BP (2018) The joint influence of intra‑ and inter‑ team
     learning processes on team performance: A constructive or destructive combination? Vocations and
     Learning, 11(3), 449–474. https://doi.org/10.1007/s12186-018-9197-z

Burkhardt JC (2002) “Boundary Spanning Leadership in Higher Education.” Journal of Leadership and
     Organizational Studies 8 (2): 145–50. https://doi.org/10.1177/107179190200800312

Bush T (2006) “Theories of Educational Management.” International Journal of Educational Leadership
     Preparation 1 (2): n2.

Bush T and Haiyan Q (2000) “Leadership and Culture in Chinese Education.” Asia Pacific Journal of
     Education, 20(2), 58–67. Doi:10.1080/02188791.2000.10600183.

Chen D and Yang X (2021) “Talk the Walk and Walk the Talk”: Gearing Toward a Culturally Responsive
     Leadership Approach. Asia-Pacific Education Researcher, 31(3), 285–295. https://doi.org/10.1007/s40299-
     021-00560-2

Cheng Z and Zhu C (2021) Academic Members’ Perceptions of Educational Leadership and Perceived Need for
     Leadership Capacity Building in Chinese Higher Education Institutions Academic Members’ Perceptions
     of     Educational     Leadership.   Chinese    Education      &     Society,  54(5–6),   171–189.
     https://doi.org/10.1080/10611932.2021.1990621

Cheng Z and Zhu C (2023). Leadership styles of mid-level educational leaders perceived by academic members:
     An exploratory study among Chinese universities. Research in Educational Administration & Leadership,
     8(4), 762-794. https://doi.org/10.30828/real.1255643

Cheng Z, Caliskan A and Zhu C (2023) Academics’ motivation for joining an educational leadership training
     programme and their perceived effectiveness: Insights from an EU-China cooperative project. European
     Journal of Education, 59(1), e12576. https://doi.org/10.1111/ejed.12576

Cheng Z, Zhu C and Dinh NBK (2024) Perceived changes in transformational leadership : The role of motivation
     and perceived skills in educational leadership training under an EU-China cooperation project. European
     Journal of Education, January, 1–20. https://doi.org/10.1111/ejed.12636

Creswell JW (2007) Qualitative inquiry and research design: Choosing among five traditions. London: Sage.

Creswell JW (2009) Research Design: Qualitative, Quantitative, and Mixed Methods Approaches. Thousand Oak:
     SAGE Publications.

Creswell JW and Creswell JD (2017) Research Design: Qualitative, Quantitative, and Mixed Methods
     Approaches. Sage publications.

Daniëls E, Hondeghem A and Dochy F (2019) A review on leadership and leadership development in educational
     settings.        Educational       Research   Review,        27(January        2018),       110–125.
     https://doi.org/10.1016/j.edurev.2019.02.003

Davies J, Hides MT and Casey S (2001) ‘Leadership in higher education’ Total Quality Management 12(7), 1025–
     1030. https://doi.org/10.1080/09544120120096197

Dimmock C (2020) Connecting research and knowledge on educational leadership in the West and Asia: adopting
    a     cross-cultural   comparative   perspective.   Comparative      Education,     56(2),    257–277.
    https://doi.org/10.1080/03050068.2019.1703393

Elrehail H, Emeagwali OL, Alsaad A and Alzghoul A (2018) The impact of Transformational and Authentic
      leadership on innovation in higher education: The contingent role of knowledge sharing. Telematics and
      Informatics, 35(1), 55–67. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.tele.2017.09.018

Etikan I, Musa SA and Alkassim RS (2016) “Comparison of convenience sampling and purposive sampling.”
      American Journal of Theoretical and Applied Statistics, 5(1), 1-4.

Fields J, Kenny NA and Mueller RA (2019) “Conceptualizing Educational Leadership in an Academic
      Development Program.” International Journal for Academic Development 24 (3), 218–31.
      https://doi.org/10.1080/1360144X.2019.1570211

Frisk S, Apelgren BM and Sandoff M (2023) Leadership for teaching and learning: Exploring a department-level
      educational leadership role at a Swedish comprehensive university. Educational Management
      Administration and Leadership, 51(6), 1461–1477. https://doi.org/10.1177/17411432211051882

Gagnon S, Vough HC and Nickerson R (2012) Learning to Lead, Unscripted: Developing Affiliative Leadership
     Through Improvisational Theatre. Human Resource Development Review, 11(3), 299–325.
     https://doi.org/10.1177/1534484312440566

Gaspar D and Mabic M (2015) Creativity in higher education. Universal J. Educ. Res. 3 (9), 598–605.
     http://dx.doi.org/10.13189/ujer.2015.030903

Gast I, Schildkamp K and Van der Veen JT (2017) Team‑based professional development interventions in higher
      education: A systematic review. Review of Educational Research, 87(4), 736–767.
      https://doi.org/10.3102/0034654317704306

Gastil J (1994) A definition and illustration of democratic leadership. Human Relations, 47 (8), 953–975.
      https://doi.org/10.1177/001872679404700805

Goleman D (2000) Leadership that gets results. Harvard Business                        Review,    78(2),   78-90.
     http://www.enterprisingminds.ca/download/leadership_that_gets_results.pdf

Goleman D, Boyatzis RE and McKee A: Primal Leadership: Learning to Lead with Emotional Intelligence.
     Boston, Mass.: Harvard Business School Press; 2004

Grootenboer P and Hardy I (2017) Contextualizing, orchestrating and learning for leading: The praxis and
     particularity of educational leadership practices. Educational Management Administration and
     Leadership, 45(3), 402–418. https://doi.org/10.1177/1741143215595418

Grunes P, Gudmundsson A and Irmer B (2014) To what extent is the Mayer and Salovey (1997) model of
     emotional intelligence a useful predictor of leadership style and perceived leadership outcomes in Australian
     educational institutions? Educational Management Administration and Leadership, 42(1), 112–135.
     https://doi.org/10.1177/1741143213499255

Guest G, Bunce A and Johnson L (2006) How many interviews are enough? An experiment with data saturation
     and variability. Field Methods, 18(1), 59.82. https://doi.org/10.1177/1525822X05279903

Hallinger P (2011) Leadership for learning: Lessons from 40 years of empirical research. Journal of Educational
      Administration, 49(2), 125–142. https://doi.org/10.1108/09578231111116699

Harris K, Hinds L, Manansingh S, Rubino M and Morote ES (2016) “What Type of Leaderhip in Higher Education
      Promotes Job Satisfaction and Increases Retention?” Journal for Leadership and Instruction, 27–32.
      https://files.eric.ed.gov/fulltext/EJ1097552.pdf

Hsieh HF and Shannon SE (2005) Three approaches to qualitative content analysis. Qual Health Res; 15,

     1277‑88.


Jambo D and Hongde L (2020) The effect of principal’s distributed leadership practice on students’ academic
     achievement: A systematic review of the literature. International Journal of Higher Education, 9(1), 189–
     198. https://doi.org/10.5430/ijhe.v9n1p189

Kezar AJ (2014) How Colleges Change: Understanding, Leading, and Enacting Change. New York: Routledge.

Khumalo SS (2019) “Analyzing abusive school leadership practices through the lens of social justice”,
    International   Journal     of    Educational  Management,      33(4),   546-555.     https://doi-
    org.myezproxy.vub.ac.be/10.1108/IJEM-11-2017-0320

Koeslag-Kreunen M, Van den Bossche P, Van der Klink MR and Gijselaers WH (2021) Vertical or shared? When
     leadership supports team learning for educational change. Higher Education, 82(1), 19–37.
     https://doi.org/10.1007/s10734-020-00620-4

Liu S, Xu X, Grant L, Strong J and Fang Z (2017) Professional standards and performance evaluation for
     principals in China: A policy analysis of the development of principal standards. Educational Management
     Administration & Leadership 45(2): 238–259. https://doi.org/10.1177/1741143215587304

Lovett S (2023) Teacher leadership and teachers’ learning: actualizing the connection from day one,
     Professional Development in Education, 49(6), 1010-1021, DOI: 10.1080/19415257.2023.2235583

Lu X and Smith R (2020) Leadership in Chinese higher education and the influence of sociocultural constructs.
     Compare, 00(00), 1–19. https://doi.org/10.1080/03057925.2020.1768827

Ma C and Shouse RC (2019) Filmmaking as untethered educational leadership: examples from American and
    Chinese       cinema.     International  Journal  of     Leadership      in    Education,   1–11.
    https://doi.org/10.1080/13603124.2019.1634839

Mathew V (2010) Service delivery through knowledge management in higher education. J. Knowl. Manage.
     Practice 11, 1–16.

McHugh ML (2012) Interrater reliability: The kappa statistic. Biochemia medica, 22(3), 276–282.


Marshall MN (1996) “Sampling for qualitative research.” Family Practice, 13(6), 522-526.

McHugh ML (2012) Interrater reliability: The kappa statistic. Biochemia medica, 22(3), 276–282.


Merriam S (2009) Qualitative Research: A Guide to Design and Implementation. 3rd edition. San Francisco:
     Jossey-Bass. Methods in Educational Leadership and Management, edited by A. Briggs, M. Coleman, and
     M. Morrison, 75–89. London: Sage.

Onwuegbuzie AJ and Leech NL (2007) “A call for qualitative power analyses.” Quality & Quantity, 41(1), 105-
    121.

Pashiardis P (2004) Educational Leadership: From the Era of Benevolent Neglect to the Current Era, Metaichmio
      Publications, Athens.

Patton MQ (2002) Qualitative research & evaluation methods (3rd ed.). Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage Publications.

Qiao X, Yu S and Zhang L (2018) A review of research on professional learning communities in mainland China
     (2006–2015): Key findings and emerging themes. Educational Management Administration and
     Leadership, 46(5), 713–728. https://doi.org/10.1177/1741143217707523

Ritala P, Olander H, Michailova S and Husted K (2015) Knowledge sharing, knowledge leaking and relative
      innovation        performance:      an      empirical study.    Technovation     35,      22–31.
      http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.technovation.2014.07.011

Saxena A, Desanghere L, Stobart K and Walker K (2017) Goleman’s Leadership styles at different hierarchical
     levels in medical education. BMC Medical Education, 17(1), 1–9. https://doi.org/10.1186/s12909-017-
     0995-z

Schiffecker S and McNaughtan J (2022) Leading the way–Understanding women’s university leadership during
      crisis through a feminist educational leadership lens. Frontiers in Education, 7(September), 1–11.
      https://doi.org/10.3389/feduc.2022.982952

Schoel C, Bluemke M, Mueller P and Stahlberg D (2011) When autocratic leaders become an option—uncertainty
     and self-esteem predict implicit leadership preferences. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 101
     (3), 521–540. https://doi.org/10.1037/a0023393

Sharif MM and Scandura TA (2014) Do Perceptions of Ethical Conduct Matter During Organizational. J Bus
      Ethics, 124, 185-196. https://doi.org/10.1007/s10551-013-1869-x

Spears L (1996) Reflections on Robert K. Greenleaf and servant‐leadership. Leadership & organization
     development journal. 17(7), 33-35. https://doi.org/10.1108/01437739610148367

Stensaker B, Frølich N and Aamodt PO (2020) Policy, Perceptions, and Practice: A Study of Educational
      Leadership and Their Balancing of Expectations and Interests at Micro-level. Higher Education Policy,
      33(4), 735–752. https://doi.org/10.1057/s41307-018-0115-7

Sudirman A and Gemilang AV (2020) Promoting work-based learning as a praxis of educational leadership in
     higher education. International Journal of Learning, Teaching and Educational Research, 19(3), 149–173.
     https://doi.org/10.26803/ijlter.19.3.9

Teddlie C and Yu F (2007) “Mixed methods sampling: A typology with examples.” Journal of Mixed Methods
     Research, 1(1), 77-100.

Tian M and Risku M (2019) A distributed leadership perspective on the Finnish curriculum reform 2014. Journal
     of Curriculum Studies, 51(2), 229–244. https://doi.org/10.1080/00220272.2018.1499806

Tjeldvoll A (2011) “Change Leadership in Universities: The Confucian Dimension.” Journal of Higher Education
      Policy and Management, 33(3), 219–230. doi:10.1080/ 1360080X.2011.564997.

Tran LT and Nghia TLH (2020) Leadership in international education: leaders’ professional development needs
     and tensions. Higher Education, 80(3), 479–495. http://dx.doi.org/10.1007/s10734-019-00494-1

Vangrieken K, Grosemans I, Dochy F and Kyndt E (2017) Teacher autonomy and collaboration: A paradox?
     Conceptualising and measuring teachers’ autonomy and collaborative attitude. Teaching and Teacher
     Education, 67, 302–315. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.tate.2017.06.021

Vuori J (2019) Distributed leadership in the construction of a new higher education campus and community.
     Educational        Management        Administration      and      Leadership,     47(2),    224–240.
     https://doi.org/10.1177/1741143217725322

Wang T (2008) Chinese Educational Leaders’ Conceptions of Learning and Leadership: An Interpretative Study
    in an International Education Context. Germany: VDM Verlag.

Yada T and Jäppinen AK (2019) A systematic narrative review of prosociality in educational leadership.
     Educational        Management     Administration  and     Leadership,      47(6),     980–1000.
     https://doi.org/10.1177/1741143218768579

Young M (2013) ‘Overcoming the crisis in curriculum theory: a knowledge-based approach’, Journal of
    Curriculum Studies 45(2), 101–118. https://doi.org/10.1080/00220272.2013.764505

Zheng X, Yin H and Li Z (2019) Exploring the relationships among instructional leadership, professional learning
     communities and teacher self-efficacy in China. Educational Management Administration and Leadership,
     47(6), 843–859. https://doi.org/10.1177/1741143218764176

Zheng X, Yin H and Wang M (2018) Leading with teachers’ emotional labour: relationships between leadership
     practices, emotional labour strategies and efficacy in China. Teachers and Teaching: Theory and Practice,
     24(8), 965–979. https://doi.org/10.1080/13540602.2018.1508432

Zheng X, Yin H, Liu Y and Ke Z (2016) Effects of leadership practices on professional learning communities:
     the mediating role of trust in colleagues. Asia Pacific Education Review, 17(3), 521–532.
     https://doi.org/10.1007/s12564-016-9438-5