The Interactive Journal of Global Leadership and
                                                                        Learning

Volume 2       Issue 1                                                                                        Article 3


2021

Self-Evaluation of Educational Leadership Practices During
COVID-19
Mike Coquyt
University of Minnesota Moorhead, michael.coquyt@mnstate.edu




Follow this and additional works at: https://red.mnstate.edu/ijgll

    Part of the Curriculum and Instruction Commons, Educational Leadership Commons, Higher
Education Commons, Leadership Studies Commons, and the Online and Distance Education Commons


ISSN: 2692-3394


Recommended Citation
Coquyt, M. (2021). Self-Evaluation of Educational Leadership Practices During COVID-19. The Interactive
Journal of Global Leadership and Learning, 2(1). https://doi.org/10.55354/2692-3394.1025


This Article is brought to you for free and open access by RED: a Repository of Digital Collections, the repository of
Minnesota State University Moorhead.

Self-Evaluation of Educational Leadership Practices During COVID-19

Abstract
Due to the COVID-19 pandemic, school districts, and specifically, superintendents, are under increased
pressure to lead. Irregularity and ambiguity are now the mantras of those tasked with leading in our
schools. Many current research studies aim to evaluate the possible effects of COVID-19 on the system
of education (Azorín, 2020; Hargreaves & Fullan, 2020), and advice on how to lead during a crisis (Harris &
Jones, 2020; Leithwood et al., 2020, Netolicky, 2020). There are no standards or benchmarks to follow
that could potentially aid school leaders as they navigate, lead, and make important decisions that affect
how quality instruction and student learning continues during these turbulent times. Using tolerance for
ambiguity as a framework, this qualitative case study aims to determine precisely how some school
leaders have adjusted their leadership, or not, in the throes of this disruptive pandemic. The results of this
study determined that many superintendents saw the pandemic as another challenge that needed to be
overcome, believed their leadership and organizational skills became sharper, and needed to accede a
measure of control in their district to the state.

Keywords
Educational leadership, COVID-19, hybrid learning, distance learning, tolerance for ambiguity, case study,
deductive coding, inductive coding, decision making, satisficing, sensemaking, reevaluation.

Author Bio
Michael Coquyt, EdD, is currently an associate professor of education at Minnesota State University
Moorhead. He teaches primarily in the educational leadership and curriculum and instruction graduate
programs. Coquyt also coordinates the curriculum and instruction graduate program. He has served as a
superintendent, high school principal, and high school teacher.




   This article is available in The Interactive Journal of Global Leadership and Learning: https://red.mnstate.edu/ijgll/
                                                                                                            vol2/iss1/3

                            Coquyt (2021): Self-Evaluation of Educational Leadership Practices During COVID-




                                                              Introduction

                    Teaching in today’s educational climate is fraught with anxiety, frustration, and

            apprehension for many teachers who now find themselves teaching from home, and utilizing

            online and distance learning techniques that are foreign to them (Bradbury et al., 2020). While

            much attention is given to teaching and learning during this pandemic, and for good reason, little

            consideration has been given to how superintendents in P-12 schools have adjusted and adapted

            their leadership style during this time of uncertainty. Contingency theorists argue that a leader’s

            behavior is a direct result of the general atmosphere of the group and feelings such as trust,

            loyalty and confidence that the group has for its leader. In order to maintain this loyalty and

            confidence, educational leaders have needed to reevaluate their leadership behaviors that may

            have worked previously, and adjust how they lead in an educational environment that can change

            from week to week. In order to do this successfully, a tremendous amount of tolerance for

            ambiguous and sometimes confusing situations is required by the educational leader. This

            research study is motivated by an attempt to discover how educational leadership has adapted to

            the “new normal.”

                    To examine this further, an in-depth qualitative case study utilizing semi-structured

            interviews in various schools in Minnesota was conducted. In addition to the interview

            transcripts, video messages intended to keep the public informed; written announcements and

            learning plans were also investigated via each district’s website. The participants included eight

            superintendents. Years of experience varied from four to 23 years. The size of the district varied

            from just over 300 P-12 students to a little more than 2,500 students.

                    To address any changes in their leadership, all participants were asked to reflect, explain

            and self-evaluate their leadership behaviors during the pandemic in their respective districts.



Published by RED: a Repository of Digital Collections, 2021                                                       1

                           The Interactive Journal of Global Leadership and Learning, Vol. 2 [2021], Iss. 1, Art. 3




            Tolerance for Ambiguity (TA) is the ability to perceive uncertainties, contradictory issues that

            may be difficult to understand, as well as information with vague, contrary or multiple meanings

            in an impartial way (McLain et al., 2015).

                     The history of this study can be traced to governmental action in response to COVID-19.

            As noted by Swaggert et al. (2020),

                     On March 15, Minnesota Governor Tim Walz issued Executive Order 20-02 directing

                     schools in Minnesota to close due to the Covid-19 Pandemic and the ensuing danger to

                     the health and safety of all Minnesotans. From March 16-27, school personnel were

                     directed to create distance learning plans to allow for continuing the education of all

                     students. On March 30, 2020, schools began to implement their learning plans. With just

                     days to plan, all Minnesota teachers were transforming their curriculum to fit a distance

                     learning model. The effort of school leaders, teachers and all school personnel was

                     deemed heroic as students are now learning from home and most teachers are teaching

                     from home. On April 23, 2020, Governor Walz ordered all schools to remain closed for

                     the remainder of the school year to limit the spread of the coronavirus. (p. 1)

                     At the time of this writing, all Minnesota schools were operating under Executive Order

            20-82 and the Safe Learning Plan (SLP) where all public schools must adhere to parameters

            determined by the Minnesota Department of Health (MDH). This plan involved implementing or

            shifting between the three learning models in the 2020-21 school year planning guidance: in-

            person learning, hybrid learning and distance learning (Exec. Order No. 20-82, 2020). To

            determine the base learning model, school districts were advised of the bi-weekly case rate (over

            14 days) by county of residence. These data are the number of COVID-19 cases by county of

            residence in Minnesota over 14 days per 10,000 people by date of specimen collection


https://red.mnstate.edu/ijgll/vol2/iss1/3
DOI: 10.55354/2692-3394.1025                                                                                          2

                            Coquyt (2021): Self-Evaluation of Educational Leadership Practices During COVID-




            (Minnesota Department of Education, 2020, p. 6). The Learning Model Parameters are specified

            in Table 1.

            Table 1

            Learning Model Parameters

                Number of Cases per 10,000 over 14              Learning Model

                    days, by County of Residence

                                    0-9                         In-person Learning for all students



                                  10-19                         In-person learning for elementary students: hybrid

                                                                learning for secondary students



                                  20-29                         Hybrid learning for all students



                                  30-49                         Hybrid learning for elementary students; distance

                                                                learning for secondary students




                                   50+                          Distance learning for all students




                    All of the participants in this study had to transition from one learning model to another

            at some time during the first half of the 2020 school year. Some leadership researchers have

            noticed the importance of TA and have begun to examine how it would affect leadership,

            especially in the field of educational leadership (Fernham & Marks, 2013; Kajs & McCollum,




Published by RED: a Repository of Digital Collections, 2021                                                          3

                           The Interactive Journal of Global Leadership and Learning, Vol. 2 [2021], Iss. 1, Art. 3




            2009, McCollum & Kajs, 2007). Table 2 summarizes the modifications in the delivery model for

            one of the districts that participated in this study.

            Table 2

            Change in Delivery Model

                         Date                Delivery Model Changes

                   9/10/-10/14/20            Pk-6 In Person

                                             7-12 Hybrid A-B

                    10/19-12/3/20            Pk-5 In Person

                                             6-12 Hybrid A-B



                   12/8 -12/18/20            Pk-2 In Person

                                             3-13 Distance Learning

                    12/21-1/8/21             PK -12 Distance Learning



                    1/11-1/29/21             Pk-5 In Person M-Th., Friday is Distance Learning

                                             6-12 Hybrid A-B with synchronous learning M-Th., Friday is

                                             Distance Learning




                     It is no wonder that while vetting the interview questions, one superintendent added, “A

            large component of managing/leading during the pandemic is building and maintaining trust

            among staff and the community. Every time a change happens which is contrary to a previous

            decision, it erodes the positive influence leaders have on a district.”




https://red.mnstate.edu/ijgll/vol2/iss1/3
DOI: 10.55354/2692-3394.1025                                                                                          4

                            Coquyt (2021): Self-Evaluation of Educational Leadership Practices During COVID-




            Purpose

                    While leading their school districts during the unprecedented turmoil COVID-19 has

            caused, this study explored how superintendents assessed their job satisfaction and leadership

            performance as they relate to uncertainty, fluctuating stimuli, unfamiliarity, novelty, and delayed

            selection. Harris (2020) emphasized that leadership, typically found in schools, has changed.

            She asserts,

                    Currently, the staff meetings, coffee catch-ups and corridor chats are gone. All those

                    formal and informal moments where relationships are forged and leadership is enacted

                    vanished overnight. Globally, education leaders, at all levels in the system, spend their

                    time influencing and engaging with others through a laptop or phone screen. (p. 321)

                    Specifically, this case study explored how superintendents are adapting to and coping

            with the pressure of leading a district during this period of uncertainty. The only certainty was

            that every fourteen days, the delivery model used in a particular school might be changing due to

            circumstances beyond their control. Quality teaching and learning need to be at the forefront

            regardless of the situation.

            Context

                    At a recent Dean’s Advisory Council (DAC) meeting in a small Midwestern university,

            the participants explained how their school districts and teachers have been coping during the

            COVID-19 pandemic. The members at this meeting were roughly 20 area superintendents.

            Concerns were expressed about teacher’s experience with teaching online, a lack of internet

            access for some of their students, communication efforts that seemed interminable, and student

            attendance issues. Towards the end of the meeting, someone asked, “and how are you all doing?”

            It was curious that none of the participants seemed to have considered this question. It seemed




Published by RED: a Repository of Digital Collections, 2021                                                       5

                            The Interactive Journal of Global Leadership and Learning, Vol. 2 [2021], Iss. 1, Art. 3




            that all of them were so busy making sure that their teachers and students had the necessities to

            subsist, that their own welfare did not even cross their minds. This study was undertaken to

            address not only their mental well-being, but also to see how their leadership practices may have

            changed since the middle of March 2020.

                       Shortly after the meeting, I began researching educational leadership practices during a

            catastrophe and came across Tolerance for Ambiguity. I discovered that recent measures of TA

            have included multiple contexts in which ambiguity may exist, such as in family or work

            situations (McLain, 1993, 2009; Furnham, 1994; Durrheim and Foster, 1997; Herman et al.,

            2010) and has often focused on individual reactions to ambiguity in varied situations or tasks

            (Endres et al., 2009; Weisbrod, 2009; Herman et al., 2010). Soon thereafter, a series of interview

            questions were developed that dealt specifically with TA. The questions were then sent out to

            five members of the DAC to be vetted. IRB permission was obtained in October 2020 and a

            series of eight interviews were scheduled during the month of January 2021.

            Purpose and Research Objectives

                       The purpose of this study was to examine the nature of the relationship between

            leadership practices and core self-evaluations amongst superintendents in Minnesota during the

            COVID-19 pandemic. The study was driven by the following research objectives:

                  1.    Describe individual self-evaluation based on leadership characteristics using Tolerance

                        for Ambiguity as a guide.

                  2.    Determine which practices, systems, or procedures established during COVID-19 will

                        continue once the pandemic ends.




https://red.mnstate.edu/ijgll/vol2/iss1/3
DOI: 10.55354/2692-3394.1025                                                                                           6

                            Coquyt (2021): Self-Evaluation of Educational Leadership Practices During COVID-




            Tolerance for Ambiguity

                      The Superintendency is a difficult job no matter the size or makeup of the district. This

            study attempted to understand how these school leaders fared when COVID-19 was added to

            their list of responsibilities. Superintendent four (S4) stated, “Prior to COVID, I had two Cs to

            manage, contract and construction. In the spring, I added another C to the list…which was

            challenging.” This study was mainly interested in finding out the direct influences COVID-19

            had on the subjects’ work-related appraisals before and during the pandemic. McLain et al.,

            (2015) argued,

                      Ambiguity hinders choice because desirable alternatives are difficult or impossible to

                      distinguish from undesirable members of the feasible set of options (Hirsh et al., 2012).

                      In an ambiguous situation, behavioral choices cannot be linked to predictable outcomes.

                      Thus, alternative conceptualizations of cognition-behavior-outcome relationships must be

                      developed and examined until predictability can be achieved. (p. 3)

                      Skaggs (2019) developed a conceptual framework around tolerance for ambiguity that

            seemed suitable for this research endeavor. His framework contained six attributes summarized

            below.

                      Comfortable With Uncertainty. Fields (2011, as cited in Skaggs, 2019) states,

                      “Uncertainty refers to situations involving imperfect, incomplete or unknown information

                      (p. 2). Agor (1986, as cited in Skaggs, 2019) suggests, “Input from facts and experiences,

                      combined and integrated with a well-honed sensitivity and openness to other clues” may

                      assist in the decision-making process (p. 2).

                      Not Bound by Categorization. Cohen and Lefebvre (2005, as cited in Skaggs, 2019)

            assert,




Published by RED: a Repository of Digital Collections, 2021                                                        7

                           The Interactive Journal of Global Leadership and Learning, Vol. 2 [2021], Iss. 1, Art. 3




                     Categorization is the method of recognizing similarities and differences in ideas or

                     objects and grouping these based on a criterion for a specific purpose. The purpose of a

                     category is to illustrate a relationship between the ideas or objects in whatever the

                     purpose of the categories may be. (p. 2)

            Duncker’s comments (1945, as cited in Skaggs, 2019) described this as functional fixedness or

            “the inability to see the possibilities and usefulness of ideas or objects beyond their accepted

            grouping” (p. 2). The changes caused by Covid-19 were unique and did fit into a certain category

            or group. “Until information is gathered that enables the development of predictive

            understanding, unfamiliarity is associated with the anxiety of ambiguity” (McLain et al., 2015, p.

            3).

                     Tolerance for Fluctuating Stimuli. Skaggs (2019) suggests,

                     Stimuli in this case can include; multiple priorities, changing schedules and budgets, and

                     changing product requirements. Tolerance for ambiguity refers to the capacity to

                     withstand the fluctuations and chaos brought on by a problem that cannot be clearly

                     defined or when it is unclear how the pieces of the solution are going to come together

                     because the criteria is changing. (p. 3)

                     Low Fear Response to the Unfamiliar or Change. Brenner and Darby (2000, as cited

            in Skaggs, 2019) propose a model for adapting to change that require four stages:

                     (1) Status quo is the initial state of the system—comfort, familiarity, established patterns,

                     relationships, and routines prevail. (2) an unfamiliar element enters or arises, and

                     interferes with the status quo, (3) Chaos--once the unfamiliar element is recognized and

                     accepted, the system enters chaos, a time of anxiety, vulnerability, and confusion and (4)




https://red.mnstate.edu/ijgll/vol2/iss1/3
DOI: 10.55354/2692-3394.1025                                                                                          8

                            Coquyt (2021): Self-Evaluation of Educational Leadership Practices During COVID-




                    Integration--a transforming idea emerges, and people figure out how to integrate the

                    unfamiliar and change how to work with the new situation. (p. 3)

            Skaggs (2019) argues, “If you are not a problem solver, then change is always frustrating.

            People don’t like the unfamiliar because it brings up problems and people don’t like dealing with

            problems” (p. 3).

                    Acceptance of Novelty. Rogers (1961, as cited in Skaggs, 2019) proposes, “The very

            essence of creativity in ideas, products or services is its originality, it’s different, and hence there

            is not a standard by which to judge it” (p. 3). This study attempted to analyze how

            superintendents responded when some measure of control was taken away from them and

            conversely, how COVID-19 intensified the acceptance of novelty in their professional lives.

                    Delaying Selection from Multiple Solutions. Sternberg (1999, as cited in Skaggs, 2019)

            argues, “Some people believe that there is only one right answer and that ambiguity must be

            avoided whenever possible” (p. 4). Skaggs affirms by stating, “To optimize creative potential

            you need to be able to tolerate the discomfort of an ambiguous situation long enough so that

            what you produce is the best, or close to the best, of which you are capable” (p. 3).

                                                              Methodology

                    This study utilized the case study as the chosen method of qualitative research. Stake

            (2005, as cited in Creswell & Poth, 2018) stated, “case study research is not a methodology but a

            choice of what is to be studied (i.e., a case within a bounded system, bounded by time and

            place)” p. 96. The cases used for this study were a small group of superintendents and their

            experiences leading their respective districts during the COVID-19 pandemic during the fall of

            2020. Creswell and Poth (2018) suggest that case study research utilizes multiple sources of

            information. As stated previously, in addition to the interview transcriptions, video messages




Published by RED: a Repository of Digital Collections, 2021                                                            9

                            The Interactive Journal of Global Leadership and Learning, Vol. 2 [2021], Iss. 1, Art. 3




            intended to keep the public informed; written announcements and learning plans were also

            investigated via each district’s website.

                     District superintendents were asked via Zoom interviews to reflect upon their leadership

            approach in relation to uncertainty, fluctuating stimuli, unfamiliarity, novelty, and delayed

            selection. A total of ten open-ended questions were asked. During the coding process, it was

            difficult, but not impossible, to separate or ascribe certain behaviors to one attribute or another.

            For instance, was an individual’s ability to cope with a wide range of information (categorize)

            attributed to their confidence (ability to handle uncertainty)? Was their ability to remain calm

            (manage unfamiliarity) associated with prior experiences managing new or novel challenges?

            This constant interplay occurred throughout the entire coding process. Table 3 provides a

            summary of the eight superintendents who participated in this study.

            Table 1

            Participant Demographics

                  Participant               Gender                  Experience (Years)                       District Size

                       S1                    Man                               21                                 360

                       S2                    Man                               10                                1300

                       S3                   Woman                              7                                  800

                       S4                   Woman                              5                                 2500

                       S5                    Man                               10                                 900

                       S6                   Woman                              5                                  475

                       S7                    Man                               7                                 1300

                       S8                    Man                               5                                 2500




https://red.mnstate.edu/ijgll/vol2/iss1/3
DOI: 10.55354/2692-3394.1025                                                                                                 10

                            Coquyt (2021): Self-Evaluation of Educational Leadership Practices During COVID-




            Paradigm

                    This qualitative case study is founded in constructivism where the objective is to rely on

            the subject’s assessment of the situation as much as possible. Regarding ontology, Creswell and

            Poth (2018) argue, “the ontological issue relates to the nature of reality and its characteristics.

            When researchers conduct qualitative research, they are embracing the idea of multiple realities”

            (p. 20). Linked to this study, one superintendent’s interpretation of leadership may be different

            from another. These individual meanings are “negotiated socially and historically and are formed

            through interaction with others” (Creswell & Poth, p. 24).

                    Epistemologically, “conducting qualitative research means that the researcher tries to get

            as close to the subject as possible to the participants being studied. Subjective evidence is

            assembled based on individual views” (Creswell & Poth, p. 21). Marion and Gonzales (2014)

            suggest, “Epistemology is nothing more than the way in which we perceive and understand our

            environments” (p. 2). Getting close to the subjects proved to be next to impossible due to the

            pandemic and as stated previously, all interviews were performed via Zoom. Luckily, copious

            amounts of information were gleaned by analyzing the various announcements and videos on the

            district website. All of the superintendents graciously shared any relevant information they

            distributed to their teachers as well.

                    Axiologically, “all researchers bring values to a study, but qualitative researchers make

            their values known in a study” (Creswell & Poth, p. 21). I spent 23 years in P-12 education prior

            to moving into higher education. For 12 of those years, I was a high school principal and

            superintendent. My experience as a building administrator provided me with plenty of situations

            where difficult decisions needed to be made that affected the school or entire district. Nothing in

            my experiences rivaled what current superintendents have been enduring for the past ten months.



Published by RED: a Repository of Digital Collections, 2021                                                       11

                           The Interactive Journal of Global Leadership and Learning, Vol. 2 [2021], Iss. 1, Art. 3




            Qualitative Approach

                     Qualitative research studies involve a continuous interplay between data collection and

            data analysis (Strauss & Corbin, 1998). Qualitative analysis is a form of intellectual artistry.

            There is no single way to accomplish qualitative research, since data analysis is a process of

            making meaning. It is a creative process, not a mechanical one (Denzin & Lincoln, nd).

            Similarly, a qualitative study capitalizes on ordinary ways of making sense (Stake, 1995). Stake

            (1995) reminds qualitative researchers that, “there is no particular moment when data analysis

            begins. Analysis,” he explained, “essentially means taking something apart” (p. 71), which in

            this case, not only means understanding the ways superintendents dealt with the COVID-19

            crisis, but also identifying and defining the patterns that emerged from that meaning making

            process. Qualitative data analysis, then, gives meaning to first impressions and final

            compilations. It is an analysis that tells the story of Minnesota superintendents’ intentions to

            make (and their results from making) informed decisions that define and guide their leadership

            decisions in this very difficult time.

                     Methodologically, Esterberg (2001) suggested, “getting intimate with data” (p. 157) and

            described the main objective of immersing oneself in interview transcripts to “load up your

            memory” with the collected data. This research study followed the data analysis and coding

            procedures suggested by Creswell (2005) and Esterberg (2001). Specifically, Esterberg (2001)

            suggested that open coding is a process by which “you work intensively with your data, line by

            line, identifying themes and categories that seem of interest” (p. 158). Additionally, Creswell

            (2005) mandated the traditional approach in the social sciences that allows the codes to emerge

            during the data analysis (p. 187). Once the data from this research were examined thoroughly




https://red.mnstate.edu/ijgll/vol2/iss1/3
DOI: 10.55354/2692-3394.1025                                                                                          12

                            Coquyt (2021): Self-Evaluation of Educational Leadership Practices During COVID-




            through the open coding process, the researchers reviewed codes for emerging themes in the

            data.

                     This research study followed Creswell’s (2012) six steps during the data analysis process,

            and although these steps are described in linear order, Creswell described “an interactive

            practice” to analysis; that is, there is a recursive element to following these steps—the process is

            not simply a static, linear order of analysis.

            Step 1: Organize and prepare the data for analysis (Creswell, 2012, p. 185). During this step, the

            Zoom interview transcripts were reviewed and refashioned into word document transcripts.

            Step 2: Read through the data (Creswell, 2012, p. 185). This step also aligns with Esterberg’s

            directive to “get to know your data.” This involves finding the overall meaning to gain a general

            sense of the information and ideas that the participants conveyed.

            Step 3: Begin detailed analysis with the coding process (Creswell, 2012, p. 186). The material

            was organized into segments by taking the text data and segmenting sentences into categories.

            These categories were then labeled with terms based on the actual language from the

            participants.

            Step 4: Use the coding process to generate a description of the setting or people as well as

            categories for these for analysis (Creswell, 2012, p. 189). This process was used to generate

            codes for the descriptions, which then led to generalizing a small number of categories or

            themes. The themes that emerged were organized into a general description for this research

            study.




Published by RED: a Repository of Digital Collections, 2021                                                        13

                           The Interactive Journal of Global Leadership and Learning, Vol. 2 [2021], Iss. 1, Art. 3




            Step 5: Advance how the description of the themes will be represented in the qualitative

            narrative (Creswell, 2005, p. 189). For this step, the emergent themes were woven into narrative

            passages, so that the findings emerged logically from the participants’ responses.

            Step 6: Interpret the meaning of the data (Creswell, 2012, p. 189). Creswell recognizes that a

            researcher’s own background plays just as important a part of the meaning making process as a

            researcher’s fidelity to a theoretical lens. During the interpretation process, my experience as

            former superintendent informed my understanding of the participants’ stories. To convey the

            participants’ perceptions of their experiences accurately, emphasis was placed specifically on

            what the subjects were saying, the conclusions they drew, and their intentions for future practice.

            The themes that emerged from this study came directly from my awareness of the healthy

            tension between my own biases and the participants’ own meaning-making processes. Creswell

            (2018) described the essential elements of qualitative data analysis as:

                     Data analysis in qualitative research consists of preparing and organizing the data (i.e.,

                     text data as in transcripts, or image data as in photographs) for analysis; then reducing the

                     data into themes through a process of coding and condensing the codes; and finally

                     representing the data in figures, tables, or a discussion. (p. 183)

            Deductive and Inductive Coding

                     The self-assessment of leadership practices during COVID-19 were translated into priori

            codes in one part of the qualitative analysis process. Priori codes are those that are developed

            before examining the current data. Deductive coding utilized predetermined codes gleaned from

            examining the open-ended responses through the tolerance for ambiguity framework. This type

            of coding is a hierarchical method where the researcher brings suggestive observations to the




https://red.mnstate.edu/ijgll/vol2/iss1/3
DOI: 10.55354/2692-3394.1025                                                                                          14

                            Coquyt (2021): Self-Evaluation of Educational Leadership Practices During COVID-




            data, these being uncertainty, categorization and fluctuating stimuli, unfamiliarity, and lastly,

            novelty and delayed selection. Under the proposition of tolerance for ambiguity, these deductive

            codes were tracked in the data.

                    Creswell (2018) counseled, “If a prefigured coding scheme is used in analysis, we

            typically encourage the researchers to be open to additional codes emerging during the analysis”

            (p. 193). To complement the deductive coding utilized for this study, inductive coding occurred.

            Inductive coding involves the development of codes as data are analyzed, and this type of coding

            allows the data to reveal categories aside from the prefigured (deductive) coding scheme. The

            utilization of both deductive and inductive coding strengthened the qualitative data analysis.

                                                               Results

                    The results section will be organized in the following manner and will involve two

            segments. The first segment will focus on research question one and include an analysis of each

            of the six TA attributes. This segment highlights the deductive coding portion of the

            research. Each attribute will be presented in the same fashion using a similar format. A brief

            introduction will be used to reorient the reader to each attribute followed by a table that identifies

            specific phrases and the themes that were related to each attribute. A deeper analysis using

            participant responses related to each attribute will then be presented. Uncertainty will be

            examined first, followed by categorization and fluctuating stimuli, unfamiliarity, and finally,

            novelty and delayed selection. A summary of the deductive coding will be provided prior to

            moving on to the second segment. The second segment will focus on research question two and

            will decipher the inductive coding portion of the research. This segment will focus on which

            practices, systems, or procedures established during COVID-19 will continue to be used once the

            pandemic ends.




Published by RED: a Repository of Digital Collections, 2021                                                          15

                           The Interactive Journal of Global Leadership and Learning, Vol. 2 [2021], Iss. 1, Art. 3




            Research Question One: Describe individual self-evaluation based on leadership characteristics

            using tolerance for ambiguity as a guide.

            Uncertainty “Confidence”

                      S6 offered an interesting comment in her response to one of the interview questions that

            spoke to the importance of having experience as a superintendent prior to the pandemic. She

            stated,

                      First or second-year folks are really being hit hard by COVID-19. I can’t imagine what

                      it would be like to be in my first year as superintendent…just trying to get a handle on all

                      the job entails, and then get slammed by the pandemic. That is a tough scene.

                      All subjects who participated in this study had at least four years of experience as a

            superintendent, and for good reason. A wise man once told me that one cannot truly understand

            anything until you have experienced it for more than three years. Looking back at my

            experiences in education, I would have to agree. After three years of teaching, I was a much

            better educator than I was when I started. The same can be said for my first years as an

            administrator and instructor in higher education. It goes without saying that experience breeds

            confidence. This confidence is a byproduct of years of knowledge and a familiarity with the

            system and the people who make the organization function properly. Any change or modification

            to the modus operandi was weathered by falling back on timeworn procedures and practices that

            have proven to be effective in the past.

                      As was previously stated, gone are the days where superintendents can operate within

            known parameters with clear repetitions and cycles as they pass from one season and one

            semester to the next. COVID-19 has changed all of this and irregularity and ambiguity are now




https://red.mnstate.edu/ijgll/vol2/iss1/3
DOI: 10.55354/2692-3394.1025                                                                                          16

                            Coquyt (2021): Self-Evaluation of Educational Leadership Practices During COVID-




            the mantras of those who are tasked with leading in our schools. Needless to say, the pandemic

            has shaken the confidence of even the most seasoned superintendent, some to a greater degree

            than others. To their credit, almost all of the subjects looked at the pandemic as another

            challenge to be overcome. To meet this challenge, many subjects relied on their experiences,

            became accustomed to adverse situations, and took their communication efforts to new levels.

            Table 4 summarizes the major themes that were revealed during the coding process.

            Table 4

            Superintendent Responses Related to Uncertainty “Confidence”

              Participant      Phrase                                                                Theme

              S7               Ability to decipher information                                       Experience

              S4               Even more confident this year                                         Experience

              S1               Use of next level communication                                       Communication

              S2               Radio and use of video platforms                                      Communication

              S3               Stakeholder surveys                                                   Communication

              S6               Know what I see not what I know                                       Adversity

              S1               Adversity is part of leadership                                       Adversity

              S2               Improved critical thinking and problem-solving skills                 Adversity

              S5               Community-based decisions                                             Transparency

              S3               Maintain visibility and approachability                               Transparency

              S7               Improved trust through vulnerability                                  Transparency




                    During the coding process, experience was one of the recurring themes that many of the

            subjects referred to in their responses. The uniqueness of COVID-19 and the impact it had on




Published by RED: a Repository of Digital Collections, 2021                                                          17

                           The Interactive Journal of Global Leadership and Learning, Vol. 2 [2021], Iss. 1, Art. 3




            districts across the state was also mentioned numerous times. S1 responded, “I feel pretty

            confident, but then as you get into the COVID-19 part, things changed and everything that comes

            up is brand new again.” S8 stated, “We're doing the testing now, like I'm a testing center. For

            God's sakes…I'm counting saliva kits this morning to make sure we get enough for our test

            tomorrow.” S7 affirmed the novelty theme but also referred to experience as an equalizer,

                     I feel pretty comfortable everyday showing up to work knowing that there are challenges

                     that come out of the blue that you can’t possibly foresee. For the most part, I’ve been in

                     those situations before and worked through them with good people.

                     Another prominent theme related to confidence was the importance of communication.

            S2 stated, “The devil’s in the details yet, you have to work down through all of the information

            and bring it to a level that meets your school and your community's needs.” He went on to state,

                     I think our level of communication with our community and our staff has had to increase

                     dramatically because there's a lot of misinformation that comes out. And so, in order to

                     try to be really consistent with the message…you have to over communicate.

                     I think it is fair to maintain that all superintendents understood the importance of

            communication, but the frequency and methods used to communicate with stakeholders changed

            due to COVID-19. S4 asserted, “I have really been intentional to ramp up my presence and my

            communication with stakeholders and families. I've been on tons of Zooms giving COVID

            updates and how we are mitigating these things at schools.” S2 explained, “I've been on the

            radio, now more than ever. I go out to the radio station about every two weeks and I bring

            information regarding COVID as well as what the school is doing.” S3 mentioned the

            importance of communication in her answer,




https://red.mnstate.edu/ijgll/vol2/iss1/3
DOI: 10.55354/2692-3394.1025                                                                                          18

                            Coquyt (2021): Self-Evaluation of Educational Leadership Practices During COVID-




                    My ability to communicate has been enhanced and has been taken to the next level. I

                    have had more open conversations with families just regarding their concerns as well,

                    listening to their ideas in how to help their children through this time.

            The use of technology and the school website was mentioned by many of the superintendents.

            S5 affirmed,

                    I give periodic video messages to families using our school’s website. We have a big

                    blue colored box and they can go in there and find answers to some of the questions they

                    might have about how things are going. It has made me a better communicator.

                    Those who have been in a leadership position understands that even under the best

            circumstances, adversity is something that simply cannot be avoided. For the subjects in this

            study, their successes managing erstwhile adverse circumstances have given them confidence

            during COVID-19. S6 simply put, “difficult situations and adversity are part of leadership.” The

            pandemic created many challenges, but most of the subjects focused on how these challenges can

            be opportunities in disguise. S4 maintained, “where there’s challenges, there are also

            opportunities. You can either get busy worrying about the challenges, or you can get busy

            working on the opportunities.” S3 asserted,

                    It's all brand new. You're not relying on any of those past specific experiences, but you're

                    relying on all of your different things you've done throughout your life to tackle all of

                    these new challenges. And so, yeah, with COVID, it's just every day there is something

                    new. There’s constant challenge that require you to use critical thinking and problem-

                    solving skills. Every day I come to school I need to bring my A game.

                    The last major theme that emerged from the coding process was transparency. Some of

            the subjects insisted that COVID-19 has made them more transparent as a leader, and this in turn



Published by RED: a Repository of Digital Collections, 2021                                                        19

                           The Interactive Journal of Global Leadership and Learning, Vol. 2 [2021], Iss. 1, Art. 3




            has given them more confidence not only during the pandemic, but also in how to handle future

            matters with their teachers and the community. S2 argued,

                     I don’t think I would have the understanding on how to roll out our strategic planning

                     model if it wasn’t for COVID. COVID has forced me and my district advisory team to

                     step out into the community and lay all of our cards on the table. We welcome input

                     from the community and we listen to what they have to say.

            S1 stated, “I have become more transparent about the decisions that are being made, listen to the

            feedback from my teachers and the community, and this has made me a more effective leader.”

            Finally, S4 stated,

                     There’s nothing that I do with committees or groups that I don't share with everybody

                     that wants it, you know. When we have our cabinet meetings every Monday morning, I

                     have it in a room that needs to be more open because we need to be more spread apart

                     and people can walk through and I don't care anymore…as far as our decision making,

                     it's in the open.

            Categorization and Fluctuating Stimuli “Coping”

                     S5 referred to John Dewey’s Decision-Making Model in one of his responses during his

            interview. Regarding Dewey’s contributions to education, Williams (2017) asserts,

                     Dewey’s beliefs and philosophy about education and learning have impacted countless

                     educators over the years and are woven throughout many learning theories such as

                     progressive education, constructivism, learner-centered theory, and experiential

                     knowledge, all of which differ from what Dewey describes as a traditional classroom

                     setting. (p. 92)




https://red.mnstate.edu/ijgll/vol2/iss1/3
DOI: 10.55354/2692-3394.1025                                                                                          20

                            Coquyt (2021): Self-Evaluation of Educational Leadership Practices During COVID-




            He had learned about decision making capacity in graduate school and had several opportunities

            to put what he learned into practice during his tenure as superintendent. He argued, “Decision

            making during COVID-19 is different because of time restraints. I often find myself making

            decisions at the spur of the moment and then try to predict the consequences.”

            Figure 1

            Dewey's Decision-Making Model




            Marion and Gonzales (2013) speculate,

                    Administrators rarely have complete information about a problem; they must deal with

                    numerous conflicting and often illogical forces during the decision making process; they

                    rarely have time to explore alternatives; and they rarely have a good grasp of cause-and-

                    effect relationships (what the outcomes of their decisions will be). (p. 211)

            Simon (1957) maintains that sound decision-making requires resources, knowledge, and time.

            As stated above, time is a resource that is in short supply during COVID-19. Simon’s 1957 work,

            (as cited in Marion and Gonzales, 2014) offers, “all we need to do is satisfice. This means that

            we find a solution that will take care of the situation from a set of solutions to which we have




Published by RED: a Repository of Digital Collections, 2021                                                     21

                           The Interactive Journal of Global Leadership and Learning, Vol. 2 [2021], Iss. 1, Art. 3




            fairly ready access” (p. 211). Although none of the subjects specifically used the word

            “satisfice,” that is exactly what they needed to do.

                     Sensemaking is another term that fits within the discussion about self-efficacy. Maitlis

            and Christianson (2014) define sensemaking as “the process through which people work to

            understand issues or events that are novel, ambiguous, confusing, or in some other way violate

            expectations” (p. 57). Novel, ambiguous, confusing are words that can be used to describe the

            effects COVID-19 has had on districts throughout the state. Karl Weick (1995) described seven

            properties of sensemaking. “Sensemaking is understood as a process that is (1) grounded in

            identity construction, (2) retrospective, (3) enactive of sensible environments, (4) social, (5)

            ongoing, (6) focused on and by extracted cues, (7) driven by plausibility rather than accuracy”

            (p. 17). For the purposes of this study, only two, social and ongoing (flows and brackets) were

            explored.

                     Marion and Gonzales (2014) assert, “sensemaking is a social process, something we do in

            relationship with one another” (p. 219). Maitlis (2005) describes organizational sensemaking as

            “a fundamentally social process in which organization members interpret their environment in

            and through interactions with each other, constructing accounts that allow them to comprehend

            the world and act collectively” (p. 21). Allport (as cited in Lindzey & Aronson, 1985) posits,

            “sensemaking is generally regarded as social because even individuals making sense on their

            own are embedded in a sociomaterial context where their thoughts, feelings, and behaviors are

            influenced by the actual, imagined, or implied presence of others” (p. 3). Many superintendents

            in this study sought to make sense of their new environments through their interactions with each

            other. If they were already part of a group that met monthly, these meetings started to occur




https://red.mnstate.edu/ijgll/vol2/iss1/3
DOI: 10.55354/2692-3394.1025                                                                                          22

                            Coquyt (2021): Self-Evaluation of Educational Leadership Practices During COVID-




            weekly. If only a handful of superintendents met, the numbers grew dramatically during the

            pandemic.

                    Maitlis and Christanson (2014) state, “Sensemaking is triggered by cues—such as issues,

            events, or situations—for which the meaning is ambiguous and/or outcomes uncertain. Such

            occurrences, when noticed, interrupt people’s ongoing flow, disrupting their understanding of the

            world and creating uncertainty about how to act” (p. 70). Marion and Gonzales (2014) liken

            these cues to brackets. They explain, “The events we bracket and the meaning we ascribe to

            those brackets become part of our worldview; they help bring order to our world, they help us

            identify causalities and predict our future” (p. 220). The networking groups not only satisfied the

            social aspect of sensemaking, it also served as a haven where superintendents could contrast their

            cues with what other superintendents were experiencing.

                    During the coding process, specific themes were identified related to categorization and

            fluctuating stimuli. In order to cope with the many changes caused by COVID-19, most

            superintendents relied on specific core values, satisficed, and took their networking capacity to

            new heights. Table 5 summarizes the major themes that were revealed during the coding process.

            Table 5

            Superintendent Responses Related to Categorization and Fluctuating Stimuli “Coping”

              Participant     Phrase                                                     Theme

              S7               Mandates create changes in cultural practices              Core Values

              S6               Reliance on core values to weather the storm               Core Values



              S1               Loss of social relationships or social capital             Satisfice




Published by RED: a Repository of Digital Collections, 2021                                                       23

                            The Interactive Journal of Global Leadership and Learning, Vol. 2 [2021], Iss. 1, Art. 3




              Participant      Phrase                                                          Theme

              S2                New challenges creating new motivations                        Satisfice

              S1                Limit on time, knowledge, resources                            Satisfice

              S3                Enhanced flexibility and adaptability                          Satisfice



              S1                This is a collaborative effort                                 Sensemaking/Networking

              S5                Many levels of support                                         Sensemaking/Networking

              S4                Relationships intensified with colleagues                      Sensemaking/Networking



                     In one of the very first interviews, S7 revealed certain core values that he and his

            leadership team would abide by during the pandemic. This went beyond merely putting a plan in

            place that specified grade levels and whether the instructional model would be face-to-face,

            hybrid, or distance learning (see Learning Model Parameters, Table 1). All of the superintendents

            were consummate professionals who repeatedly stated that they needed to put their students’

            interests first. These core values conveyed how they would act in the face of the pandemic and

            the many changes that it caused to their schools and district. S4 stated, “We need to clarify for

            our families and students exactly how we are going to proceed for the next 14 days. This needs

            to be done in a clear and calm manner.” S3 put it more succinctly, “If we are freaking out about

            the situation, then everyone in the district will be freaking out as well.” S1 asserted, “We were

            very clear about what was going to happen. We were going to be in person if we can, and operate

            as safely as possible. We haven’t veered from these criteria.” S6 professed,




https://red.mnstate.edu/ijgll/vol2/iss1/3
DOI: 10.55354/2692-3394.1025                                                                                            24

                            Coquyt (2021): Self-Evaluation of Educational Leadership Practices During COVID-




                    I need to remember my values and continue to do what’s best for kids. If you can stick to

                    those core principles that made you a good leader in the first place, you should be able to

                    cope with most anything that is thrown at you, including this pandemic.

            S7 affirmed the merit of establishing core values as guiding principles during the early stages of

            the pandemic. He stated,

                    Early in March, I brought all of my building leaders together and we developed a plan for

                    moving forward with distance learning. There were four things that I talked about and

                    my expectation was that all of us needed to role model and portray four things…and

                    these were going to be challenging. These were communication, calmness, confidence,

                    and courage, not necessarily in that order…the four C’s.

            It came as no surprise that many of the comments referenced what “we” were going to do or how

            the team would respond to the pandemic. The notion of collaboration and distributed leadership

            will be examined later in this paper.

                    The second theme that was identified during the coding process was the notion of

            satisficing. At the beginning of this segment, satisfice was associated primarily with time. It is

            understood that these superintendents needed to make timely decisions based on the resources,

            sometimes limited, that they had at their disposals. S4 stated:

                    I needed to find seven people, on a holiday, to be on our Incident Command Team, and

                    report back to the Department of Education by the morning. It took me most of the day,

                    but somehow I made it work.

            S8 offered,

                    There are some things, curriculum items for example, that have definitely taken a

                    backseat right now, and that is unfortunate. COVID dominates your




Published by RED: a Repository of Digital Collections, 2021                                                       25

                           The Interactive Journal of Global Leadership and Learning, Vol. 2 [2021], Iss. 1, Art. 3




                     day…communicating with the families, staying fully staffed, and putting out fires. That

                     is our focus right now, unfortunately.

            S2 commented,

                     Everything we do now is brand new…we are almost to the end of the first semester and it

                     seems like something new pops up every week. This week it is vaccine distribution and

                     even though I attended a couple of meetings about it, I am still unclear about some of the

                     specifics.

                     Another aspect of satisficing is making a decision that seems like the best possible

            solution at present. If given time to weigh all of the potential alternatives, an appropriate solution

            is often found. S5 stated, “Decisions that would normally take months to make…we are now

            making in a day or two.” S4 put a positive spin on this new decision-making process.

                     When an issue or challenge comes up, I meet with my leadership team and we come to a

                     consensus. We don’t have time to admire the problem. We need to make a decision

                     based on where we are, and what we have done in the past.

            S6 was also encouraged by this progressive decision-making process. She indicated, “Because

            we have amped up our communications, and are constantly reaching out to the community, we

            can see the fruits of our labors, or not, a lot sooner now compared to what happened in the past.”

            S7 made reference to his ability to be flexible and adapt to the ever-changing educational

            environment. He said,

                     Flexibility and being able to pivot and change directions on the goal has now become part

                     of my repertoire. I can still fall back on some life experiences to meet these new

                     challenges but every time I think I know the direction we are heading, the goalpost is

                     moved.


https://red.mnstate.edu/ijgll/vol2/iss1/3
DOI: 10.55354/2692-3394.1025                                                                                          26

                            Coquyt (2021): Self-Evaluation of Educational Leadership Practices During COVID-




                    Coping with or taking care of a variety of challenges during the pandemic did not always

            involve time and decision-making. Aside from the obvious changes in teaching methods and

            students learning from home, most superintendents insisted that school occasions should

            continue to be celebrated in some manner even during the pandemic. Some superintendents cited

            the loss of social relationships and social capital several times. Coping with the new normal

            meant finding alternatives to what has been the norm. S1 stated,

                    We are doing everything by Zoom and I think that really impacts the social relationship

                    part, even with our staff and our parents. I mean, we don't have our parents coming into

                    the building. We don't have anybody coming in for a music concert or a basketball game.

                    We just did our spelling bee this week and it is not uncommon for us to have 100 people

                    show up for a spelling bee and now they watch it from home.

            S6 shared,

                    So much of what I do now is based on predicting the future which is never good. COVID

                    cases may rise which would affect our delivery method, technology is fraught with

                    complications too numerous to list, and the decisions that I have made have been

                    questioned. I do the best with what I know and feel fortunate to know that I am not in

                    this alone.

            This idea of collaboration and camaraderie segues into the last theme related to coping,

            networking.

                    From the data, it became clear that day-to-day issues could be managed by satisficing.

            The larger issues, e.g., budgetary, teacher union, personal protective equipment (PPE), school

            board, legal, state guidelines and mandates, and student absenteeism, needed to be measured

            against what was happening in neighboring districts. S1 stated, “we’ve done a really good job of



Published by RED: a Repository of Digital Collections, 2021                                                    27

                           The Interactive Journal of Global Leadership and Learning, Vol. 2 [2021], Iss. 1, Art. 3




            making sure that people aren’t on an island.” S7 affirmed, “It is important that people don’t feel

            like they have to deal with all of the issues that come with COVID by themselves…we have a

            pretty strong network.” S3 stated,

                     I would say that early in July, maybe even June is when we started going to weekly

                     meetings, looking at the restart to school. I would say in March, April and May we were

                     meeting, like every month. And that was more of a…do you have your flak jacket on and

                     how is it going type of thing. It was more of a mental health check on people.

            S9 added,

                     We meet on a weekly basis by zoom for an hour with all the superintendent and executive

                     directors from around the region as well as having different state people from the

                     Minnesota School Board Association, Minnesota Association of School Administrators

                     sometimes personnel from the Department of Ed. They join us because that's the contact

                     point for getting questions answered and getting information out and we average

                     probably 55 people on that weekly zoom meeting. And so, I think that has a lot to do

                     with remaining confident during such a time of constant change and challenge.

            S5 indicated,

                     There are so many unknowns. It is really difficult to give black and white answers all of

                     the time. I needed something to provide me with faith and confidence with my decision-

                     making and these meetings really help. It seems like every other week information comes

                     out from the Department of Education and you need to reevaluate what you are doing.

                     These meetings give all of us a way to decipher what the message says, what is important

                     to communicate, and provide clear and consistent messaging.

            S9 revealed,


https://red.mnstate.edu/ijgll/vol2/iss1/3
DOI: 10.55354/2692-3394.1025                                                                                          28

                            Coquyt (2021): Self-Evaluation of Educational Leadership Practices During COVID-




                    I was having some issues with some members on the board, not huge issues, but I started

                    to questions whether I had communicated the changes to our learning plan well enough.

                    My first call was to (name), a superintendent ten miles down the road, to make sure that

                    what I proposed lined up with the Governor’s statement from last week. It was, and she

                    gave me some helpful hints about improving my communications with the school board

                    as well…a win-win.

            Unfamiliarity “Calmness”

                    After the first few interviews, it became necessary to remind the superintendents that my

            objective was to find out how they were doing during the pandemic. Most of the responses

            conveyed the needs of the students, teachers, and families rather than a focus on self. It came as

            no surprise that few ever thought about how they were doing (emotionally) throughout the

            pandemic. S3 commented, “This is like therapy for me. I get so caught up in the day-to-day,

            sometimes I forget about my needs.” It was stated earlier in this paper that it is often difficult to

            divorce one of the six attributes from the others. If subjects considered themselves to have high

            confidence and coping skills, it makes sense that this would affect their emotional stability in a

            positive manner. Bottom line, the thick skinned, confident, and optimistic veneer that these

            superintendents projected on a daily basis was present, front and center, during these interviews

            as well.

                    During the coding process, specific themes were identified related to unfamiliarity. In

            order to remain calm, secure, and show less reactivity to everyday occurrences, most

            superintendents depended on family and friends, maintained an even keel, and practiced some

            measures of self-care. Table 6 summarizes the major themes that were revealed during the

            coding process.



Published by RED: a Repository of Digital Collections, 2021                                                         29

                            The Interactive Journal of Global Leadership and Learning, Vol. 2 [2021], Iss. 1, Art. 3




            Table 6

            Superintendent Responses Related to Unfamiliarity “Calmness”

              Participant       Phrase                                                                       Theme

              S8                Focus on family                                                              Family/Friends

              S5                Talking things through with my wife                                          Family/Friends



              S4                Conversational listening                                                     Even Keel

              S5                Keyboard warriors                                                            Even Keel

              S3                Keeping my emotions in check                                                 Even Keel

              S6                This is like a roller coaster                                                Even Keel

              S4                Sometimes the guidelines are difficult to comprehend                         Even Keel

              S7                I am meant to be here                                                        Even Keel



              S1                I need to stay active as well as actively engaged                            Self-Care

              S4                Looking forward to a break in the action                                     Self-Care




                     When the topic of emotions was discussed, S3’s comments were similar to many of the

            others. She stated,

                     I don't try to stay in that emotional world too much because it's not productive. So what I

                     tend to do is try to get that emotional part out of me so if I'm sad or if I'm angry, I focus

                     on what I can do to correct it, and I get back on track and focus on the task at hand.




https://red.mnstate.edu/ijgll/vol2/iss1/3
DOI: 10.55354/2692-3394.1025                                                                                                  30

                            Coquyt (2021): Self-Evaluation of Educational Leadership Practices During COVID-




            Some of the superintendents found solace in personal relationships. It was no surprise that many

            referenced the person who knew them the best, their spouse. S5 made the comment,

                    My wife noticed that work was taking a toll on me and she gave me some great advice.

                    She reminded me that I can’t take what might be said on social media or in the newspaper

                    personally. She told me to focus on my abilities and all the good things that have

                    happened prior to and even during COVID. Make a decision and move on. You know

                    what you are doing. I needed that.

            S8 explained how he and a neighboring superintendent could talk openly about the challenges

            both were facing during the pandemic. He shared,

                    The day after the Governor spoke, the first thing I did was contact him. We have started

                    to talk almost every day. He has become more of a friend than simply a colleague…he is

                    someone I can be honest with and I know he won’t judge me. He is a calming influence,

                    and I think he would say the same about me.

            Besides their spouses and close colleagues, some superintendents shared their desire to forget

            about school and COVID-19 issues and simply discuss mundane topics that had nothing to do

            with school or leadership. C7 shared,

                    Even though I'm extremely passionate about education and kids, I can't talk about them

                    all the time. I need to have some type of release, like going over to my neighbor’s house

                    and have a few beers with him. He gives me crap about school, but we try not to talk too

                    much about it. I need this because I can’t inundate myself with work all of the time.




Published by RED: a Repository of Digital Collections, 2021                                                     31

                           The Interactive Journal of Global Leadership and Learning, Vol. 2 [2021], Iss. 1, Art. 3




                     Managing emotions on a personal level is something that superintendents have been

            doing for quite some time, pandemic or not. S5 discussed what he called keyboard warriors who

            were present before and persist during COVID-19. He opined,

                     People who constantly question every decision and don't do it in a respectful manner,

                     these keyboard warriors, who sit behind a screen and question you. They just don’t

                     understand exactly what goes into making a decision at this level.

            S4 used the term “armchairs” to describe these constituents. An unseen benefit during COVID-

            19 was that some of these community members agreed to meet face-to-face. S4 stated, “It was a

            perfect opportunity for me to do some conversational listening…it helped me see things from

            their perspective without me talking too much but instead focusing on listening.”

                     Some superintendents described leading during COVID as a roller coaster or waves. S5

            asserted,

                     You have your good days, and you have your bad. Everyone is looking at you to see how

                     you will respond to the latest news from MDE or how I will respond to the latest number

                     of COVID cases. I need to keep an even keel and make those around me think that it

                     doesn’t affect me.

            Maybe the most profound statement related to emotions was made by S7. He stressed,

                     You can easily fall into that why me, poor me situation. Why do I have to be leading

                     a school district during COVID? I honestly believe that leaders are put in certain

                     situations for certain reasons. I'm here today leading the district during COVID because I

                     am meant to be here. I have the skill set and the knowledge and the ability to do it. If

                     you don’t believe it, that you are here to lead for a reason, then every day you are going

                     to questions yourself thinking that you should have done something different.



https://red.mnstate.edu/ijgll/vol2/iss1/3
DOI: 10.55354/2692-3394.1025                                                                                          32

                            Coquyt (2021): Self-Evaluation of Educational Leadership Practices During COVID-




                    Finally, some superintendents chose to focus on some measure of self-care to moderate

            their emotions during COVID-19. Some spoke about running, weight training, and improving

            their cardiovascular health. S6 described this as her reserve tank. She stated, “It is never a good

            idea to come to school with an empty reserve tank.” S4 affirmed,

                    Filling up your reserve tank and doing things you enjoy outside of school is a way to take

                    care of yourself. It is different for everyone…some spend time with their wife or kids;

                    some go fishing, some workout, some listen or play music. Whatever it is, you need to

                    do it because if you come to school and your reserve is empty, the first negative thing that

                    happens might trigger a negative emotional response.

            S1 looked no further than his own preschool for a boost. He argued, “I've said many times that if

            you're having a bad day all you need to do is go down to preschool and kindergarten and life is

            good because I'm a big deal in preschool.”

            Novelty and Delayed Selection “Control”

                    Johnson et al. (2008) summarize locus of control as, “the belief in one’s capacity to

            impact the environment and produce desired effects. An internal locus of control involves beliefs

            that one’s environment and outcomes are controllable” (p. 393). It was not surprising that many

            superintendents believed they had a high level of control prior to COVID-19. S1 commented, “I

            have a high level control over everything, because I'm probably a control freak.” Having a good

            working relationship with the school board was another statement that was mentioned numerous

            times during the interviews. S4 stated:

                    Having a supportive and cohesive school board, especially during this time is huge. And

                    right now, If I didn't have a supportive board that allowed me to do my job, we would be




Published by RED: a Repository of Digital Collections, 2021                                                        33

                           The Interactive Journal of Global Leadership and Learning, Vol. 2 [2021], Iss. 1, Art. 3




                     having a totally different conversation. A positive school board is key to allowing me to

                     control the outcomes that are best for our district.

                     During the pandemic, the locus of control seemed to diminish for many of the

            superintendents as they were now dealing with new or novel challenges. These novelties in turn

            delayed the selection of a plan to move forward. Throughout the coding process, it was

            discovered that most superintendents focused more on matters that were not in their control

            rather than what was. S8 asserted, “So many times, I’m making decisions basically on what I

            need to do or what I have to do not necessarily what I want to do. That took some getting used

            to.” Although the locus of control eroded, it did not stop many in their pursuit of previously

            determined projects that continued to garner their attention during the pandemic.

                     During the coding process, two predictable themes were identified related to novel

            situations and an overall lack of control. These were those aspects of leadership that were still

            under their control (dominion) and those that were not (compliant). Table 7 summarizes the

            themes that were uncovered during the coding process.

            Table 7

            Superintendent Responses Related to Novelty and Delayed Selection “Control”

              Superintendent       Phrase                                                                             Theme

              S5                    Strategic planning                                                                Dominion

              S3                    Projects moving forward                                                           Dominion

              S6                    Higher level of social reflexivity                                                Dominion



              S2                    Communication needs to be as clear and precise as possible                        Compliant




https://red.mnstate.edu/ijgll/vol2/iss1/3
DOI: 10.55354/2692-3394.1025                                                                                                      34

                            Coquyt (2021): Self-Evaluation of Educational Leadership Practices During COVID-




              Superintendent       Phrase                                                                      Theme

              S5                    New level in the chain of command                                          Compliant

              S4                    Producing the desired effects is delayed                                   Compliant

              S4                    State Guidelines                                                           Compliant

              S5                    Student achievement is a concern                                           Compliant

              S1                    Unpredictable and changing messages                                        Compliant

              S2                    Not knowing                                                                Compliant



                    One might think that almost everything that was happening in school districts across the

            state came to a halt due to COVID-19 but nothing could be further from the truth. Although all

            of the districts represented in this study did alter many teaching and learning platforms, e.g.,

            from face-to-face to distance or hybrid learning, it became very clear that many of the important

            projects or policy changes that were indeterminate, but prioritized prior to COVID-19, would

            continue to garner attention by the superintendents and their school boards during the pandemic.

            What remains unclear is whether this was done intentionally in order to retain some measure of

            control during the pandemic. Hindsight is 20/20 and this would be a good follow-up question to

            ask. Several superintendents mentioned strategic planning as well as novel projects that emerged

            during the pandemic. S5 commented, “We have not forgotten about our strategic plan and

            continue to allocate resources to those teachers that were promised materials and supplies.” S4

            opined, “I admire my teachers for not only the work they have done during the pandemic, but

            also their understanding that we have re-prioritized some of our former plans, but they have not

            been forgotten…just delayed.”




Published by RED: a Repository of Digital Collections, 2021                                                                35

                            The Interactive Journal of Global Leadership and Learning, Vol. 2 [2021], Iss. 1, Art. 3




                     A surprising development that arose from the coding process was the advancement of

            conspicuously new projects that occurred during the pandemic. S3 stated,

                     I’ve always believed that where there's challenges, there's opportunities…you either can

                     get busy worrying about the challenges all the time, or you can find balance by working

                     on the opportunities. We've really worked at moving forward.

            S1 asserted,

                     We just kicked off starting an Education Foundation for the district. We have letters

                     going out today to 900 alumni, friends, and community members. The idea has been

                     kicked around for four or five years and we just decided it's got to go now. I'm fired up

                     about it.

            S7 discussed his district’s plans to expand on their Career and Technical Education program at

            his district.

                     We met last year and talked about some of our elective courses and how we might lose

                     these due to a few retirements. The framework of the program needed to be adjusted but

                     if we could find the right candidate, we could maybe pull it off. We just met with an

                     applicant that was very excited about the possibility and has many great ideas. We could

                     have waited, but we didn’t.

            Another superintendent shared his ideas about changing the way student teaching is done in his

            district and his continued work with regional higher education institutions. Finally, another

            superintendent explained their plans to have a virtual academy up and running by the fall.




https://red.mnstate.edu/ijgll/vol2/iss1/3
DOI: 10.55354/2692-3394.1025                                                                                           36

                            Coquyt (2021): Self-Evaluation of Educational Leadership Practices During COVID-




                    One superintendent used the words “social reflexivity” in one of her answers. Quite

            honestly, I did not comprehend exactly what she meant until she explained it further. She

            theorized,

                    At the beginning of the year, I just needed to stop and think about where we were

                    heading. I needed to assess my own beliefs and opinions about how our district was

                    managing the pandemic…I think it is called social reflexivity or something like that.

                    There were some things that were out of my control and they simply needed to be

                    accepted. My leadership team decided to focus more on those aspects that we could

                    control and it was important for me to be a role model in this effort.

            It seems as though many superintendents were using this strategy whether they knew it or not.

            S4 echoed the sentiment above by stating,

                    I think I'm in the minority of superintendents when I hear them get so frustrated and want

                    to fight back about some of these things. I don't ever get the feeling to fight back. I think

                    to myself, this is the way it is and I'm going to take the rules or guidelines and put in

                    place a plan to deal with it.

                    The preceding statement segues nicely into this next section. It makes sense that nothing

            that has happened during COVID-19 is completely out of the superintendent’s control. They

            cannot control what the Governor, Department of Education, or the Health Department might

            announce nor do anything about the rise of COVID-19 cases in their county. If new guidelines

            need to be followed, they need to be implemented with fidelity. Local control was bandied about

            in many of their comments and some superintendents questioned the timing of some of the

            announcements from the state. Most of the superintendents expressed discomfort and a bit of

            anxiety in their new subservient role. To a person, all of the superintendents understood that the




Published by RED: a Repository of Digital Collections, 2021                                                         37

                           The Interactive Journal of Global Leadership and Learning, Vol. 2 [2021], Iss. 1, Art. 3




            decision-making process and the level of control they enjoyed pre-COVID-19 had changed. This

            new level or layer atop the decision-making pyramid was mentioned numerous times during the

            coding process. S2 stated,

                     Superintendents like getting the direction from the extra layer as it gives protection when

                     decisions are being made. Superintendents also like local control in decision-

                     making. So…what I think has improved is the extra layer giving guidance with the

                     freedom of district leaders to make decisions within the parameters….that is best for their

                     district.

            S6 reiterated the comments above but added the element of time by suggesting,

                     My first impression is that we have always been governed in some way by MDE, MDH,

                     and other agencies. We have always had rules which change from time to time. The

                     difference now is the frequency of such events. Each time a change has occurred it takes

                     a considerable amount of time to understand, plan, and implement. A recent example is

                     teacher evaluation. This created a huge movement involving teachers, administration,

                     and the school board. Trainings were readily available; requirements were articulated

                     and ultimately a plan needed to be agreed on by the teacher union and the school board.

            S3 similarly posited,

                     Local control and doing what is best for our families and communities is an authority and

                     obligation that we take serious. The thought of having to “request” permission to educate

                     students in person, is difficult to accept. However, my experience during this was that the

                     Public health “layer” was supportive and an active participant in the discussion. The

                     regional support team acted as a conduit between the layers.




https://red.mnstate.edu/ijgll/vol2/iss1/3
DOI: 10.55354/2692-3394.1025                                                                                          38

                            Coquyt (2021): Self-Evaluation of Educational Leadership Practices During COVID-




            S1 was a bit more critical in his response,

                    Some decisions by state government officials, federal government officials, Governor,

                    etc. have had a direct impact on schools on a daily and weekly basis for the first time in

                    my tenure. Masking, social distancing in classrooms and buses, sending students home

                    based on close proximity policy, hiring additional staff to supervise additional bus routes,

                    additional lunch periods, etc. We have state and federal officials making decisions that

                    affect local schools and communities that have no idea about our local communities

                    based on national statistics. It is difficult to communicate the rationale for the decisions

                    to our local community members when in many cases as leaders we fail to support the

                    decisions ourselves.

            S8 reaffirmed these sentiments,

                    Many of these decisions are made without any input from the leaders that have the

                    responsibility to implement the policy and/or mandates. At the state level, in multiple

                    cases we have seen Executive orders come from the Governor’s office that have not been

                    seen or discussed with the Minnesota School Board Association or Minnesota

                    Association of School Administrators. It is certainly an interesting time in school

                    leadership.

            Summary of Deductive Coding

                    For simplicity’s sake, each of the six attributes were abridged into what can be

            considered the four Cs. Uncertainty was reduced to confidence, categorization and fluctuating

            stimuli shortened to coping, unfamiliarity truncated to calmness, and novelty and delayed

            selection pared to control. Experience breeds confidence and it was revealed in the section




Published by RED: a Repository of Digital Collections, 2021                                                        39

                           The Interactive Journal of Global Leadership and Learning, Vol. 2 [2021], Iss. 1, Art. 3




            covering uncertainty that it was important to find superintendents who had at least four years of

            experience in their current position for this study. What was noteworthy in this section was that

            many of the superintendents believed that the COVID-19 pandemic actually sharpened their

            skills and made them more confident. Some superintendents explained that they needed to

            enhance their communication efforts with all stakeholders and their confidence grew as a result.

            This was partially due to becoming more transparent and seeking feedback from stakeholders

            more regularly. Some superintendents also mentioned an improvement of their critical thinking

            and problem-solving skills. Decision making during the pandemic needed to be hastened, but

            most fell into a routine and found solace in being vulnerable. To synopsize, the superintendents

            who participated in this study perceived a growth in their confidence to manage what was

            uncertain.

                     Decision-making dominated the section covering categorization and fluctuating stimuli

            (coping). Daily or weekly decisions could be managed by satisficing, which for the most part,

            improved their flexibility and adaptability. More sober decisions needed further examination and

            clarification. Most superintendents utilized sensemaking for these decisions and were aided by

            their participation in a network of area superintendents. Many of the superintendents also

            explained how they coped with the spasmodic nature of the pandemic by relying on specific core

            values that helped weather the storm. In sum, the ability to categorize and handle fluctuating

            stimuli of the superintendents in this study was tested and those willing to establish a networking

            relationship with their colleagues seemed to fare better than those who did not.

                     In regards to unfamiliarity or (calmness), many superintendents shared that managing

            their emotions during COVID-19 was essentially no different from how they handled them in the

            past. On a professional level, many attempted to maintain an even keel no matter the situation.



https://red.mnstate.edu/ijgll/vol2/iss1/3
DOI: 10.55354/2692-3394.1025                                                                                          40

                            Coquyt (2021): Self-Evaluation of Educational Leadership Practices During COVID-




            On a personal level, they were allowed to let their guard down and shared freely with their

            spouse or close friends. The fact that many mentioned some type of self-care did not mean that

            COVID-19 was the cause of these diversions. This trait affected those who did not invest in

            some activity that allowed them time to unwind more than those who did.

                    Most of the superintendents, prior to COVID-19, found comfort knowing that they had

            control over many of the day-to-day activities and existing projects in their district. This changed

            during COVID-19. A measure of this control was consigned to the Governor and his subsequent

            executive orders. For those superintendents whose county COVID-19 cases remained below the

            bi-weekly case rate, the level of control was mostly uninterrupted. The superintendents, whose

            county case rates caused them to adjust their learning plans intermittently experienced lower

            locus of control. To their credit, most of the superintendents accepted these new guidelines and

            some came to appreciate the assistance given from the state. Most superintendents accepted and

            respected, but did not necessarily like the subservient role they were mandated during COVID-

            19.

            Inductive Coding

            Research Question Two: Determine which practices, systems, or procedures established during

            COVID-19 will continue once the pandemic ends.

                    This next section veers away from tolerance for ambiguity and instead focuses on the

            practices and procedures that will continue to be utilized when the pandemic ends. It is worth

            noting that during the examination of research question one, some of these conversions or

            adaptations were already disclosed. For example, related to confidence, many superintendents

            explained how they became more transparent and their level of communication was augmented




Published by RED: a Repository of Digital Collections, 2021                                                        41

                           The Interactive Journal of Global Leadership and Learning, Vol. 2 [2021], Iss. 1, Art. 3




            by the pandemic. Some increased the number of radio spots they did, used videos ad nauseam to

            communicate with their internal and external publics, and increased the number and frequency in

            their use of surveys to obtain public opinion. Coping revealed the importance of core values,

            collaboration on all fronts, and expediency in the decision-making process. The section that

            examined calmness exposed a need for additional time spent on introspection and self-care.

            Finally, the section about control uncovered the practice of social reflexivity, the importance of

            modeling, the discomfort of being in a subordinate role, and perseverance.

                     The two major themes revealed during the inductive coding process were reevaluation

            and collaboration. Where the deductive coding sections were focused on each individual

            superintendent’s evaluation of self, the inductive piece is meant to be holistic and the focus shifts

            from individual to shared practices. Table 8 summarizes the themes that were revealed during the

            coding process.

            Table 8

            Inductive Coding Phrases and Themes

              Superintendent Phrase                                                                            Themes

              S1                   Teachers are transforming their thoughts about teaching                      Reevaluation

              S5                   Everyone involved needs to be proactive moving                               Reevaluation

                                   forward. We need to be more timely; our community

                                   expects this from us now

              S4                   This changes the way we will deliver instruction                             Reevaluation

              S3                   We can’t go back to the way we operated before COVID                         Reevaluation

              S8                   We all need to listen to the community better                                Reevaluation




https://red.mnstate.edu/ijgll/vol2/iss1/3
DOI: 10.55354/2692-3394.1025                                                                                                   42

                            Coquyt (2021): Self-Evaluation of Educational Leadership Practices During COVID-




              Superintendent Phrase                                                                      Themes



              S2                   Seeing others step up as leaders                                       Collaboration

              S5                   Good leaders surround themselves with good people                      Collaboration

              S3                   Work on delegating more and empower those who seek                     Collaboration

                                   out opportunities to lead

              S3                   More familiar with MDE and MDH because of COVID                        Collaboration

                                   and the resources they can provide

              S6                   We all needed to work together and this effort has                     Collaboration

                                   created more efficiency



                    After the coding process was completed, it dawned on me that it might be simpler to

            identify those things that did not change due to the pandemic. Educators have learned to adjust

            their teaching to the many outside forces that affect education. What is different at present is the

            number of and the speed that COVID-19 changes have generated in districts across the state. For

            those who teach in districts where COVID-19 cases were marginal, they noticed few changes to

            the way they taught and their students learned. For the vast majority, changes were abundant.

            During the interviews, S8 stated, “Sometimes it takes something like this to push us into a corner

            to make us come out and try things differently.” Sometimes, different is good if it turns out to be

            more effective and efficient.

                    It is important to note that some of what was done pre-COVID-19 will continue to be

            performed when the pandemic has subsided. Hiring new staff will return to face-to-face rather

            than via Zoom or some other video platform for obvious reasons. Teachers will physically walk




Published by RED: a Repository of Digital Collections, 2021                                                               43

                           The Interactive Journal of Global Leadership and Learning, Vol. 2 [2021], Iss. 1, Art. 3




            around their classrooms during a cooperative group activity providing guidance to each group

            rather than “pop in” to a breakout room. Students will be bussed to school, eat in the cafeteria,

            and have PE classes in the gymnasium. COVID-19 has created opportunities for districts to

            reevaluate past practices and determine if they were performed more effectively during the

            pandemic. Parent teacher conferences and Open House events were mentioned by quite a few of

            the superintendents. S4 stated, “We had our parent teacher conferenced virtually using Zoom this

            year. The thing we noticed was that more parents attended virtually than they had before. This

            was surprising.” S1 made the following observation, “I think some parents who normally don’t

            attend appreciated the fact that the teacher would schedule the conference on their time, not the

            other way around.” After having reevaluated how a past practice was performed during COVID-

            19, S8 asserted, “Parent teacher conferences will continue to operate as before, but the option of

            doing them virtually will also be given.”

                     By far, the most referenced revision had to do with instruction. Many superintendents

            mentioned that their district previously had 1:1 technology, and most had some type of learning

            platform, such as Google Classroom or Schoology, in place at the start of the current school year.

            Some referenced the technology “crash course” that many teachers endured last spring, but it did

            prepare them for teaching either in person, hybrid, or distance learning contingent on the

            fluctuating case numbers in their county. S7 asserted, “Some of what we are using is definitely

            going to stay. Teachers are finding better technology resources and improving their teaching, but

            too many are still in the substitution mode.” I pressed him to explain this a bit more and he

            referenced the Substitution, Augmentation, Modification, Redefinition (SAMR) model. He

            replied:




https://red.mnstate.edu/ijgll/vol2/iss1/3
DOI: 10.55354/2692-3394.1025                                                                                          44

                            Coquyt (2021): Self-Evaluation of Educational Leadership Practices During COVID-




                    The easiest thing to do is substitute and I see a lot of this. If you scan a worksheet and

                    put it on your laptop and share it with students, they are still just doing a worksheet. I

                    would like them to push into augmentation and modification. We’ll get there.

            Some superintendents discussed that they will encourage teachers to continue to record their

            lessons. S3 argued,

                    If you are a math teacher and you’ve been recording and putting your lessons on the

                    website for students and parents to see, why wouldn’t you keep doing this? This would

                    eliminate ‘make-up work’ and provide a great tutorial for students to use when working

                    at home.

            S1 stated that there is no reason for us to have snow days any longer. “If we do, all we need to do

            is pivot to our distance-learning mode that we’ve been doing for the past year.” Other

            superintendents explained how they and their teachers now have the option of attending

            professional development conferences virtually, and if the resources and seminars remain online,

            it should cut down on travel time as well. S2 stated succinctly, “We will not be transitioning

            back to the way it was, for sure.”

                    The last topic that will be examined in this section is collaboration. Most superintendents

            illustrated various examples of collaborative efforts during COVID-19 between administration

            and teachers, teachers and teachers, school board and community, administration and the state

            department of education, district to district, to name a few. Most heaped praises on their

            principals for their leadership, flexibility, and support. The African proverb, “It takes a village to

            raise a child” was in full display during these turbulent times. The most fascinating epiphany was

            that many superintendents began to reassess their leadership styles. S6 opined,




Published by RED: a Repository of Digital Collections, 2021                                                          45

                           The Interactive Journal of Global Leadership and Learning, Vol. 2 [2021], Iss. 1, Art. 3




                     One of the things that motivates me right now is seeing other people step up and be

                     leaders. We always talk about leaders and how we want to create leaders in our school.

                     This is actually happening…people are stepping up and taking on challenges, whether it’s

                     in food service, custodial, human resources, and our nurses…oh my gosh.

            S1 affirmed this sentiment by declaring, “A leader surrounds himself with good people, right?

            And the hardest thing for some of us is to do is not meddle with them. I’ve learned to stay out of

            their way.” S8 asserted,

                     We’ve done a good job getting the stakeholders and our teacher leaders at the decision

                     -making table. We’ve established more of a collaborative decision-making process. It

                     can’t be only one person’s decision. We now have paraprofessionals and custodians on

                     our district advisory committee. I have no idea why I didn’t use these people before.

            Lastly, S5 summed up his thoughts,

                     I have good people and I think that’s everywhere. We need to empower people to be

                     leaders and take action. That's something I'm going to continue to do. I call this type of

                     leadership informed decision-making. I believe this has helped enhance my ability to do

                     my job.

            Summary of Inductive Coding

                     The two themes exposed by the inductive coding segment were reevaluation and

            collaboration. Honestly, it was a pleasant change of pace to decipher the responses for themes

            unrelated to TA. The process of reevaluation occurs in school districts all the time. COVID-19

            more or less forced districts to change the way they had performed certain procedures in the past.

            COVID-19 provided districts with the opportunity to decide if all or certain elements of the “new




https://red.mnstate.edu/ijgll/vol2/iss1/3
DOI: 10.55354/2692-3394.1025                                                                                          46

                            Coquyt (2021): Self-Evaluation of Educational Leadership Practices During COVID-




            normal” should remain as is, augment what was previously used, or abandon it altogether. The

            results of this segment suggests that nothing will be completely abandoned. Anything that

            facilitated better-quality teaching and improved student learning will be retained. The last theme,

            collaboration, was directly related to the superintendent’s leadership style. Almost to a person,

            the superintendents who did not employ a distributed leadership approach prior to COVID-19

            have witnessed, first hand, the benefits of collaboration, empowerment, and shared decision-

            making.

                                                              Discussion

            Limitations and Implications

                    Perhaps the most glaring limitation was that only superintendents with at least four years

            of experience were included in this study. To the reader, four years may sound arbitrary, but

            through personal experience and having numerous interactions with administrators for over two

            decades, four years seemed appropriate. Are there superintendents with one or two years of

            experience doing a quality job? Absolutely. Personal prerogative trumped any scientific data

            about this argument. Another limitation was the absence of cross-case analysis. The years of

            experience superintendents who participated in the study varied from four years to twenty-one

            years. The total student population ranged from 350 to just over 2500. It should be noted that

            school size was selected based on my familiarity and experiences in smaller school districts.

            These differences did not matter as much as the phenomenon (i.e., reflections of the six attributes

            in the midst of the pandemic) under investigation. Stake (2006) described, “The quintain is

            something that we want to understand more thoroughly, and we choose to study it through its

            cases” (p. 42).




Published by RED: a Repository of Digital Collections, 2021                                                       47

                           The Interactive Journal of Global Leadership and Learning, Vol. 2 [2021], Iss. 1, Art. 3




                     The implications for future research could address any of the two limitations

            acknowledged in the previous paragraph. Aside from those practices acknowledged in the

            introductory paragraph of the section on Inductive Coding, the implications for future practices

            brought to light a few pearls that anyone in a leadership position should take into consideration.

            First, the importance of collaborative leadership. It was not as if none of the superintendents

            understood or were not practicing some form of collaborative leadership prior to COVID-19. I

            do question whether the leadership capacity of those NOT in a leadership position would have

            been ascertained if not for COVID-19. To a person, the superintendents commended certain

            individuals and appreciated how they tirelessly endeavored to make teaching and student

            learning succeed during the pandemic. My hope is that these proven leaders are not forsaken

            after the pandemic has passed. Presently, all educational leaders can simply stop and realize that

            there is leadership potential in many of those working right under your nose. Identifying,

            growing, developing, and empowering the leadership potential in these individuals is a crucial

            piece to realizing true collaborative leadership.

                     Secondly, I would like to revisit the idea of sensemaking examined previously in the

            section on Coping. Foldy et al. (2008, as cited in Marion and Gonzales, 2014) describe a

            sensemaker as that “who shapes how people understand themselves, their work, and others

            engaged in that work” (p. 224). Marion and Gonzales go on to suggest, “Decision making is

            turned upside down by sensemaking. Sensemaking suggests that the term decision making

            implies there is a concrete, correct, decision to be discovered” (p. 224). Granted, no one could

            possibly make sense of the pandemic in the early stages, but in time, most of the superintendents

            could at least make sense of the situation, and develop an appropriate response. In short, they

            became sensegivers. Sensegivers impart insight to others, understand the importance of



https://red.mnstate.edu/ijgll/vol2/iss1/3
DOI: 10.55354/2692-3394.1025                                                                                          48

                            Coquyt (2021): Self-Evaluation of Educational Leadership Practices During COVID-




            providing action plans rather than perfect plans, and value the need for promptness (Marion &

            Gonzales, p. 225). This concept is directly related to reevaluation; one of the major themes

            uncovered in the inductive coding segment. It would be prudent for all in a leadership role to

            apply some sensemaking acumen in order to make the decision-making process a bit less

            cumbersome.




Published by RED: a Repository of Digital Collections, 2021                                                    49

                           The Interactive Journal of Global Leadership and Learning, Vol. 2 [2021], Iss. 1, Art. 3




                                                               References

            Azorín, C. (2020). Beyond covid-19 supernova. Is another education coming? Journal of

                     Professional Capital and Community, 5(3/4), 381–390. https://doi.org/10.1108/jpcc-05-

                     2020-0019

            Bono, J. E., & Colbert, A. E. (2005). Understanding responses to multi-source feedback: The

                     role of core self-evaluations. Personnel Psychology, 58(1), 171–203.

                     https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1744-6570.2005.00633.x

            Bradbury, B. L., Suarez-Sousa, X. P., Coquyt, M., Bockelmann, T. L., & Pahl, A. L. (2020).

                     Teaching Under Crisis: Impact and Implications of the COVID-19 Pandemic on

                     Education in Minnesota. The Interactive Journal of Global Leadership and Learning,

                     1(2). Retrieved from https://red.mnstate.edu/ijgll/vol1/iss2/2

            Creswell, J. W. (2005). Educational research: Planning, conducting, and evaluating quantitative

                     and qualitative research (Fifth ed.). Pearson.

            Creswell, J. W. (2012). Research design: Qualitative, quantitative, and mixed methods

                     approaches, 3rd edition (3rd ed.). Sage.

            Creswell, J. W., & Poth, C. N. (2018). Qualitative inquiry & research design: Choosing among

                     five approaches. SAGE Publications.

            Durrheim, K., & Foster, D. (1997). Tolerance of ambiguity as a content specific construct.

                     Personality and Individual Differences, 22(5), 741–750. https://doi.org/10.1016/s0191-

                     8869(96)00207-3

            Endres, M. L., Chowdhury, S., & Milner, M. (2009). Ambiguity tolerance and accurate

                     assessment of self-efficacy in a complex decision task. Journal of Management &

                     Organization, 15(1), 31–46. https://doi.org/10.1017/s1833367200002868



https://red.mnstate.edu/ijgll/vol2/iss1/3
DOI: 10.55354/2692-3394.1025                                                                                          50

                            Coquyt (2021): Self-Evaluation of Educational Leadership Practices During COVID-




            Esterberg, K. G. (2001). Qualitative methods in social research (1st ed.). McGraw-Hill

                    Humanities/Social Sciences/Languages.

            Exec. Order No. 20-82, 78 Fed. Reg. 129 (July 30, 2020).

            Foldy, E., Goldman, L., & Ospina, S. (2008). Sensegiving and the role of cognitive shifts in the

                    work of leadership. The Leadership Quarterly, 19(5), 514–529.

                    https://doi.org/10.1016/j.leaqua.2008.07.004

            Furnham, A. (1994). A content, correlational and factor analytic study of four tolerance of

                    ambiguity questionnaires. Personality and Individual Differences, 16(3), 403–410.

                    https://doi.org/10.1016/0191-8869(94)90066-3

            Furnham, A., & Marks, J. (2013). Tolerance of ambiguity: A review of the recent literature.

                    Psychology, 04(09), 717–728. https://doi.org/10.4236/psych.2013.49102

            Hargreaves, A., & Fullan, M. (2020). Professional capital after the pandemic: Revisiting and

                    revising classic understandings of teachers' work. Journal of Professional Capital and

                    Community, 5(3/4), 327–336. https://doi.org/10.1108/jpcc-06-2020-0039

            Harris, A., & Jones, M. (2020). Covid 19 – school leadership in disruptive times. School

                    Leadership & Management, 40(4), 243–247.

                    https://doi.org/10.1080/13632434.2020.1811479

            Herman, J. L., Stevens, M. J., Bird, A., Mendenhall, M., & Oddou, G. (2010). The tolerance for

                    ambiguity scale: Towards a more refined measure for international management research.

                    International Journal of Intercultural Relations, 34(1), 58–65.

                    https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ijintrel.2009.09.004




Published by RED: a Repository of Digital Collections, 2021                                                    51

                           The Interactive Journal of Global Leadership and Learning, Vol. 2 [2021], Iss. 1, Art. 3




            Johnson, R. E., Rosen, C. C., & Levy, P. E. (2008). Getting to the core of core self-evaluation: A

                     review and recommendations. Journal of Organizational Behavior, 29(3), 391–413.

                     https://doi.org/10.1002/job.514

            Kajs, L.T., & McCollum, D. (2009). Examining Tolerance for Ambiguity in the Domain of

                     Educational Leadership. The Academy of Educational Leadership Journal, 13, 1.

            Leithwood, K., Harris, A., & Hopkins, D. (2019). Seven strong claims about successful school

                     leadership revisited. School Leadership & Management, 40(1), 5–22.

                     https://doi.org/10.1080/13632434.2019.1596077

            Lindzey, G., & Aronson, E. (1985). Handbook of social psychology, third edition: Volume 1:

                     Theory and methods (3rd ed.). Psychology Press.

            Maitlis, S. (2005). The social processes of organizational sensemaking. Academy of Management

                     Journal, 48(1), 21–49. https://doi.org/10.5465/amj.2005.15993111

            Maitlis, S., & Christianson, M. (2014). Sensemaking in organizations: Taking stock and moving

                     forward. Academy of Management Annals, 8(1), 57–125.

                     https://doi.org/10.5465/19416520.2014.873177

            Marion, R., & Gonzalez, L. D. (2013). Leadership in education: Organizational theory for the

                     practitioner, second edition (2nd ed.). Waveland Pr Inc.

            McCollum, D., & Kajs, L. (2007). School administrator efficacy: Assessment of beliefs about

                     knowledge and skills for successful school leadership. In Advances in educational

                     administration (pp. 131–148). Elsevier. https://doi.org/10.1016/s1479-3660(07)10008-1




https://red.mnstate.edu/ijgll/vol2/iss1/3
DOI: 10.55354/2692-3394.1025                                                                                          52

                            Coquyt (2021): Self-Evaluation of Educational Leadership Practices During COVID-




            McLain, D. L. (1993). The MSTAT-I: A New Measure of an Individual’s Tolerance for

                    Ambiguity. Educ. Psychol. Meas. 53, 183–189. https://doi.org/10.1177/

                    0013164493053001020

            McLain, D. L., Kefallonitis, E., & Armani, K. (2015). Ambiguity tolerance in organizations:

                    Definitional clarification and perspectives on future research. Frontiers in Psychology, 6.

                    https://doi.org/10.3389/fpsyg.2015.00344

            McLain, D. L. (2009). Evidence of the properties of an ambiguity tolerance measure: The

                    multiple stimulus types ambiguity tolerance scale–ii (mstat–ii). Psychological Reports,

                    105(3), 975–988. https://doi.org/10.2466/pr0.105.3.975-988

            Netolicky, D. M. (2020). School leadership during a pandemic: Navigating tensions. Journal of

                    Professional Capital and Community, 5(3/4), 391–395. https://doi.org/10.1108/jpcc-05-

                    2020-0017

            Norman K. Denzin; Yvonna S. Lincoln & Norman K. Denzin; Yvonna S. Lincoln. (n.d.). The

                    sage handbook of qualitative research (5th ed.). SAGE Publications, Inc. (US).

            Piatek, R., & Pinger, P. (2015). Maintaining (locus of) control? data combination for the

                    identification and inference of factor structure models. Journal of Applied Econometrics,

                    31(4), 734–755. https://doi.org/10.1002/jae.2456

            Simon, H. A. (1957). Administrative Behavior 2nd ed. Macmillan

            Skaggs, P. (2019) Tolerance for Ambiguity, INNOVATION Herndon, VA, Published by

                    Industrial Designers Society of America, Vol. Winter, p. 14-18

            Stake, R. E. (1995). The art of case study research (1st ed.). SAGE Publications, Inc.

            Stake, R. E. (2006). Multiple case study analysis (2nd ed.). Guilford Publications, Inc.




Published by RED: a Repository of Digital Collections, 2021                                                       53

                           The Interactive Journal of Global Leadership and Learning, Vol. 2 [2021], Iss. 1, Art. 3




            Strauss, A., & Corbin, J. (1998). Basics of qualitative research: Techniques and procedures for

                     developing grounded theory (2nd ed.). Sage Publications, Inc.

            Swaggert, J., Suarez-Sousa, X., Bradbury, B., Coquyt, M., & Mills, C. (2020). Responding to a

                     natural crisis: Exploring the impact of the COVID-19 pandemic on practicing school

                     teachers and graduate students in a Midwestern state. [IRB Approval: 1585446-1.]

                     Department of Leadership and Learning, Minnesota State University Moorhead.

            Weick, K. E. (n.d.). Sensemaking in organizations (foundations for organizational science) (1st

                     ed.). Sage Publications, Inc.

            Weisbrod, E. (2009). The role of affect and tolerance of ambiguity in ethical decision making.

                     Advances in Accounting, 25(1), 57–63. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.adiac.2009.02.011

            Williams, M. K. (2017). John Dewey in the 21st Century. Journal of Inquiry and Action in

                     Education, 9(1), 91–102.




https://red.mnstate.edu/ijgll/vol2/iss1/3
DOI: 10.55354/2692-3394.1025                                                                                          54