PJER, Vol 3, Issue 2 (2020)                                                        Evaluation of school…

      EVALUATION OF SCHOOL MANAGEMENT
        COMMITTEE (SMC) ON QUALITY OF
          EDUCATION: A CASE OF SINDH
Lubna Naz
PHD Scholar,
Applied Economics Research Centre, University of Karachi,
Sindh, Pakistan
Email: lubna@aerc.edu.pk

Naeem-uz-Zafar
Chief Economist Sindh,
Planning & Development Department, Govt of Sindh,
Sindh, Pakistan
Email: naeemuzzafar@hotmail.com

Noman Saeed
Assistant Professor
Applied Economics Research Centre, University of Karachi,
Sindh, Pakistan
Email: economanics@yahoo.com
                    ------------------------------------------------------------

ABSTRACT
The right to education is not only indicating the right to access to education but also
emphasizing the right to quality education. To improve the quality of education, World
Bank and other donor agencies introduced the need of community involvement in
school management system in achieving the right to education. Thus, multiple reform
programs initiated based on community involvement known as school-Based
Management (SBM) or School Management Committee (SMC). Given this, to improve
the quality education, many countries initiated multiple reform programs and
indicated the need of community involvement through community-school partnership.
Therefore, in Pakistan, like other provinces, Sindh has also formed School
Management Committee (SMC). This study is an attempt to evaluate the impact of
community involvement i.e. SMC on quality of education in Sindh province, Pakistan.
For the analysis, the study has used Sindh Education Management Information System
(SEMIS) database for the year 2013-14. To evaluate the impact of SMC intervention,
the study has constructed different measures of quality education such as school
environment index, teacher’s resource index, promotion rate, repetition rate, and
dropout rate. Further, the study has also assessed the quality of matching based on
different measures of matching quality. Since the study has selected those schools of
                                                  33

PJER, Vol 3, Issue 2 (2020)                                         Evaluation of school…

Sindh in which SMC is functional. Hence, to control the problem of self-selection bias,
the study has used a semi-parametric propensity score matching technique (PSM). The
overall findings of the study provide useful insights and reveals that the establishment
of SMC has positive and significant impact on access to school and quality of school
measures except the one i.e. student’s dropout rate. The study recommends that an
impact evaluation is one of the best ways to provide evidence-based useful insights for
the policymakers to improve educational outcomes for future generations.

KEYWORDS
School Management Committee, Quality of Education, Impact Evaluation, program
Evaluation, Propensity score matching, Average Treatment Effect

INTRODUCTION
In Pakistan, one of the key performance social indicators particularly, education,
remained a challenge since its independence in 1947. The right to education is not only
indicating the right to access to education but also emphasizing the right to quality
education. The access to good quality education is entailed for the development of
societies as a whole. Generally, the quality of education is assessed on the basis of key
performance indicators such as increase in student’s class enrolment, number of
qualified teachers and number of institutes in a country. To improve the quality of
education, World Bank and other donor agencies introduced the need of community
involvement in school management system. Thus, multiple reform programs initiated
based on community involvement known as school-Based Management (SBM) or
School Management Committee (SMC). Therefore, in Pakistan, like other provinces,
Sindh has also formed SMC in 1990. SMC was formed to control all aspects of school
management such as students’ enrollment, teachers’ attendance, classroom teaching,
school finance and outcome of the student. However, according to SEMIS 2013-14,
SMC is functional in around 82 percent of the public schools in Sindh. But the
deteriorating condition and current decline in the enrollment is alarming, this need an
in-depth assessment. Thus, this study aims to assess the impact of School Management
Committee (SMC) on quality education in Sindh for the year 2013-14.

According to UNESCO (2003), the primary source to assess the quality education is
to focus the student’s learning outcomes but the desired quality can be achieved if the
input, process, and output ensure the quality in terms of efficiency, effectiveness and
excellence and social justice. Nonetheless, it does not only impact the learner’s
cognitive development but also ensures a successful and productive future to our future
generation. Unfortunately, in Pakistan, education remained one of the deprived fields
and it has been facing serious challenges in the areas of access, quality, and
governance. However, since its inception, the government of Pakistan took various
initiatives for building concrete educational foundation of the country and proposed

                                           34

PJER, Vol 3, Issue 2 (2020)                                         Evaluation of school…

considerable attention to the betterment of the educational outcomes. Additionally,
education is one of the most powerful and supported factor for achieving the
sustainable development in a country. Thus, Pakistan, like other developing countries
of the world also signed the 17 Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs) agenda 2030
in September 2015.

The state of Pakistan has partially successful in providing access to education, but it
has not been able to ensure the quality of education. Recently, the education sector was
in the federal domain but after the 18th amendment in the 1973 constitution subject to
the education, which was made in 2010 under the Article 25-A, the education sector
was devolved to the provincial domain. It is, therefore, provincial Govt.’s
responsibility to provide prime education to all. Thus, each provincial Govt. initiated
several reform programs to provide and improve the quality education. The
establishment of provincial education foundation is also a result of 18th amendment.
The Sindh Education Foundation (SEF) initiated a number of reform programs based
on school interventions, particularly in remote areas of Sindh. In this context, the
government of Sindh introduced a sector reform program for primary as well as
secondary education known as the Sindh Education Sector Reform Program (SERP).
Additionally, this program was financially supported by the World Bank during the
Fiscal Year 2006/07 to 2011/12. The Second Sindh Education Sector Reform Program
(SERP-II) was arrived to improve the quality of service delivery and to increase the
student’s participation in schools. Improvement in educational governance ensures the
improved levels of access, quality and participation in education which ultimately
reduces various problems related to service delivery (UNESCO, 2009). This indicates
the need and the interest of community involvement in education for better planning
and management which can help to increase the demand for education and improve
the quality of education by improving the enrolment, attainment, and achievement of
the students (Watt, 200l). Additionally, studies conducted in Latin America, North
America, Sub-Saharan Africa, and Southeast Asia found positive impact of
community-school involvement on outcomes for students, schools and community
(DeSteffano et al., 2006; Vagas, 2005; Henderson & Mapp, 2002; Watt, 2001;
Mozumder & Halim, 2006). Further, Bray (2001) observed that community
participation increased community interest in education and also increased equity in
access to education. Finally, in almost all the studies reported three stakeholders in
school-based mechanism such as school, parents and community members and the
most common term used in the literature is School Management Committee (SMC).

In Sindh, a number of reform programs introduced under SERP-II for instance,
community-based committee is formed called School Management Committee (SMC)
which is one of the core factor of the SERP-II reform program agenda. Further to this,
the need of community involvement is also indicated in the minimum standards for

                                          35

PJER, Vol 3, Issue 2 (2020)                                         Evaluation of school…

quality education in Pakistan, developed by the interprovincial technical working
groups (IPTWGs) on quality and governance of education. However, SMC is a
triangular committee consisting of its three members namely school, parents and local
community. SMC is formed to provide a support to the head-teachers in order to
deliver quality education without any delay to the children, the monitoring of teacher’s
attendance and performance in the classroom. Finally, SMC is also formed to improve
the student’s performance by increasing the student’s enrolment and reducing the
dropout from the school. To improve the quality education, multiple reform programs
have been initiated by the Govt. of Sindh mainly under the umbrella of SERP.
However, the impact assessment studies, for evaluating the quality education, are very
limited in number.

Thus, there is a need to evaluate an in-depth assessment of such interventions/programs
on the overall quality of education. Thus, a number of related studies conducted to
examine the impact of SMC in improving the quality education such as Asim (2013)
evaluated the trends in education system of public schools in Sindh province for the
periods of 2004-05 and 2011-12 using descriptive analysis. Further to this, the study
also validated the statistics by robustness checks based on household-school level
census collected independently in three districts of rural Sindh namely Mirpurkhas,
Matiari, and Sanghar. However, Kumar (2016) and Meher and Patel (2018) studied the
role and functioning of SMC in public schools in district Kullu of Himachal Pradesh
and elementary schools in Jharsuguda district of India respectively. Their study found
that SMC has positively improved the quality of education. Similarly, another study
conducted by Rout (2015) to assess the role of SMC in rural elementary schools in
Balasore district of India and revealed that SMC has successfully achieved universal
enrolment by proper monitoring pupil’s attendance and absenteeism and also
efficiently developed school infrastructure. Further, the study revealed that the SMC
allocated funds has also been utilized properly. Osei-Owusu and Sam (2012) analyzed
the role of SMC to improve the quality education and teaching in Ashanti Mampong
Municipal Township Basic schools in Ghana-West Africa, based on simple random
sampling. However, the study found SMC ineffective to monitor the head teachers,
teachers, and student’s attendance but found very effective for developing better
school-community relationship. This study contributes to the existing literature by
empirically assessing the impact of SMC on quality education in Sindh.

This study is an attempt to assess the impact of one of the SERP programs that is
School Management Committee (SMC). The objectives of the study are twofold. In
the first step, to evaluate the impact of SMC intervention, the study has constructed
different measures of quality education such as school environment index, teacher’s
resource index (measures of access to school), promotion rate, repetition rate and
dropout rate (measures of quality of education). However, in the second step, the study

                                          36

PJER, Vol 3, Issue 2 (2020)                                         Evaluation of school…

evaluated the ex-post treatment effect of SMC on quality education measures using a
semi-parametric propensity score matching technique (Jimenez & Sawada, 1998;
Sawada, 1999; and Sawada & Ragatz, 2005). Since the study has selected those schools
of Sindh in which SMC is functional. Thus, to control the problem of self-selection
bias, the study has used a semi-parametric propensity score matching technique (PSM)
for treatment (schools with SMC) and control (schools without SMC). The overall
findings reveal useful insights to the policy makers to improve the quality of education
and reveals that the establishment of SMC has positive and significant impact on
access to school and quality of school measures except the one i.e. student’s dropout
rate.

The study is organized in such a way that after the introduction, the study is providing
the relevant literature review and then in the next section, the study is discussing the
proposed models based on different outcome variables and also providing the detailed
construction of each variable used in the model. Additionally, the section is also
discussing the source of data used for the analytical purpose. Furthermore, Section 4
is presenting the propensity score matching technique which is generally employed for
an impact evaluation. Additionally, section 5 is described as the results section of the
study which consists of descriptive as well as empirical insights drawn from the study.
Finally, the last section concludes the study by discussing the overall findings of the
study.

Model specification and source of data
To evaluate the impact of SMC intervention on different aspects of quality education,
such quality indicators are the outcome variables that are discussed in detail in the
following econometric models. For instance, the model, given in equation 1, is
basically discussing the general model which is consisting of the outcome of interest,
treatment variable and different covariates used in the analysis.
Yi = β0 + β1Ti + β2Vi + β3Wi +β4Zi + ∊            (1)

Where,
         Yi is the outcome of variable for school i (i.e. Quality and Access indices),
         T is the treatment variable for whether the school received the intervention or
         not. This is binary in nature,
         Vi is the student’s enrolment based indices such as student’s flow rates
         Wi is the teachers’ characteristics on average by school i. Such as gender of
         the teacher, teacher’s qualification, type of training acquired their
         designation, etc.
         Zi denotes the school characteristics including number of classrooms in the
         school, building condition, availability of washroom, drinking water facility,
         electricity facility, etc.

                                           37

PJER, Vol 3, Issue 2 (2020)                                            Evaluation of school…

Here, in the following models, each outcome variable and covariates are discussed in
detail.
Yi = β0 + β1Ti + β2Vi + β3 Zi + ∊          (2)
Yi = β0 + β1Ti + β2Vi + β3Wi + ∊           (3)
In equation 2, the outcome of interest is teacher’s resource index, a quality measure of
access to school. Since teacher’s characteristics are comprised of numerous indicators,
thus, a single variable composite index is constructed using principal component
analysis (PCA). Such characteristics are comprised of teacher’s designation (PST, JST,
HST, SS, SLT, OT, PTI, WIT, HMs, DT, others), their academic qualification
(doctorate, M.Phil., masters, bachelor, intermediate, matriculation and below matric),
type of post and professional training (PTC, CT, B.Ed., M.Ed., other trained and
untrained). These indicators were initially discrete in nature, first converted by taking
proportion of each variable from the total number of teachers and PCA is applied.

Similarly, PCA is also applied to construct another access to school outcome variable
in equation 3 i.e. the school environment index. This index is constructed using a
number of school-level indicators which are first converted into a dummy and scale
variable. A scale variable is defined as the variable which was initially discrete in
nature, converted into a scale of ranges from 0 to 2. A scale of 2 is assigned to the
highest level or degree, 1 is assigned to moderate degree and 0 to the lowest degree.
For example, in case of school facility index, a scale ranges from 0 to 2 is assigned to
a variable pupil-classroom ratio in such a way that a scale value of 2 is assigned if the
ratio ranges from 1 to 25, scale value of 1 if the ratio is 26 to 50 and a scale value of 0
if the ratio value is above 50. The school facility index is constructed using 10 school-
level indicators namely boundary wall, building condition, type of building, electricity
connection, electric fan availability, drinking water facility, library facility, and pupil-
classroom ratio. Thus, PCA is applied to construct a composite- school facility index
based on the variables discussed above.

However, PCA is a commonly used statistical technique for transforming orthogonally
a large number of indicators into a composite index (indices) which can be further
defined as the process of converting correlated variables to linearly uncorrelated
components. Each component of PCA is a linear (weighted) combination of original
indicators that follows the common arrangement. The construction of first PCA i.e.
school facility index is consisting of 9 indicators. Out of these 9 indicators, 6 indicators
have 2 dimensions and 3 having 3 dimensions.

Principal component analysis
In general, PCA is basically a linear combination of p variables or indicators with n-
dimensional vectors x1, x2,….,xn. Hence, an (n x p) matrix of X, its jth column is the
vector xj of values for the jth variable. Thus, a linear combination of the columns of

                                            38

PJER, Vol 3, Issue 2 (2020)                                         Evaluation of school…
                      𝑝
matrix X is given as ∑𝑗=1 𝑎𝑗𝑥𝑗 = Xa, where “a” is a vector of constants a1, a2,…,ap.
these PCs can be written as:
                          PC1 = a11X1 + …. + a1p Xp = Xa1
                                             .
                                             .
                                             .
                              PCp = ap1X1 + …. + app Xp = Xap

Since eigenvectors ak of the covariance matrix are used to find weights for the linear
combination and the eigenvalues S corresponding to each eigenvector a are the
variances of the linear combinations or PC. Moreover, another symmetric p x p matrix
similar to covariance matrix S, with exact eigenvalues (for k=1, 2,…, p), corresponding
to eigenvectors to create an orthogonal set of eigenvectors ak, which is known as PC
                                                                𝑝
loadings. To find p new linear combinations i.e. Xak = ∑𝑗=1 𝑎𝑗𝑘𝑥𝑗, a Lagrange
multiplier approach can be used with the restriction of orthogonal coefficient vectors,
which maximizes the variance subject to the condition that the new linear combinations
are not correlated with the earlier linear combinations. The newly obtained linear
combinations Xak are known as
the principal components.

Thus, the first and second components are not co-correlated each other. Similarly,
every following component is not correlated with the preceding one. Since it is of the
interest that to obtain a largest eigenvalue or variation, the corresponding eigenvector
a1 is considered. The first PC explains the greater variation, the second PC displays
second-largest amount (less than the first PC) and so on. Thus, PCA is an appropriate
technique which converts a large number of original variables (9 in case of school
facility and 26 variables in case of teacher’s index) into small set of linear
combinations that explains the total variation of the data (Dillon and Goldstein, 1984).
Further, PCA is also a best-suited technique for removing the problem of simultaneity
and multi co-linearity may arise among the original set of variables because it
maximizes the variance relative to minimization of least square distance (Jha and
Murthy, 2003).

Hence, the first principal component is used for school facility index and for teacher’s
quality index as well. For school facility index, the first PC explains 33% of the total
variation and 62% of the variance, using first three components. However, for
teacher’s index, it explains 13% of the total variation and 65% variation for first 10
components. Detailed summary of both the indices is provided in Annexure 2.
Yi = β0 + β1Ti + β2Wi +β3Zi + ∊           (4)
Yi = β0 + β1Ti + β2Wi +β3Zi + ∊            (5)

                                            39

PJER, Vol 3, Issue 2 (2020)                                          Evaluation of school…

Yi = β0 + β1Ti + β2Wi +β3Zi + ∊            (6)

However, the outcome variables given in above equations are the measures of quality
education. These outcome variables namely student’s promotion rate, repetition rate,
dropout rate called student’s flow rates that are constructed using cohort student flow
rate method by taking class wise enrollment and number of repeaters.

The cohort student-flow rate method, adopted from UNESCO, is used for calculating
the student- flow rates (promotion rate, repetition rate, and dropout rate) by taking
class-wise enrolment and numbers of repeaters. To calculate the class-wise promotion
rate, the number of students from a cohort enrolled in a given class at a given school
year t+1( i.e. 2013-14)is divided by the number of students from the same cohort
enrolled in the previous class in preceding school year t (i.e. 2012-13). Like promotion
rate, the student’s repetition rate is also derived by dividing the number of repeaters in
a given class in a given year t+1 (i.e. 2013-14) by the enrollment of same class but in
the previous year t (i.e. 2012-13). Finally, the student’s class-wise dropout rate is
calculated by subtracting the former student’s flow rates (promotion rate and repetition
rate) from 100.

Data source
In assessing the impact of SMC on quality education, this study has constructed a
number of variables using different techniques. In particular, at school level, this study
has constructed five outcome variables namely, student’s promotion rate, repetition
rate, dropout rate (student’s flow rates), school environment rate and teacher’s resource
index. Moreover, student’s promotion rate (measure of access to school), student’s
repetition and dropout rates (measures of quality of education) are constructed using
cohort student flow rate method. Additionally, the latter two indices are constructed,
for assessing the quality of education, using a composite index methodology i.e.
principal component analysis (PCA).

The school-level analysis is solely based on the Annual School Census called Sindh
Education Management Information System (SEMIS), provided by the School
Education and Literacy Department of Govt. of Sindh. SEMIS data provides
comprehensive education profile of Sindh province which comprises of information
such as school infrastructure and availability of school facilities, class-wise enrolment
and number of repeaters and detailed teacher’s information by gender and district. For
impact evaluation of SMC, the study has used 2013-14 SEMIS dataset having 46,724
numbers of schools in province of Sindh out of which 6,207 schools are (temporary
and permanently) closed.



                                           40

PJER, Vol 3, Issue 2 (2020)                                         Evaluation of school…

Estimation technique: propensity score matching
Matching technique is being used in various fields of study where one has two
comparison groups, a group of treated individuals (Y1) called treatment and a control
group of untreated individuals (Y0). Moreover, the technique provides one of the
possible solutions to the problem of selection bias by selecting on observable
characteristics (X) through random selection. The treatment binary variable denoted
by P, with a value (P = 1) if the individual undergoes treatment and (P = 0) if the
individual is not treated.

In addition to this, there are two potential outcomes for each group. Yi (1) denotes the
potential outcome of treated group and Yi (0) denotes the potential outcome of
untreated group. Thus, the treatment effect, commonly known as the causal effect, is
defined as the difference between these two potential outcomes which can be written
as:
TEi = Yi (1) - Yi (0)                (7)

Moreover, the matching technique randomly selects the potential outcomes and their
difference from the population. However, an individual effect for both the treated and
untreated is not observable. Hence, an average treatment effect (ATE) is estimated.
There are two parameters of interest or treatment effects. One is average treatment
effect (ATE), which can be defined as the expected difference between the two
outcomes and can be written as:
ATE = E (Y1) – E (Y0)            (8)
ATT = E [Y(1) | P = 1] – E [Y (0) | P = 1]              (9)

However, the average treatment effect on treated (ATT) is the difference between the
outcomes of those randomly selected individuals who were treated. The ATT is
constructed to deal with the problem of “selection-bias”.

In equation 9, the term on right hand E [Y (0) | P = 1] is called counterfactual mean,
which is for those being treated was not observed because outcomes (both) for the
same individuals cannot be observed at the same time; or in this case, a counterfactual
is a possibility of what would have happened if the participating school not received
(SMC) intervention Gertler et al. (2007). Thus, considering the expected outcome for
untreated individuals E [Y (0) | P = 0] is not appropriate because it shows that factors
which define treatment indicator also defines the outcome variable. Since both
individuals (treated and untreated) differ even in the absence of treatment and leading
to a problem of self-selection bias.

The comparison of average effects conditional on treatment status can be stated as:


                                          41

PJER, Vol 3, Issue 2 (2020)                                                               Evaluation of school…



E [Y(1) | P = 1] - E [Y(0) | P = 0] =   E [Y(1) | P = 1] - E [Y(0) | P= 1] + E [Y(0) | P = 1] - E [Y(0) | P = 0] 10

                     ATE                                      ATT                           Selection Bias
Thus, the true ATT can be estimated if the term E [Y (0) | P = 1] - E [Y (0) | P = 0] or
self-selection bias becomes equal to zero.

In experimental studies, the assignment to treatment is random and can be identified
directly. But in non-experimental studies, two strong assumptions are required to deal
the selection bias problem.

Unconfoundedness / Conditional Independence (CIA)
Conditional on observable characteristics X, treatment P and potential outcomes Y (0)
and Y (1) are independent. The assumption of CIA states as:
                            Y (0), Y (1) ⊥ P | X , ∀ X

The above notion is called unconfoundedness which implies that the selection is only
based on observable covariates. According to Rosenbaum and Rubin (1983), the
potential outcomes are independent of treatment conditional on X as well as
conditional on balancing score (propensity score, PScore) – the probability of an
individual who receives treatment based on his observed characteristics X. The
assumption of unconfoundedness/CIA, conditional on PScore can be stated as:
                         Y (0), Y (1) ⊥ P | Prob (X) , ∀ X

Overlap / Common Support Condition
Besides with the independence, the overlap assumption is also a strong assumption
which eliminates the chance of perfect predictability of treatment P given covariates
X should satisfy the overlap assumption which can be stated as:
                               0 < Prob (P = 1 | X) < 1

The probability of treated group must lie between 0 and 1 and it ensures that
individuals with same characteristics X having positive propensity of being treated and
untreated (Heckman, LaLonde, and Smith, 1999). Moreover, the condition of strong
ignorability holds if both unconfoundedness and overlap assumptions are valid
(Rosenbaum & Rubin, 1983).

For propensity scores, let’s consider a model based on binary choice probit model
                         Prob (P = 1| X) = G (Xβ) = Prob(X)
Let us choose a propensity score Prob(X) at random and two individuals having same
propensity score. One of them is treated and other does not. The average treatment

                                                         42

PJER, Vol 3, Issue 2 (2020)                                            Evaluation of school…

effect conditional on propensity score is as follows:
          E (Y| P = 1, P (X)) – (E (Y| P = 0, Prob (X)) = E (Y1 – Y0 | P (X))

These propensity scores are estimated via logit or probit model of estimation. Thus,
such matching technique is called semi-parametric matching. However, matching can
be obtained through different algorithms such as Nearest Neighbor Matching (NN)
(with or without replacement), caliper matching, radius matching, Kernel matching,
and stratification matching.

The current study employs NN matching, the most commonly used and proposed by
Abadie and Imbens (2006). Furthermore, the study also presents Kernel matching by
graphical representation (see Figures 2 through 6 in Annexure 1).

RESEARCH FINDINGS AND DISCUSSIONS
This section is providing the descriptive analysis which is basically consisting of the
outcome variables used in drawing the empirical findings of the study. Moreover, the
section is also discussing the empirical analysis for instance, the average treatment
effect of SMC using Propensity Score Matching technique.

Descriptive analysis
The descriptive analysis of school-level data for the year 2013-14 can be depicted from
the following figures. In general, the analysis is providing the description of schools
in which SMC is functional and schools without SMC in Sindh province.

However, the analysis is describing the pupil-class ratio, pupil-teacher ratio, schools’
facilities, teacher’s training by class-level and student’s flow rates for primary by SMC
status for the year 2013-14.
 50
                    42
 40
                                                              28            28
 30
 20                               15
 10
   0
                     Pupil-Classroom                            Pupil-Teacher

                                 Functional        Not Functional

            Figure 1: Pupil-Classroom Ratio & Pupil-Teacher Ratio by SMC

                                              43

PJER, Vol 3, Issue 2 (2020)                                                                 Evaluation of school…

The figure 1 is depicting the measures of quality education in Sindh that are pupil per
classroom and per teacher ratios in schools in which SMC is functional and not
functional for the year of 2013-14. However, a low pupil-classroom ratio is considered
as a good measure of quality education. Above figure indicates that the overall pupil-
classroom ratio is 42 per classroom in schools where SMC is functional, which is much
higher than a ratio of 15 in schools where SMC is not functional. Additionally, as per
international criteria, the pupil-teacher ratio should not exceed a ratio of 40:1, however,
in case of Sindh, the pupil-teacher ratio remained 28:1 for schools where SMC is
functional and not functional.

  Boundary wall                   10.70%
                                                                                                      89.30%

   Toilet Facility           7.80%
                                                                                                         92.20%

 Drinking Water             6.50%
                                                                                                          93.50%

      Electricity                8.50%
                                                                                                        91.50%

                 0.00% 10.00% 20.00% 30.00% 40.00% 50.00% 60.00% 70.00% 80.00% 90.00% 100.00%

                                            SMC Not Functional        SMC Functional

                    Figure 2: Schools with Basic Facilities by SMC
Figure 2 is showing the status of basic facilities available in public schools of Sindh
for the year of 2013-14. Additionally, the figure is also distinguishing the facilities by
SMC. Moreover, the figure is illustrating that the condition of schools with basic
facilities in which SMC is functional is significantly better than the schools where
SMC is not functional which ensures the quality education in such schools.
        .60
        .50
        .40
        .30
        .20
        .10
        .00
                      Elementary




                      Elementary




                      Elementary




                      Elementary




                      Elementary




                      Elementary
                 Higher Secondary




                 Higher Secondary




                 Higher Secondary




                 Higher Secondary




                 Higher Secondary




                 Higher Secondary
                        Secondary




                        Secondary




                        Secondary




                        Secondary




                        Secondary




                        Secondary
                          Primary




                          Primary




                          Primary




                          Primary




                          Primary




                          Primary
                          Middle




                          Middle




                          Middle




                          Middle




                          Middle




                          Middle




                     PTC Ratio           CT Ratio       B.Ed. Ratio    M.Ed. Ratio     Untrained   Other Trained
                                                                                         Ratio

                                                    Functional        Not Functional

            Figure 3: Average Number of Teachers by Training, Level & SMC

                                                             44

PJER, Vol 3, Issue 2 (2020)                                                       Evaluation of school…

The assessment of quality teachers is also very important element of quality education.
The figure 3 is depicting the average number of trained teachers across the different
levels of class in schools of Sindh where SMC is functional and not functional for the
year of 2013-14. Thus, in a broader way, the above figure reveals that most of the
trained teachers are associated with the schools in which SMC is functional. Moreover,
the PTC trained teachers are greater in belong to primary followed by elementary.
However, the M.Ed. qualified teachers (belong to middle, secondary and higher
secondary) are greater in SMC schools. Additionally, the figure is also presenting the
condition of untrained teachers in both types of schools, which shows that the average
number of untrained teachers is higher in schools where SMC is not functional.
 100       878887
  90     79                                                                                        81.9
  80
  70                                                                                       65616262.9
                   60
  60
  50                                                                                39.8
  40                    35393837
  30                                   18                                21
  20                                                                       131212.7
  10                                         0 0 0 0.30.2 0 0 0 0.10.1
   0
          Functional        Not              Functional       Not        Functional           Not
                         Functional                        Functional                      Functional
               Promotion Rate                    Repeatition Rate                 Dropout Rate

                              1 to 2        2 to 3   3 to 4   4 to 5     5 to 6

                        Figure 4: Student’s Flow Rates by SMC
The figure 4 is presenting the class-wise student’s flow rates for primary level of
education in schools of Sindh where SMC is functional and not functional. The figure
depicts that the student’s promotion rate in each class is significantly higher in those
school where SMC is functional schools. Moreover, class-wise repetition rate is
slightly higher in SMC functional schools than schools in which SMC is not functional.
Additionally, the repetition rate for class 1 to 3 is zero that is because of the government
of Sindh’s policy through which all the students of class 1 to 3 were promoted.
However, the dropout rate in each class is significantly lower in schools where SMC
is functional as compare to the schools in which SMC is not functional. Furthermore,
the figure also shows that the biggest dropout occurs for class 1 to 2 and class 5 to 6 in
both types of schools. However, the dropout from class 5 to 6 reflects the transition
from primary to middle-level schools and in some areas of Sindh; children who
graduated from class 5 were not able to find any nearby middle-level school (Ali,
2011).

                                                     45

PJER, Vol 3, Issue 2 (2020)                                            Evaluation of school…

Empirical findings: Estimates of PSM
The study is evaluated the ex-post average treatment effects of SMC on quality
education, discussed in this section. Since the Probit model is used to estimate the
propensities, thus the estimated coefficients, given in tables 1, 2 & 3 in Annexure 1,
are not the marginal effects which cannot be interpreted directly. Following tables are
providing the empirical findings of the impact of SMC on all the measures of quality
education.

                                         Table 1
                Average Treatment Effects of SMC on Teacher’s Index
 Matched/Unmatched                 Treated     Controls       Difference        T-stat
 Unmatched                          11.96         11.70          0.26            6.14
 Matched ATT                        11.96         11.78          0.18            2.21
The estimates of average treatment effect on treated (ATT) from matched sample and
the estimates of average treatment effect from unmatched sample are given in table 1.
Further, the table provides the estimates of treated group, control group and their
differences as well, which is the desired coefficient, for both the matched and
unmatched samples. Additionally, the estimates of ATT; in case of this study, the
average treatment impact of SMC on teachers’ index – measure of access to school, is
positive and statistically significant. The positive difference coefficient of value 0.18
shows an increase of 18 percent after matching which reveals that the SMC has
efficiently improved the student’s access to school by improving the quality of teachers
in Sindh. These findings are consistent with the studies of Brinkerhoff (2003), King &
Ozler (2005) and Baral et al. (2019). Whereas, the studies conducted by Khan (2003)
and Pryor (2005) provide negative impact of SMC.

The positive impact of SMC on teachers’ quality ensures improved school
accountability which can be measured by teacher’s academic and professional
qualification, reduction in teachers’ absenteeism, increase in teaching time, etc. In this
case, the teachers’ quality index – a measure of school accountability, is based on
teacher’s academic, professional qualification (training), and gender of the teacher.
Though the difference coefficient (difference of treated and control) of unmatched
sample is also positive and statistically significant but the coefficient is higher than the
ATT which is indicating an upward bias in estimating the SMC impact on teacher’s
resource index or on access to school
measure.
                                          Table 2
           Average Treatment effect of SMC on School Environment Index
 Sample                               Treated       Controls Difference           T-stat
 Unmatched                              0.35           -0.61          0.96         29.82
                                            46

PJER, Vol 3, Issue 2 (2020)                                         Evaluation of school…

 Matched ATT                           0.35         -0.53          0.87         16.0
The above table provides the impact of SMC on another measure of access to
school that is school environment index. The estimated difference coefficients
for the unmatched and matched samples are positive and statistically significant
and reveal that the former is higher than the later, indicating an upward bias.
Thus, the positive impact of SMC on school environment index provides that
the implementation of SMC has increased the student’s access to school in the
province of Sindh. Studies evaluated the impact of school-based management
(SBM) found that the role of community involvement particularly SMC,
improves the school infrastructure. In addition to this, these studies also report
that schools with SBM have more learning material and resources, better class
environment (in terms of pupil-teacher ratio), and improved infrastructure as
compare to non-SBM schools (Gertler et al. 2006; di Gropello and Marshall
2005; and Muskin 1999).

                                        Table 3
     Average Treatment effect of SMC on Students’ Flow Rates (Promotion Rate,
                             Repetition Rate & Dropout Rate)
     Variable               Sample           Treated Controls Difference T-stat
  Promotion Rate Unmatched                    32.32      23.47          8.84      19.63
                     Matched ATT              32.32      25.34          6.97       3.92
  Repetition Rate Unmatched                    0.06       0.02          0.04       2.53
                     Matched ATT               0.06       0.01          0.05       3.08
   Dropout Rate Unmatched                     67.62      76.50         -8.88     -19.69
                     Matched ATT              67.62      74.64         -7.02      -3.95
Table 3 presents the average treatment effect of SMC on student’s flow rates such
as promotion rate, repetition rate, and dropout rate. Here, the student’s flow rates are
considered as the measure of quality of education. Hence, the above table discusses
the impact of SMC on each flow rate. In general, all the three estimated difference
coefficients are statistically significant and positive except the dropout rate which is
negative for both unmatched and matched samples and indicating a decline in student’s
dropout rate in Sindh over the period of 2013-14. The estimated coefficient depicts a
decline of around 7 percent. Thus, it leads to improve the quality of education in Sindh.
Additionally, the difference in both the difference coefficients provides an upward bias
in estimating the ATT on student’s dropout rate. Furthermore, the table is also
discussing the ATT on student’s promotion rate and repetition rate. The estimated
findings are providing the positive and statistically significant results of ex-post
treatment effect of SMC. However, the difference coefficients for promotion rate and
                                           47

PJER, Vol 3, Issue 2 (2020)                                          Evaluation of school…

repetition rate provide an increase of around 7 percent and 0.05 percent respectively.
Hence, it is evident from the above discussion that the implementation of SMC has
significantly improved the quality of education in Sindh over the period of 2013-14.
These findings are consistent with the findings of Skoufias and Shapiro (2006) that
evaluated the impact of SBM on students’ survival i.e. dropout, repetition and failure
rates using propensity score matching technique. Their study found that a community
participation resulted a decline in dropout, repetition and failure rates of the students
in Mexico. Moreover, the studies conducted by Marshall et al. (2008); Di Gropello and
Marshall (2005); Pellini (2005); and Gertler et al. (2006) also found positive impact of
community involvement on student’s survival rates. Finally, King & Ozler (1998)
found positive effect on student’s promotion rate.

                                          Table 4
                                 Average Percentage Bias
  Group                  Pseudo R2       LR Chi-Square         Mean Absolute Bias
  Unmatched                 0.04              774.58*                   70.6
  Matched                  0.003              263.23*                    3.3
          Note: * indicates level of significance at 1%, ** at 5% &*** at 10%
In addition, to estimate the plausible ATT, the assessment of the matching quality (of
the covariates) is also very important for evaluating the impact of SMC on quality of
education. However, there are various measures which assess the quality of matching
namely standardized percentage bias-suggested by Rosenbaum and Rubin (1985), t-
test for homogenous mean value of each exogenous variable – also suggested by
Rosenbaum and Rubin (1985), Pseudo R2 – suggested by Sianesi (2004) and graphical
assessment of quality check. Table… is providing the reduction in average percentage
bias after matching from 70.6 to 3.3 which indicates that covariates are matched
efficiently. Additionally, the reduction in Pseudo R2 after matching is also an
endorsement of the efficient matching quality check. Furthermore, the standardized
percentage bias for each variable before and after matching is also assessed, provided
in table A4 which reveals the reduction in almost all the bias calculated before and
after matching. In addition to this, the table is also providing the t-test calculated for
equal variances in both the matched and unmatched samples, also an indication of
efficient quality match. Finally, figure 3 in Annexure 1, is depicting the reduction in
standardized percentage bias, the panel 1 of the figure is presenting the bias before
matching and panel depicts the reduction in percentage bias after matching. However,
figure 2 in Annexure 1, is the scatter diagram across each covariate for both matched
and unmatched samples. The figure is also ensuring the efficient matching of the
variables by minimizing the after matched percentage bias to zero. Conclusively, now
it is evident to say that matching indicators revealed the success in matching and thus,
the covariates for the both the treated and control groups are similar for estimating the

                                           48

PJER, Vol 3, Issue 2 (2020)                                          Evaluation of school…

ATT.

RECOMMENDATIONS
A number of studies empirically evaluated the impact of school-based management
(SBM) and found positive, negative and mixed results quality education. In Pakistan,
the recent education reform programs such as SERP-II and SDGs 2030, reports lessons
from past failures of (MDGs and SERP) reform programs based on efficient
monitoring and governance in the education system. Thus, the evaluation of such
reform programs provides evidence-based useful insights for the policymakers to
design more effective education-related policies. This study is, therefore, an attempt to
evaluate the impact of SMC intervention on the overall quality education in province
Sindh using a sophisticated empirical approach commonly known as semi-parametric
propensity score matching technique.

The overall findings of the study conclude that SMC has helped in improving the
quality of education particularly, in province Sindh. Moreover, the study reveals that
the average treatment effect of SMC on all the measures of access to school and quality
education used in the study namely school environment index, teacher’s index,
student’s flow rates, mainly student’s promotion rate, and repetition rate, found
significantly positive. Whereas, one of the student’s flow rates that is student’s dropout
rate found significantly negative over the period of 2013-14 which ensures the
improvement in the quality education particularly in schools where SMC is functional.
Further to this, the findings also ensure that improved school facilities and quality of
teachers are positively affected by SMC. Moreover, the study also assessed the quality
of matching by different measures of quality check. It is evident from the overall
matching quality assessment that matching is successful and hence, both the treated
and untreated groups are similar to estimate the average treatment effect of SMC on
quality education.

Finally, on the basis of the findings drawn, the study recommends that in order to
achieve further improvement in schools, the government of Sindh should empower
community involvement in rest of the public schools in which SMC is not functional.
In addition to this, the government should empower teachers through their
participation in decision making process and government should introduce teacher’s
professional training programs. For this, the government of Sindh should allocate more
SMC funds for making school management effective in these schools. Furthermore,
the findings of the study also recommend that the government should initiate more
school-level interventions and reform programs to further improve the education
system of Sindh and Pakistan.



                                           49

PJER, Vol 3, Issue 2 (2020)                                            Evaluation of school…

REFERENCES

Abadie, A., & Imbens, G. W. (2006). Large sample properties of matching estimators for
          average treatment effects. Econometrica, 74(1), 235-267.
Ali, S. (2011). Policy analysis of education in Sindh. United Nations Educational, Scientific
          and Cultural Organization (UNESCO).
Asim, S. (2013). The public school system in Sindh: Empirical insights.
Baral, R., Sahu, N., & Meher, V. (2019). The Attitude of Teachers and Parents of Students
          towards the Implementation of School Management Committee (SMCs) at Elementry
          Level. International Journal of Theory and Application in Elementary and Secondary
          School Education, 1(2), 58-74.
Bray, M. (2001). Community partnerships in education: Dimensions, variations and
          implications. Paris: Unesco.
Brinkerhoff, D. W., & Keener, S. C. (2003). District-level service delivery in rural
          Madagascar: Accountability in health and education. Report Prepared for the
          World Bank, Research Triangle Institute, NC.
DeStefano, J., Hartwell, A., Moore, A. M. S., & Benbow, J. (2006). A cross-national
          cost-benefit analysis of complementary (out-of-school) programs. Journal of
          International Cooperation in Education, 9(1), 71-88.
Dillon, W. R. & Goldstein, M. (1984). Multivariate analysis, methods and applications.
          John Wiley & Sons, Inc., ISBN 0-471-08317- 8.
Di Gropello, E., & Marshall, J. H. (2005). Teacher effort and schooling outcomes in rural
          Honduras. Incentives to Improve Teaching, 307.
Gertler, P., Patrinos, H. A., & Rubio-Codina, M. (2007). Methodological issues in the
          evaluation of school-based management reforms. Unpublished manuscript,
          World Bank, Washington, DC.
Gertler, P., Patrinos, H., & Rubio-Codina, M. (2006). Empowering parents to improve
          education: Evidence from rural Mexico. The World Bank.
Henderson, A. T., & Mapp, K. L. (2002). A New Wave of Evidence: The Impact of
          School, Family, and Community Connections on Student Achievement. Annual
          Synthesis, 2002.
Heckman, J. J., LaLonde, R. J., & Smith, J. A. (1999). The economics and econometrics
          of active labor market programs. In Handbook of labor economics (Vol. 3, pp.
          1865-2097). Elsevier.
Jha, R., & Murthy, K. B. (2003). An inverse global environmental Kuznets curve
          . Journal of Comparative Economics, 31(2), 352-368.
Jimenez, E., & Sawada, Y. (1998). Do Community-Managed Schools Work? An
          Evaluation of El Salvador's EDUCO Program. Working Paper Series on Impact
          Evaluation of Education Reforms. Paper No. 8.
Khan, S. R. (2003). Participation via collective action in government and NGO schools in
          Pakistan. Development in Practice, 13(4), 361-376.
King, E. M., & Ozler, B. (2005). What’s decentralization got to do with learning? School
          autonomy and student performance. Kyoto University: Interfaces for Advanced
          Economic Analysis. DP, 54(2005), 51-60.
King, E., & Ozler, B. (1998). What’s decentralization got to do with learning? The case

                                             50

PJER, Vol 3, Issue 2 (2020)                                           Evaluation of school…
          of Nicaragua’s school autonomy reform. Development Economics Research Group,
          Working Paper Series on Impact Evaluation of Education Reforms, 9, 278200
          -1099079877269.
Kumar, S. (2016). Roles and Functions of School Management Committees (SMCs) Of Govt.
          Middle Schools in District Kullu of Himachal Pradesh: A Case Study. Scholarly
          research journal for humanity science & English language, 3(17), 3876-3886.
Meher, V., & Patel, I. (2018). Functioning of school management committee at
          elementary level. International Journal of Recent Scientific Research, 9(5),
          26954-26958.
Mozumder, P., & Halim, N. (2006). Social capital fostering human capital: The role of
          community participation in primary school management in Bangladesh. Journal
          of International Development: The Journal of the Development Studies
          Association, 18(2), 151-162.
Muskin, J. A. (1999). Including local priorities to assess school quality: the case of Save
          the Children community schools in Mali. Comparative Education Review, 43(1),
          36-63.
Osei-Owusu, B., & Sam, F. K. (2012). Assessing the role of School Management
          Committees (SMCs) in improving quality teaching and learning in Ashanti
          Mampong municipal basic schools. Journal of emerging trends in educational
          research and policy studies, 3(5), 611-615.
Pellini, A. (2005). Decentralisation of education in Cambodia: Searching for spaces of
          participation between traditions and modernity. Compare: A Journal of
          Comparative and International Education, 35(2), 205-216.
Pryor, J. (2005). Can community participation mobilise social capital for improvement of
          rural schooling? A case study from Ghana. Compare: A Journal of Comparative
          and International Education, 35(2), 193-203.
Rosenbaum, P. R., & Rubin, D. B. (1983). The central role of the propensity score in
          observational studies for causal effects. Biometrika, 70(1), 41-55.
Rout, S. K. (2015). Functioning of school management committee in rural elementary
          school: A case study.
Sawada, Y., & Ragatz, A. B. (2005). Decentralization of education, teacher behavior, and
          outcomes. Incentives to improve teaching, 255.
Sawada, Y. (1999). Community participation, teacher effort, and educational outcome:
          the case of El Salvador's EDUCO program.
Sianesi, B. (2004). An evaluation of the Swedish system of active labor market programs
          in the 1990s. Review of Economics and statistics, 86(1), 133-155.
Skoufias, E., & Shapiro, J. (2006). Evaluating the impact of Mexico's quality schools
          program: the pitfalls of using nonexperimental data. The World Bank.
United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization (UNESCO). 2003.
          Ministerial Communique: Ministerial Round Table Meeting on Quality
          Education on October 3 and 4, 2003.
Vegas, E. (Ed.). (2005). Incentives to improve teaching: Lessons from Latin America.
          The World Bank.
Watt, P. (2001). Community Support for Basic Education in Sub-Saharan Africa. Africa
          Region Human Development Working Paper Series.

                                            51