SCHOOL MANAGEMENT WITH A FOCUS ON RESULTS: REGULATION AND
             CONTROL ACTIONS IN PUBLIC SCHOOLS

         GESTÃO ESCOLAR COM FOCO NOS RESULTADOS: AÇÕES DE
             REGULAÇÃO E CONTROLE EM ESCOLAS PÚBLICAS

    GESTIÓN ESCOLAR CON ENFOQUE EN RESULTADOS: ACCIONES DE
           REGULACIÓN Y CONTROL EN CENTROS PÚBLICOS

                                 https://doi.org/10.56238/sevened2025.038-021

 Clayse Cardoso Fidalgo1, Márcio Brito Cerveira2, Shirley Maria Dias da Silva3, Éder
                                 do Vale Palheta4

ABSTRACT
This study aimed to discuss the impacts of results-based management policies on improving
student performance and the quality of education offered, based on a literature review. This
review is justified by the interpretation and analysis of a theoretical framework, conducted
using the Latin American and Caribbean Health Sciences Literature (LILACS) database and
the Scientific Electronic Library Online (SCIELO) virtual library, covering publications from
2015 to 2025. The impacts of results-based management policies on improving student
performance and the quality of education offered are of paramount importance because they
are based on market logic, employing necessary and appropriate means for the
implementation of business management grounded in human capital theory, prioritizing
quantitative results over qualitative ones. It is concluded that the results-based management
model, through its managerial approach, focuses on developing goals and strategies aimed
at achieving results, while also promoting a business model that values only quantitative
aspects, prioritizing products and results measured through standardized, large-scale
assessments.

Keywords: Results-Based Management. Neoliberalism. Education.

RESUMO
Esse estudo teve como objetivo geral discutir os impactos da política de gestão de resultados
na melhoria do desempenho de estudantes e na qualidade do ensino oferecido, com base
em uma revisão bibliográfica, que se justifica pela interpretação e análise de uma
fundamentação teórica, realizada nas bases de dados Literatura Latino Americana e do
Caribe em Ciências da Saúde (LILACS), e na biblioteca virtual Scientific Eletronic Library
Online (SCIELO), que foram publicados no período de 2015 a 2025. Quanto aos impactos
da política de gestão de resultados na melhoria do desempenho dos alunos e na qualidade
do ensino oferecido é de suma importância porque está pautada na lógica de mercado ao

1 Master in Education. Facultad Interamericana de Ciencias Sociales. Paraguay.

E-mail: claysefidalgo1@gmail.com
2 Dr. in Public Administration. Facultad Interamericana de Ciencias Sociales. Paraguay.

E-mail: cerveira_brito@yahoo.com.br
3 Master in Education. Universidade de Évora. Portugal.

E-mail: shirleymd48@hotmail.com
4 Dr. in Education. Facultad Interamericana de Ciencias Sociales. Paraguay.

E-mail: edervpalheta@gmail.com

               Knowledge Networks: Education as a Multidisciplinary Field
  SCHOOL MANAGEMENT WITH A FOCUS ON RESULTS: REGULATION AND CONTROL ACTIONS IN
                                 PUBLIC SCHOOLS

empreender meios necessários e adequados para a efetivação de uma gestão empresarial
alicerçada na teoria do capital humano com resultados quantitativos em detrimento de
resultados qualitativos. Conclui-se que o modelo de gestão por resultado empreende pelo
modelo gerencialista na elaboração de metas e estratégias que prevê o alcance de
resultados com a propagação do modelo empresarial que valoriza somente os aspectos
quantitativos que privilegiam os produtos e os resultados medidos em avaliações de larga
escala padronizadas.

Palavras-chave: Gestão por Resultados. Neoliberalismo. Educação.

RESUMEN
Este estudio tuvo como objetivo analizar el impacto de las políticas de gestión basadas en
resultados en la mejora del rendimiento estudiantil y la calidad de la educación ofrecida, a
partir de una revisión bibliográfica. Dicha revisión se justifica mediante la interpretación y el
análisis de un marco teórico, utilizando la base de datos LILACS (Literatura Latinoamericana
y del Caribe en Ciencias de la Salud) y la biblioteca virtual SciELO (Biblioteca Científica
Electrónica en Línea), que abarca publicaciones de 2015 a 2025. El impacto de estas
políticas en la mejora del rendimiento estudiantil y la calidad de la educación ofrecida es de
suma importancia, ya que se fundamenta en la lógica de mercado, empleando los medios
necesarios y apropiados para la implementación de la gestión empresarial basada en la
teoría del capital humano, y priorizando los resultados cuantitativos sobre los cualitativos. Se
concluye que el modelo de gestión basado en resultados, a través de su enfoque gerencial,
se centra en el desarrollo de metas y estrategias orientadas al logro de resultados, a la vez
que promueve un modelo de negocio que valora únicamente los aspectos cuantitativos,
priorizando productos y resultados medidos mediante evaluaciones estandarizadas a gran
escala.

Palabras clave: Gestión Basada en Resultados. Neoliberalismo. Educación.




                 Knowledge Networks: Education as a Multidisciplinary Field
    SCHOOL MANAGEMENT WITH A FOCUS ON RESULTS: REGULATION AND CONTROL ACTIONS IN
                                   PUBLIC SCHOOLS

1 INTRODUCTION
       The implementation, in the mid-1990s, of the managerial management model in Brazil,
typical of neoliberal ideals, as a solution to the drop in the levels of production and
commercialization of products that the country was facing, and with the objective of raising
public administration to a level of efficiency, reached the various public sectors and,
notwithstanding, education. It is important to emphasize that this is not a dynamic that
transcends the national context, assuming global proportions.
       As Brazil is one of the founding countries of the United Nations (UN), with
representation since 1947, and being a signatory, it corroborates its objectives, which are to
promote world peace, the guarantee of rights, among others, and the promotion of initiatives
aimed at the socioeconomic and cultural progress of the countries.
       The internationalization of education is promoted by UNESCO, through its documents
and guidelines, establishing pacts and strategies for the participating countries. These
documents guide the implementation of educational policies that shape the profile of the
individual who wishes to be trained, according to the educational objectives that are planned
to be achieved.
       Based on the Incheon Declaration, which delegated UNESCO to coordinate Education
2030, based on the Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs), it argues that education drives
the transformation of lives with fundamental principles such as quality, inclusion and
equitable, during the life course (2015). It is observed, therefore, that it is a guiding document
that introduces several important concepts for educational management, including the
evaluation of learning outcomes and the implementation of mechanisms to monitor the
educational progress of students.
       In addition, the normative document in theory emphasizes the training and continuous
qualification of the pedagogical team, the promotion of motivation among education
professionals and the search for efficiency and effectiveness in educational processes. Such
approaches reflect typical characteristics of a neoliberal culture, which prioritizes
performance measurement, operational efficiency, and results-based management, aligning
education with market principles and business practices (BUENO, 2019).
       In view of the above, it is possible to evidence the worldwide advance of structuring
educational policies that are in line with the neoliberal ideology that defends the freedom of
the market and the reduction of the role of the State in social policies, the control of public
spending, the predominance of market logic in the economy, the adoption of results-oriented

                 Knowledge Networks: Education as a Multidisciplinary Field
    SCHOOL MANAGEMENT WITH A FOCUS ON RESULTS: REGULATION AND CONTROL ACTIONS IN
                                   PUBLIC SCHOOLS

management models and the challenges imposed by technological advances, with direct
impacts on the area of education (MESZÁROS, 2000).
       From this context, in Brazil, there is a discussion about the democratic management
of education, a movement that was a consequence of social demands for rights, including
involvement in decision-making processes, guaranteed in the Citizen Constitution of 1988
(CF/88), in the Law of Guidelines and Bases of National Education of 1996 (LDB/96)
reaffirmed in the National Education Plan of 2001 (PNE), as well as in goal 19 of the 2014
PNE (BRASIL, 2014). However, education is put at risk, in the face of procedures based on
external agents that, validated by the administrations, start to order the methods and contents
of educational policies. In view of the above, it is possible to infer and say that there was an
increase in the participation of the private sector in the construction of agendas and in the
production of actions for basic education.
       In view of this, were we instigated to understand how the efficient use of available
resources can positively influence educational results, especially with regard to raising
student performance and improving the quality of education offered?
       The objective was to discuss the impacts of the results management policy on
improving student performance and the quality of education offered.


2 METHODOLOGY
       The type of investigation was through bibliographic research based on the descriptive
approach, with the use of scientific productions in databases such as Latin American and
Caribbean Literature in Health Sciences (LILACS), and in the virtual library Scientific
Electronic Library Online (SCIELO). This type of research is essential in the preparation of
scientific investigations, because it provides a better knowledge of the phenomenon under
study. It allows the identification of the current state of knowledge, the identification of gaps
and the theoretical foundation of the work. Among the materials that make up the
bibliographic research are books, scientific articles, theses, dissertations, journals and legal
norms and other types of consolidated publications, which can be accessed both in print and
digital format (APPOLINÁRIO, 2019).
       According to Marconi and Lakatos (2016), the bibliographic research is based on the
analysis of already published materials related to the theme under study, involving a
systematic review of books, scientific articles, dissertations, theses and other academic



                 Knowledge Networks: Education as a Multidisciplinary Field
    SCHOOL MANAGEMENT WITH A FOCUS ON RESULTS: REGULATION AND CONTROL ACTIONS IN
                                   PUBLIC SCHOOLS

productions. Its main objective is to offer a theoretical basis that supports the construction of
the work.
       The descriptors used were: "Neoliberalism", "Result Management" and "Control". The
inclusion criteria adopted were articles in Portuguese and English that contemplated the
problem under study and that were present in the selected descriptors, published between
2015 and 2025. Articles not published in full and outside the cited period, as well as those
that do not address the theme, were excluded.
       After selecting the articles according to the inclusion criteria previously determined,
the following steps were performed:
    a) reading of studies carried out on the subject;
    b) bibliographic survey;
    c) discussion in a research group to adapt the theme;
    d) preparation of the article.


3 RESULTS
       It was chosen to present the results in the form of topics, based on the central question
that guided the study. This approach was classified as qualitative analysis, as it offers a more
efficient organization of the information collected.


3.1 THE THEORY OF HUMAN CAPITAL AND THE PROPOSAL OF BUSINESS
EDUCATION
       The Human Capital Theory (TCH) in Sandri's (2016) view, it is possible to reflect and
say that, to date, it has been used by entrepreneurs as a practical and theoretical strategy
that guides their projects in the area of education. Through this approach, it was observed
that there was a reduction of education to a purely economic perspective, in its worst sense.
In other words, education has come to have a meaning of a tool to teach people to become
entrepreneurs of themselves, often leaving aside its more human, social and cultural aspects.
       It is important to remember that Laval (2021) comments on Foucault's theory,
especially from the perspective of entrepreneurship, whose approach brings valuable
contributions to the reflection on neoliberalism, by showing how the idea of human capital
manifests itself in the figure of the entrepreneur himself, which reinforces the feeling that
workers lose the consciousness of their own class, which increases the feeling of alienation.



                 Knowledge Networks: Education as a Multidisciplinary Field
    SCHOOL MANAGEMENT WITH A FOCUS ON RESULTS: REGULATION AND CONTROL ACTIONS IN
                                   PUBLIC SCHOOLS

         In this sense, it is convenient to add, according to Laval's (2021) ideas, that the worker
is manufactured by this rationality, ready to act in the market, as a kind of cog in a gear that
cannot ascend socially and take responsibility for its own sustenance and existential destiny.
However, the author reflects that the identity and behavior of the neoliberal subject are not
natural, but result from a process of social formation or construction, which Foucault calls
subjectivation.
         Thus, there is the neoliberal context that is characterized by a standardized narrative
of the individual around the image of the organization, called the Theory of Human Capital,
whose focus permeates a set of practices that has spread throughout society and has come
to occupy a central position in the institutional transformations that contribute to the
production of a new connotation of the subject, what is called entrepreneurial or neoliberal,
reduced to human capital, with a managerial interpretation of the human being (LAVAL,
2019).
         From this perspective, the traditional view of education undergoes changes in the
conception of neoliberalism, that is, in the face of this new paradigm, it is no longer seen as
an exclusive property of the State, nor as a prerogative of the school. Instead, it becomes a
dispersed phenomenon, present in all aspects of socioeconomic and cultural life, so that its
content, its values and its practices become present in all spaces of coexistence and
discussion, based on a new paradigm of society. In this logic of thought, a new definition of
school is registered that is consistent with the written, because,
         The school, which was previously based not only on the professional value of
knowledge, but also on its social, cultural, and political dimension, understood in different
ways according to ideological and political currents, has been redirected, by the current
reforms, to goals related to competitiveness, in line with the demands of the globalized
economy (LAVAL, 2019, p. 13)
         In this bias of this discussion, neoliberalism begins to register, in the very structuring
axis of education, the components of the mechanism and practices of a pedagogical
governmentality responsible for strengthening the strategies of entrepreneurship in
education. Because of this, the school becomes a reflector of the designations that are related
to the scenarios of the financial system, integrating itself into the daily lives of educators, as
well as evidence such as management processes, the formulation of performance metrics,
the broad resignification of curricular content and the transformation of human relations into



                 Knowledge Networks: Education as a Multidisciplinary Field
    SCHOOL MANAGEMENT WITH A FOCUS ON RESULTS: REGULATION AND CONTROL ACTIONS IN
                                   PUBLIC SCHOOLS

commodities, in addition to the fact that learning is re-signified as entrepreneurship (COSTA,
2019)


3.2 SCHOOL MANAGEMENT FOR LEARNING OUTCOMES
         In the environment of managerial administration, the relationship between
management, school and company is discussed, due to the fact that the private sector
represents a large portion entering school spaces, with its "expertise" for public
administration, with the proliferation of consultancies, organizations and foundations that are
committed to training education through actions with school management (PERONI;
CAETANO, 2015). In this bias, it is assumed that the adoption of management models of
administration changes school management.
         In the area of educational management, it is observed the performance of institutes
linked to large business conglomerates and financial institutions. An example is the Unibanco
Institute, which, as of 2003, began to present proposals aimed at formal education. In 2007,
already expressing the intention of influencing public policies, it launched the Youth of the
Future Project in Brazil, which implemented programs that focused on the School
Management for Results (GEPR) model (PERONI; CAETANO, 2015).
         In Management by Results, management must have three dimensions: pedagogical,
administrative and participatory policy. The pedagogical political dimension aims to ensure
that the school fulfills its social function, which should be provided for in its Pedagogical
Political Project (PPP) and concretized in its practice, aiming to guarantee access to school,
permanence and learning of students (INSTITUTO UNIBANCO, 2013).
         The administrative dimension is involved in the school's routine, such as human,
physical and material resources, as well as data, records and pedagogical information.
Therefore, there is an urgent need for technical knowledge for management to be efficient,
providing student learning. Thus, it is necessary to highlight that the idea of bureaucratic
management must be overcome by a strategic vision.
         In the participatory dimension, the interaction of the community (teachers, employees,
students and parents) in institutional decisions, in the organization of the school, in the
collective construction is understood, as everyone involved ends up being co-responsible for
the improvement of the results and performance of the students (INSTITUTO UNIBANCO,
2013).



                 Knowledge Networks: Education as a Multidisciplinary Field
    SCHOOL MANAGEMENT WITH A FOCUS ON RESULTS: REGULATION AND CONTROL ACTIONS IN
                                   PUBLIC SCHOOLS

       In view of the assumptions, Management by Results presents itself as an innovation
in school administration, that is, as a renewal of business practices that, despite incorporating
certain innovations, maintain the emphasis on goals defined in a centralized way, following a
traditional bureaucratic logic, accompanied by strict control over the work of others
(BRAVERMAN, 1974).
       In addition, Management by Results is supported by the Management Circuit, which is
a methodology developed to structure, organize, and systematize the processes and
practices of school management, focusing on improving pedagogical management and
improving student learning, covering all school routines and activities, which should be
focused on the pedagogical (HENRIQUES et al. 2021).
       Therefore, the Management Circuit is inspired by the PDCA management tool, which
has the following objectives: plan, execute, check and act/adjust, which now has the following
stages of planning, execution, monitoring and correction of routes, as a result of an action
plan prepared by the school community in order to achieve the goals established based on
its reality (INSTITUTO UNIBANCO, 2017).
       Thus, the concept of School Management for Results (GEpR) is based on the premise
that no organization works properly without structured management. In this sense, GEpR is
materialized through the elaboration of Action Plans, considered fundamental instruments to
make participatory planning in the school environment viable. These plans are validated and
monitored by a team of supervisors. Through this process, the school community defines,
based on its diagnosis, the actions necessary to achieve the desired results (LIMA:
RODRIGUES, 2022).


4 DISCUSSION
       It is reiterated that the Human Capital Theory (HCT) in the words of Laval (2019) is
closely related and grounded in the proposal of business education where it represents
interconnected concepts that have gained prominence in the current panorama, especially
with regard to the rapid transformations of the labor market and the demands for innovation,
productivity and competitiveness.
       Because of this, it is argued that in the TCH, education is no longer seen only as a
social right or a phase of life, but as a strategy to increase economic efficiency and promote
sustainable growth, whose approach reinforces the idea that the economic growth of a
country is closely linked to the degree of qualification of its working population. Therefore,

                 Knowledge Networks: Education as a Multidisciplinary Field
    SCHOOL MANAGEMENT WITH A FOCUS ON RESULTS: REGULATION AND CONTROL ACTIONS IN
                                   PUBLIC SCHOOLS

public and private policies that promote quality education, continuous training and
occupational health are essential in the search for the improvement of professional
qualifications.
       The business education proposal is based on the increase of human capital in
organizations through investment strategies in continuous training, to enhance the skills of its
employees, increasing their productivity and contributing to the economic growth of the
organization. This means that business education, supported by the theory of human capital,
becomes a vector of innovation, competitiveness and corporate social responsibility.
Therefore, in an increasingly complex and competitive world, the synergy between human
capital theory and business education presents itself as an indispensable strategy for long-
term success.
       And in this scenario is the School Management for Results (GEpR), which through the
global and cultural transformations of the system that seeks to apply private management
methods in the public sector, with a focus on results, efficiency and control in the public
administration that has the responsibility of assuming a new efficient management model,
enabling new organizational knowledge, technologies and greater supervision of the
controlling bodies, in which the public administrator starts to optimize services with the
introduction of new paradigms capable of promoting quality service in the public sector,
ensuring more efficient and effective services to citizens (LIMA: RODRIGUES, 2022).
       However, for the authors, it is perceived that the management model focuses on the
logic of results, based on a policy of decentralization of educational management aims to
promote the improvement of quality in schools, triggering processes influenced by the logic
of the market, based on principles such as efficiency, effectiveness and productivity.
       From this point of view, a change is made in school management directed by the
referrals of the private administration, together with a policy of external evaluation that uses
the measures as good or bad results to justify financial punishments to public institutions, in
which school management is imprisoned to the artifices of the capitalist project and, as a
public institution, Instead of ensuring quality education, the institution has gradually lost the
confidence of its public regarding the effectiveness of the services offered.


5 CONCLUSION
       Through this study, it was discussed that the impacts of the results management policy
on the improvement of student performance and the quality of education offered is of

                 Knowledge Networks: Education as a Multidisciplinary Field
    SCHOOL MANAGEMENT WITH A FOCUS ON RESULTS: REGULATION AND CONTROL ACTIONS IN
                                   PUBLIC SCHOOLS

paramount importance because it is based on the logic of the market when undertaking
necessary and adequate means for the effectiveness of a business management based on
the theory of human capital with quantitative results to the detriment of qualitative results.
       In this sense, it was possible to understand that having as a subsidy the theoretical
discussion related to these results, it is highlighted that within the scope of the capitalist world-
system, a business education operated and materialized by a management by results
germinates in the light of dynamics of practical programs with their logics and specificities
that influence and interfere in the pedagogical aspects of the school as regulation, budget,
hiring and/or training of people.
       Based on the results obtained, the management model by results undertakes the
managerialist model in the elaboration of goals and strategies for the field of public
administration, which denotes its entrepreneurial character, impregnated by the logic of
capital from the neoliberal perspective. Because of this, it is understood that this managerial
vision that foresees the achievement of results with the propagation of the business model
that is the only one capable of achieving the best educational indices in the achievement of
teaching quality, values only the quantitative aspects that privilege the products and the
results measured in standardized large-scale evaluations.
       Regarding the limitations of the study, it is reiterated the relevance of future research
on the understanding of the theme under study, in order to understand that the culture of
management by results must be effective with the participation of all school actors.
       Finally, this research does not intend to exhaust the theme, but rather to encourage
new and continuous studies on the subject, considering the rapid advancement of scientific
knowledge, especially in the educational field, and the relevance of a theme that still
represents a great challenge for society: management by results.


REFERENCES

Appolinário, F. (2019). Metodologia da ciência: Filosofia e prática da pesquisa. São Paulo:
   Thomson.
Braverman, H. (1974). Trabalho e capital monopolista: A degradação do trabalho no século
   XX (3rd ed.). Rio de Janeiro: Editora Guanabara.
Brasil. (1988). Constituição da República Federativa do Brasil de 1988. Brasília, DF:
   Presidência da República.
Brasil. Ministério da Educação. (2001). Lei nº 10.172, de 9 de janeiro de 2001. Aprova o
   Plano Nacional de Educação. Diário Oficial da União, Brasília, DF.

                 Knowledge Networks: Education as a Multidisciplinary Field
    SCHOOL MANAGEMENT WITH A FOCUS ON RESULTS: REGULATION AND CONTROL ACTIONS IN
                                   PUBLIC SCHOOLS

Brasil. Ministério da Educação. (2014). Lei nº 13.005, de 25 de junho de 2014. Aprova o
   Plano Nacional de Educação - PNE. Diário Oficial da União, Brasília, DF.
Bueno, C. A. E. (2019). Qualidade da educação na agenda global: Análise da Educação para
   Todos da Unesco [Dissertação de mestrado, Escola de Filosofia, Letras e Ciências
   Humanas, Universidade Federal de São Paulo]. Guarulhos, Brazil.
Costa, S. de S. G. (2019). Governamentalidade neoliberal, teoria do capital humano e
   empreendedorismo. Educação & Realidade, 34(2), 171–186.
Henriques, R. (2021). Gestão e avanço contínuo em educação: A teoria da mudança no
   Programa Jovem de Futuro. São Paulo: Instituto Unibanco.
Instituto Unibanco. (2017). Projeto Jovem de Futuro [PowerPoint presentation]. Fortaleza:
     Instituto Unibanco.
Laval, C. (2021). Neoliberalismo por Christian Laval: Entrevista à Revista Aurora (F. Amorim,
   T. Chicarino, & R. Segurado, Interviewers). Aurora: Revista de Arte, Mídia e Política, 14,
   5–32.
Laval, C. (2019). Novo neoliberalismo, autoritarismo e os novos caminhos do sindicalismo
   (E. Sanvicente, Interviewer). Teoria Jurídica Contemporânea, 4(1).
Lima, E. M. B. da S., & Rodrigues, D. S. (2022). Gestão escolar para resultados (GEPR) e
   parceria público-privada do PROEMI/JF em escolas públicas de ensino médio. Revista
   Ibero-Americana de Estudos em Educação, 17(1), 97–115.
Marconi, M. de A., & Lakatos, E. M. (2016). Técnicas de pesquisa: Planejamento e execução
   de pesquisas, amostragens e técnicas de pesquisa, elaboração, análise e interpretação
   de dados (7ª ed.). São Paulo: Atlas.
Mészáros, I. (2000). A crise estrutural do capital. Revista Outubro, (4).
Peroni, V., & Caetano, R. (2015). O público e o privado na educação: Projetos em disputa?
   Revista Retratos da Escola, 9(17), 337–352. Retrieved from http://www.esforce.org.br/
Sandri, S. (2016). Relação público-privado no contexto do ensino médio brasileiro: Em
   disputa a formação dos jovens e a gestão da escola pública [Tese de doutorado, Setor
   de Educação, Universidade Federal do Paraná]. Curitiba, Brazil.




                 Knowledge Networks: Education as a Multidisciplinary Field
    SCHOOL MANAGEMENT WITH A FOCUS ON RESULTS: REGULATION AND CONTROL ACTIONS IN
                                   PUBLIC SCHOOLS