Cypriot Journal of Educational
                                           Sciences
                                           Volume 16, Issue 2 (2021) 594-611
                                                                                                          www.cjes.eu


               Women and leadership style in school management:
                        Study of gender perspective
Widyatmike Gede Mulawarman a*, Faculty of Teacher Training and Education, Mulawarman University, Jl. Muara
       Pahu Kampus Gunung Kelua, Samarinda, East Kalimantan, Indonesia. http://orcid.org/0000-0002-0996-
       3757
Laili Komariyah b, Faculty of Teacher Training and Education, Mulawarman University, Jl. Muara Pahu Kampus
         Gunung Kelua, Samarinda, East Kalimantan, Indonesia. http://orcid.org/0000-0001-9446-1673
Suryaningsi c, Faculty of Teacher Training and Education, Mulawarman University, Jl. Muara Pahu Kampus Gunung
        Kelua, Samarinda, East Kalimantan, Indonesia. http://orcid.org/0000-0003-1093-810X


Suggested Citation:
Mulawarman, W. G., Komariyah, L., Suryaningsi. (2021). Women and leadership style in school management:
Study of gender perspective. Cypriot Journal of Educational Science. 16(2), 594-611.
      https://doi.org/10.18844/cjes.v16i2.5638

Received from December 28, 2020; revised from February 10, 2021; accepted from April 12, 2021.
©2021 Birlesik Dunya Yenilik Arastirma ve Yayincilik Merkezi. All rights reserved.
Abstract

Women’s representation in leadership positions is still low because there is still an opinion that women are not worthy of being
leaders and only men are worthy of being leaders. This condition proves women’s low participation in leadership roles because
the patriarchal culture still strongly influences people’s perspective. This paper aims to describe the roles and positions of
women in school management. The research data are in the form of observations and interviews with female school principals
and four male vice principals. The qualitative method with a gender perspective is used to identify women’s leadership style in
Elementary School 002, Muara Badak District. The results showed that the principal in Muara Badak District prefers masculine
characters and maintains a feminine character. It has an impact on assertiveness in controlling the school management process.
Second, in carrying out school management functions, the principal’s leadership style applies a democratic leadership style. As
a leader, participation seeks to provide trust and establish good communication by prioritising teamwork in decision-making.

Keywords: Women’s leadership, school management, gender perspective.




*
 ADDRESS FOR CORRESPONDENCE: Widyatmike Gede Mulawarman, Faculty of Teacher Training and Education,
Mulawarman University, Jl. Muara Pahu Kampus Gunung Kelua, Samarinda, East Kalimantan, Indonesia, 75123.
 E-mail address: widyatmike@fkip.unmul.ac.id / Tel.: +62 81390420781

Mulawarman, W. G., Komariyah, L., Suryaningsi. (2021). Women and leadership style in school management: Study of gender perspective.
      Cypriot Journal of Educational Science. 16(2), 594-611. https://doi.org/10.18844/cjes.v16i2.5638


1.    Introduction
      The increasing number of women indicates the shift in women’s participation in leadership
positions in business and school management as academic leaders in an educational institution (Al-
Moamary, Al-Kadri, Al-Moamary & Tamim, 2020). Men’s dominance as a leader in an organisation or
institution is relatively increasing and is still very strong. In reality, women’s participation becomes vital
and provides an important role in leadership positions identical to the men’s world. The success of an
organisation, in this case, an educational institution, cannot be separated from the leadership style and
the role of the individual as a leader in an educational institution (Rodriguez, Montequin, Moran & de
Arriba, 2017). Society still thinks that the individual’s ability to lead with the biological aspects is inherent
in the leader, which is based on differences in men and women (Eger, Miller & Scarles, 2018). The rise
of gender inequality positions women in unfavourable conditions, even though women are a very
potential human resource and play a role throughout the world, even in terms of much more than men
(Hoyt & Burnette, 2013).
     The participation of women in leadership has become a separate record in world history. There are
around 68 women who are listed as presidents and prime ministers in various countries worldwide. This
condition shows that women’s role and leadership greatly determine the development and prosperity
of a country. The proportion of women working in affluent countries is more than the participation of
women in poor countries. In these countries, women play a major role in government business and
society (Eger, Miller & Scarles, 2018). However, some people still argue that women are not suitable for
leadership positions; even in conventional society, there is still resistance to women becoming leaders.
In fact, it is clear that in the manpower sector and the Manpower Act, women’s rights are the same as
men’s; however, some managers still think that certain gender-based roles cause gender bias in
employment. They think that women’s performance is not the same as men’s because men are the
family’s head.
     In addition to the leadership style being a dominant factor in an organisation engaged in the world
of education, it can create a climate of transformation which is very useful in increasing the loyalty of
colleagues / school residents and at the same time maintaining the quality of services provided (Clark,
Hartline & Jones, 2009). The system of promotion to position in the field of leadership in schools is based
on work performance, not on the special character of women or men (Skirstad, 2009). However, in fact-
based analysis of gender, especially in East Kalimantan Province, there are still cultural and structural
obstacles that make it difficult for women to occupy the position of school principal. There are many
signs that bind women’s movements so as not to carry out certain activities, especially in the public
sector, because the public sphere belongs only to men (Eagly, Eagly & Carli, 2007). The lack of the role
of women in the public sector causes women’s participation in school leadership to take over the
position of headmaster to be smaller. Meanwhile, the data show that there are 14 primary schools led
by female principals that have been accredited, almost all of them received a B predicate and even two
others received an A predicate, while the majority of schools led by male principals received a C
predicate (survey results by BANSM or National School / Madrasah Accreditation Board). The reason for
the low participation of women as principals of SD schools in Muara Badak District, among others, is the
perception that tends to become a standard image that is regulated by culture, causing low female
education conditions, so that the involvement of women in academic management is not taken into
account (Angrisani, Lee & Meijer, 2020). The view of the norms that govern the relationships of women
and men that exist in society also applies to the field of education, especially in determining and
selecting school principals who still refer to the male model. It seems that the role of women in
managing management in schools is limited. The limitation of women's participation as stated in social

                                                                                                                               595

Mulawarman, W. G., Komariyah, L., Suryaningsi. (2021). Women and leadership style in school management: Study of gender perspective.
      Cypriot Journal of Educational Science. 16(2), 594-611. https://doi.org/10.18844/cjes.v16i2.5638


theory states that discrimination is a path of gender inequality that affects women's lives because of
the domestic responsibilities they have, and also because of other social roles which ultimately make it
difficult for them to focus on the profession they are running (Stepanikova et al., 2020).
     Looking at the situation mentioned above, the focus of this paper on the status and role of women
in school management is important because we do not only analyse the position of women in the
education sector, but also indirectly highlight how the management and leadership styles in schools are.
This study seeks to examine the roles and positions of women in making decisions at various levels of
school management (Maranto, Teodoro, Carroll & Cheng, 2019).

2.    Method

      Management and leadership are a social phenomenon that relies on the subjective interpretation
of both the leaders and the led (Klasa, Greer & van Ginneken, 2018). The complexity of social
phenomena is also motivated by cultural and political backgrounds that demand a methodology that
can provide access to data that reflects the views of women's leadership management in schools by
looking at a gender perspective in analysing data by considering the gender gap that occurs whether it
has a gender perspective (Compere et al., 2021). A qualitative approach helps to explore how managers
understand life behaviour and how principals directly manage daily situations so that researchers can
identify women's leadership roles and positions in schools (Miles, Huberman & Saldana, 2018).
Therefore, the researchers were inspired to explore the characteristics of women's management and
leadership patterns in schools through field studies interpreting observational data and interviews to
penetrate the meaning frames from which these people operate in the context of educational
institutions. Researchers only explore social phenomena in one locus, namely SDN 002 Muara Badak.
The research method used is a case study by understanding the phenomena related to other people's
experiences of their world (phenomenology), by exploring cultural elements that are local and specific
(ethnography) and by utilising focus group discussion (Bhatta, 2018; Rahardjo, 2017). Phenomenology
is a type of theory often used in qualitative research that builds social phenomena, specifically using
comparisons from empirical observations (Neuman, Winterdyk & Wiegand, 2004).

2.1 Research Participants

      Because this research paradigm is interpretivism, it encourages researchers to believe that
participants in a large number of studies do not make sense (Yin, 2002). Thus, the study's participatory
size in this study was kept as small as possible because it used a case study. Therefore, empirical data
was collected through interviews semi-structured with 1 principal, 3 vice principals (curriculum, student,
and cooperation), staff administrative, and several teachers. The participants, both male and female,
are SDN 002 in Muara Badak, with different cultural backgrounds, whether they are married or not.

     2.2 Data Collection Techniques

     In this study, researchers focused on using participatory observation as a data collection technique
to acquire a more close intimacy with research participants and the community of SDN 002 Muara Badak
school residents. Observations were made to observe school principals’ behaviour and their interaction
with school members, such as vice principals, teachers and students. At the beginning of each year, the
principal and his staff always compile programmes proposed form below and then decide to consider
the school community’s considerations. Observation of principals who interact with school members
(educators, education staff and students) and how the gender perspective is in the leader influences the
                                                                                                                               596

Mulawarman, W. G., Komariyah, L., Suryaningsi. (2021). Women and leadership style in school management: Study of gender perspective.
      Cypriot Journal of Educational Science. 16(2), 594-611. https://doi.org/10.18844/cjes.v16i2.5638


way to manage school members to create a comfortable school culture for teachers, education staff
and students. By looking at school members and school leaders’ interactions, researchers can find out
who determines the extent of the school community.
     Interviews are used to collect data and information directly from school leaders (school principals),
deputy principals and the teachers involved. Interviews were conducted using unstructured methods,
active participation in the communities studied and various histories of the participants’ lives were the
main sources of research data recorded through the researcher’s field notes and reflexivity journals.
Researchers compile interview questions as a reference, which is then used to expand further questions.
The interview itself was conducted to determine how gender perspectives play a role in management
schools’ leadership styles. The data findings were discussed in a focus group discussion (Palmén et al.,
2020). Documents, such as research, evaluation, scientific and previous non-scientific publications
regarding the same ‘site’ or location under study, newspaper clippings and other articles, appear in the
mass media or social bulletins.

     2.3 Analysis procedure

     The analysis process of this research uses case analysis and consists of several emphases, especially
content analysis (for documents), conversation (for interviews and observations), thematic analysis (for
the data reduction process) and matrix analysis (for the data display process) (Bryman, Bell & Harley,
2019). All of these emphases are used chronologically or stimulant to convince the researcher of the
logical continuity between the data. The researcher analysed the notes from the observations along
with the data collection process. This strategy was used to make the interview protocol more dynamic,
easy to develop and right on target, as well as to make it easier for researchers to verify how much data
are needed for reps.

2.4 Data validity

     At the data provision stage, to test the validity of the data, it is necessary to conduct data
triangulation with the aim of minimising researcher bias (Efferin, Darmadji & Tan, 2008; Neuman et al.,
2004). Triangulation is defined as a data collection technique that combines various existing techniques
collection data and sources. Triangulation was carried out by comparing data between methods. The
method used by researchers is interviews that were conducted with more than one person with the
same questions so that data consistency can be ensured and observations can be carried out as a whole
in order to get clear results and data analysis was carried out to ensure the correctness of observations
and interviews. If there were differences, the researcher looked for relationships that explained the
differences. The data obtained in this study need to meet the criteria for validity and reliability so that
it can be analysed further (Efferin et al., 2008). Data collection ends when the research reaches a
theoretical saturation in answering the main question’s research. Most of the data collected during the
study were analysed by indexing the data or the required data coding process, because theory building
remained entirely in the realm of the researcher.

3.      Result and findings
    To examine the roles and positions of women in various levels of school management in Muara
Badak, it can be seen from the views of the respondents on three main topics, including first on the
issue of barriers for women to careers in school management; second, the leadership style adopted by
the principal of SDN 002 Muara Badak; and the last one is related to the factors that encourage the

                                                                                                                               597

Mulawarman, W. G., Komariyah, L., Suryaningsi. (2021). Women and leadership style in school management: Study of gender perspective.
      Cypriot Journal of Educational Science. 16(2), 594-611. https://doi.org/10.18844/cjes.v16i2.5638


principal of SDN 002 to be successful in school management. Before the description of these three things
as an introduction, it informed about the large number of schools that have good grades and titles led
by female school principals; this proves that female school principals are also able to appear strong in
leadership and management so that the quality of the educational institutions they lead is better and
of higher quality as is the case with male leadership. On the other hand, if it is viewed from the number
of teachers and the position of principal at the primary school level, according to existing data regarding
the existence of teachers and school principals in Muara Badak District, it is still dominated by women.
Tables 1 and 2 describe the education level of teachers and principals, respectively.

             Table 1. School teachers in Muara Badak District, Kutai Kartanegara Regency, Indonesia

                   No.        Education Level                                2018/2019
                                                            Male               Female                 Total
                 1.        Elementary school                 91                  294                   385
                 2.        Junior high school                44                   97                   141
                 3.        Senior high school                28                   31                    59
                 4.        Vocational school                 14                   31                    45
                           Total                            177                  453                   630

                 Table 2. Principals in Muara Badak District, Kutai Kartanegara Regency, Indonesia

                   No.        Education Level                                2018/2019
                                                            Male               Female                 Total
                 1.        Elementary school                 15                  14                    29
                 2.        Junior high school                7                    3                    10
                 3.        Senior high school                4                    -                     4
                 4.        Vocational school                 3                    -                     3
                           Total                             29                  17                    46

    Tables 1 and 2 describe the domination of female teachers and the large number of female
principals currently at the primary school level is in accordance with the basic data of primary and
secondary education (Dapodikdasmen). Based on Tables 1 and 2, currently more and more women are
becoming teachers and school principals, especially at the primary school education level in Muara
Badak District. The large number of female teachers and principals at the primary school education level
has proven the large contribution of women in the world of education. With the advantages they have,
although it also needs to be acknowledged that, women have many weaknesses compared to men who
are created with stronger physical conditions than women, physical limitations and the scope of
movement and responsibility of women as mothers make the perception of women's leadership
remains different to male leadership.
3.1 Barriers for women in school management
     From the observations and interviews, some of the common problems faced by female
school principals were noted. The statement was that women are weak creatures who have
specific characteristics and so these traits are identified with weakness, softness, slow, emotional
and lack of assertiveness in dealing with problems (Popa & Gavriliu, 2015) . Another assumption
is that the leadership of female school principals is slow in making decisions because of a lack
of courage in taking risks, and a series of other physical weaknesses. This negative labelling of
society triggers a lack of trust in the leadership of female school principals, which is shown by
                                                                                                                               598

Mulawarman, W. G., Komariyah, L., Suryaningsi. (2021). Women and leadership style in school management: Study of gender perspective.
      Cypriot Journal of Educational Science. 16(2), 594-611. https://doi.org/10.18844/cjes.v16i2.5638


always comparing with male leadership. This is because the patriarchal culture is deeply rooted
in society. In addition to long working hours, women are also faced with the many roles that the
principal of the school wears, sometimes even having to sacrifice time with family and personal
life. The following is the statement of the school principal’s mother:
        ‘...Working as a teacher, especially if you hold a top position, like it or not, like it or not,
        you have to be willing to lose time with your family and community. That is a consequence,
        because indeed there is more work to be done. Generally, if women take office, yes, usually
        something is sacrificed. For example, the role of data and religion is very influential for
        women... .’
     Mrs. IU, a teacher who has additional duties as the principal of the school, can certainly
increase her workload. As a housewife with three children plus other domestic duties (Ferretti
& Mariani, 2017), Mrs. IU has a very heavy double burden (Olson et al., 2019). However, as the
principal, Mrs. IU has a strong determination to develop and improve the quality of education.
Mrs. IU's success is inseparable from her leadership style, in managing education in schools, in
both decision-making and carrying out school management functions which are truly supported
by all school members so that the quality and quality of education in schools can continue to be
improved. Mrs. IU also said that before becoming the principal of the school, she revealed that
there was no discrimination to reach the highest position in the school, but participation and
readiness to advance as school principal were still low. This is because from within herself, the
difficulty in dividing her time and activities in the domestic sphere is quite time-consuming.
          ‘... Every teacher has the right to propose or participate in a promotion to the position
          of school principal, it's just that because of the many requirements ... women are lazy to
          participate for all kinds of reasons and women's problems....’
     By observing the issue of barriers in the world of education in the previous presentation, it can be
concluded that the phenomenon of promotion is limited to certain genders that occurred 10 years ago.
The top positions in schools belong only to those close to officials. This social phenomenon is quite
interesting, as we know that the teaching profession is very attractive to women, but in reality, in
Samarinda City in 2012 there were 15,456 female elementary school teachers and only 9,667 male
elementary school teachers, but only 2.78% of the school principals were female and 92.22% were male
school principals. The question is what is it? There are still obstacles to the position of school
management leadership, and it turns out that only certain people can hold the position of school
principal.
     This view is in line with similar research conducted by Mulawarman (2015). The results of the study
show that the low participation of women as school principals is due to the fact that promotion belongs
only to certain circles; cultural and religious influences greatly affect that leadership belongs only to
men so that this is what causes the low participation of women as school principals.
     By observing the explanation above, it can be concluded that this phenomenon is still found, but
the cause is not external factors that come from outside the female school principals, such as not being
given the opportunity or opportunity for them to occupy strategic positions in schools, but rather
because of internal factors that come from within herself – the female teacher herself. Generally, these
women feel they have more responsibility in supervising and completing household chores, caring for
children so that when faced with the choice to occupy a certain position, they will voluntarily refuse the
offer. This shows that patriarchal teachings or culture have been ingrained in the souls of women in

                                                                                                                               599

Mulawarman, W. G., Komariyah, L., Suryaningsi. (2021). Women and leadership style in school management: Study of gender perspective.
      Cypriot Journal of Educational Science. 16(2), 594-611. https://doi.org/10.18844/cjes.v16i2.5638


Muara Badak. Understanding of gender stereotyping about gender roles can still occur from an early
age. Meanwhile, those who succeed in freeing themselves from this kind of stereotyping usually come
from families or women who have husbands who are not gender biased or in other words, gender
literate.
3.2 Supporting factors for women's success
      Based on the documentation, Mrs. IU was appointed as the principal of SDN 002 from 2014 to 2018.
For the second term, Mrs. IU has served as the principal of the school with a working period of 2018–
2022 accompanied by all-male deputy principals. Meanwhile, if you look at the number of teachers in
SDN 002, there are more women than men. After confirming why all were male, the school principal
replied that in determining the decree for the deputy principal, it could not be separated from the
intervention of the local education office. Being in the midst of all-male deputy principals did not
frighten Mrs. IU, she tried to embrace and be open so that she could work together regarding school
programmes. Mrs. IU herself is a Dayak woman who has high aspirations and wants to build her
homeland. There is a family tradition here that if you have a daughter who wants to stay in school, the
girl has to leave the house or move to a new house. If they do not move to a new house, the girl will be
immediately married and then told to go to the fields to do gardening. In addition to working outside
the home as a civil servant teacher (in 2008 he was appointed as a civil servant), it is illustrated that he
is busy managing the household and his workload as a school principal so that Mrs. IU's workload
increases. Mrs. IU is the second of four children and is the only daughter in the family. Because IU's
mother is the only daughter in her family, Mrs. IU is accustomed to living a spoiled life with all the
facilities her parents provide. Due to the cultural influence of her parents since she was young, IU was
given the freedom to make choices but was still limited.
     Since childhood, she was accustomed to living independently without the help of men and was
accustomed to gathering and making friends with men. Mrs. IU works hard to earn her own money, so
she is used to making her own decisions and has a masculine character in her. Mrs. IU sometimes has
to work longer hours than her colleagues, and every day she is already at school at 07.00 welcoming
and greeting SDN 002 students and colleagues. With a friendly smile, Mrs. IU greets the school
community. This activity takes place every day so that it becomes a habit that forms a culture of
discipline for school residents. Routines are carried out without any burden and coercion, that is how it
is done every day. Mrs. IU revealed that:
          ‘... If the school programme wants to be made easy, yes it could be, but I chose to compile a
          programme with my colleague teachers and vice-principals according to the quality standards
          set from the centre so that for some jobs it takes a bit longer to complete compared to others,
          maybe I am too perfectionist In doing....’
     By looking at Mrs. IU's behaviour and work dedication to her daily work dealing with three school
members, it can be concluded that Mrs. IU is a school principal who occupies Mrs. IU's leadership style,
including the transformational leadership style, other experts call it democratic leadership, has the
following characteristics: (1) motivates the teaching staff to work hard and help each other, (2) builds a
trusting relationship between leaders and subordinates and (3) has appreciation or respect for each
individual by the leader to his subordinates. In addition to the transformational leadership style, when
there are school members (teachers) who show good performance and are proud of the school, it
appears that Ibu IU's leadership style is categorised as transactional leadership. Mrs. Inoq always applies
rewards and punishments for school members who violate the school rules that have been agreed upon.
Assertiveness and task-oriented, thinks by considering logical, objective factors, likes to have

                                                                                                                               600

Mulawarman, W. G., Komariyah, L., Suryaningsi. (2021). Women and leadership style in school management: Study of gender perspective.
      Cypriot Journal of Educational Science. 16(2), 594-611. https://doi.org/10.18844/cjes.v16i2.5638


relationships with subordinates and cares, full of togetherness, involves others in decision-making and
is team-oriented. This shows that Mrs. Inoq has a combination of feminine and masculine characters in
her leadership style.

3.3 Forms of gender roles in school management
     In achieving the desired results, a leader tends to use rewards, namely a transactional leadership
style (participation) with a masculine character that leads to a reciprocal relationship between superiors
and subordinates so that the teaching staff completes the task as desired. On the other hand, there is a
feminine character that creates a transformational leadership process, namely by building relationships
with subordinates so that leaders will find it easier to communicate; this makes rewards and
punishments unnecessary to be strictly applied (Manwa, 2014). As stated by Mrs. UI:
          ‘… so, a leader you have to be firm, obey the rules. If there are teachers or administrative staff
          who are wrong, then we have to be brave in warning them. But still have to be polite, gentle,
          considerate of subordinates because with them we work. It must still be maintained that the
          working conditions remain conducive. Even if I have done something, I have to be brave enough
          to admit it and correct it. Every time I want to give this example to teachers in my school
          environment….’
      If we look at the above explanation, it can be concluded that the women's leadership in this study
wants a change in leadership patterns that have been rigid and top-down so far, where all of these
things be the authority and decision of the leadership, without actively involving employees or teacher
colleagues and be gentle but still firm and involve all school members. In addition, if it is related to the
leadership style of IU's mother, mentoring and coaching applied by IU is a combination of masculine and
feminine characters. For IU's mother, rewards or sanctions are still needed to motivate the work of
teachers to keep working innovatively in compiling fun learning materials and models, because after all
there are among them who do not emphasise a sense of togetherness at work. However, the
performance criteria fall outside important feminine competencies such as in terms of cooperation,
mentoring and teamwork. Ibu IU feels that the teachers should work with the awareness of the goals of
SDN 002 School. This contradicts the fact that previously mentioned that teacher colleagues often help
each other because basically the school residents (educators and education personnel) work for
themselves and get a decent salary so that implementation rewards and punishment still have to be
enforced. The application of reward and punishment is carried out as an implementation of the
disciplinary attitude of educators and educators in carrying out their duties as evidence of employee
performance. Some educators often give rewards to students during teaching and learning activities
with the aim of encouraging them, even though they are only in the form of greeting words, such as
‘good’, ‘thank you’, ‘extraordinary’ and so on. Likewise, educators give punishment to students who are
late in collecting assignments, who are ignorant, or students who make a fuss; it is just that punishments
are educational, not violence against children.

3.4 Gender perspectives on decision-makers at SDN 002
     At the beginning of every semester, Mrs. IU prepares an annual agenda and programme with her
fellow teachers and five vice principals, which are carried out by SDN 002 and are carried out every 3
months unless there is something important that must be informed to the teachers. School
management is always on the schedule by inviting all teachers and vice principals to compile work
programmes as needed and aligned with the curriculum (Olson et al., 2019). As emphasised by Mrs. IU,
a meeting is like a gathering place with school members to build kinship; it is necessary to provide

                                                                                                                               601

Mulawarman, W. G., Komariyah, L., Suryaningsi. (2021). Women and leadership style in school management: Study of gender perspective.
      Cypriot Journal of Educational Science. 16(2), 594-611. https://doi.org/10.18844/cjes.v16i2.5638


direction about how they work and complain about fellow teaching staff. Listening to complaints and
looking for the best solution based on mutual teamwork is considered to be of benefit to all members
of the school community (educators and educational staff) because according to Mrs. IU if there are
conflicts between them that have not been resolved; strategic management is needed as a solution that
will affect how to work them in terms of working together (Postema & Haverkort, 2018). Therefore, he
must step in and be firm if there are problems between educators that have not been resolved so as
not to affect their performance. If there are problems among the educators, they can be resolved in a
friendly manner; as long as they can be resolved, the principal always calls personally with full patience
as she will solve the existing problems.
     In line with the opinion (Postema & Haverkort, 2018) that a school leader when managing a school
and in making decisions should have the ability/strategy to manage emotions in an effort to suppress
the interactionist nature of actions taken by modifying emotions associated with culture, gender, status
and position (Olson et al., 2019). The decisions made by IU's mother do not mean that male leaders
cannot carry out and solve problems well, as it is stated that there is no single concept that states that
women's leadership is better than male leadership, or vice versa, because the leadership theory is a
process of influencing not only from leaders to followers or in one direction but reciprocity or two
directions. Good followers can also generate leadership by following the existing leadership and to some
degree provide feedback to the leader. Influence is the process by which leaders communicate ideas,
gain acceptance of ideas and motivate followers to support and implement these ideas through change
(Woods & Gronn, 2009).
     The democratic leadership model respects the potential of each individual, is willing to hear advice,
suggests subordinates and recognises subordinates' expertise. This follows the opinion of who reported
that democratic leadership values the potential of each individual, is willing to listen to advice and
suggestions from subordinates, is also willing to acknowledge specialist expertise in their respective
fields and is able to utilise the capacity of each member as effectively as possible at the right time and
condition (Jones, Jones, Winchester & Grint, 2016). Democratic leadership is also often called leadership
group development.
     Democratic leaders usually view their role as coordinators of various elements and components of
the organisation so that they move as a totality because the democratic leadership style is the ideal and
most coveted leadership style (Allen, Lyons & Stephens, 2019). Indeed, it must be admitted that
democratic leaders are not always effective leaders in the life of social organisations because there are
times when in terms of acting and making decisions there can be delayed as a consequence of the
involvement of subordinates in the decision-making process. Even so, democratic leaders are still seen
as the best leaders because their weaknesses outweigh their shortcomings. Democratic leadership
usually takes place steadily, with the following symptoms: (1) the organisation and all its units run
smoothly, even though the leader is not in the office; (2) authority is fully delegated downward and each
person is aware of their duties and obligations so that they feel happy and safe carrying out their duties
and obligations; (3) prioritising welfare goals in general and smooth cooperation of each group member;
and (4) democratic leaders are a catalyst to accelerate dynamism and cooperation to achieve
organisational goals in a way that best fits the spirit of the group and its situation (Llantos & Estuar,
2019).
     Women have the same ability to be at the top of their careers. The fact is that in many organisations
today when a tough and rigid leadership style is no longer suitable for employees, a comprehensive
women's leadership style and other positive values make them more suitable for occupying top
positions (Leiva, Montecinos, Ahumada, Campos & Guerra, 2017). Women can become leaders as well
                                                                                                                               602

Mulawarman, W. G., Komariyah, L., Suryaningsi. (2021). Women and leadership style in school management: Study of gender perspective.
      Cypriot Journal of Educational Science. 16(2), 594-611. https://doi.org/10.18844/cjes.v16i2.5638


as men because in Islam itself women are considered equal to men; Islam gives rights to women as has
been given to men and gives the same obligation to men and there is no difference. In Surah Al-Ahzab
verse 33:35, it is emphasised that women and men have the same right to get proper reward/reward
for the work done so that with this verse it is necessary to straighten out the misogynistic understanding
and assumptions (hatred) and bias in portraying women with a correct understanding of the human
existence of women and men.
     Today, more and more women are working in men's jobs. They can not only survive but also
succeed in becoming leaders. Women too can show themselves to be extraordinarily strong and brave
and are not inferior to men. In essence, management and leadership are basically not much different
from men. Several female figures succeeded in becoming leaders, like Margaret Thatcher in England
who was nicknamed ‘The Iron Woman’, Indira Gandhi in India, Cory Aquino in the Philippines, Megawati
in Indonesia and Sri Mulyani, Miranda Goeltom, Mari Elka Pangestu, Linda Amalia Sari, Felia Salim, Eva
Riyanti Hutapea, Karen Agustiawan and many other successful Indonesian women.
     Dr. Herbert Greenberg found five traits that many women leaders have: (1) ability to persuade,
female leaders are generally more persuasive when compared to men. They tend to be more ambitious
than men. Their success in persuading others to say ‘yes’ will increase her ego and give her satisfaction.
Even so, when imposing their will, their social, feminine and empathetic side will not disappear. (2)
Proving wrong criticism, they are ‘not yet thick-faced’, female leaders have a lower level of ego than
men, meaning they can still feel the pain of rejection and criticism. However, a high level of courage,
empathy, flexibility and kindness makes them recover quickly, learn from mistakes and move forward
with a positive ‘I'll prove it’ attitude. (3) In the spirit of teamwork, great women leaders tend to apply a
comprehensive leadership style when it comes to solving problems and making decisions. They are also
more flexible, considerate and helpful to their staff. However, women still have a lot to learn from men
in terms of accuracy when solving problems and making decisions. (4) The leader, a great female leader,
generally has a strong charisma, so do men. They are persuasive, confident and have a strong will to
complete tasks and are energetic. (5) They dare to take risks and are no longer in a safe area, women
leaders basically dare to break rules and take risks, just like men and at the same time pay equal
attention to detail. They speculate outside company boundaries, and do not fully accept the existing
structural rules, but try to mediate in the event of a clash between school members and the regulations
and policies of educational institutions so as to create pleasant learning conditions for school residents
(Garcia-Raga, Grau & Lopez-Martin, 2017).
     This research is in accordance with Gibson, who shows that most women have a behavioural
dimension that tends to think about the welfare of their subordinates and emphasises the interaction
and facilitation of subordinates, whereas men are more likely to have a dimension in which this
dimension of behaviour is firm, oriented on purpose and tends to be overpowering. Based on the
characteristics that can be classified as masculine and feminine, the relevant leadership style variables
to be used are autocratic leadership styles for men and democratic ones for women.
3.5 The leadership style of female school principals in decision-making at SDN 002
      Decision-making is the absolute authority of the school principal; however, the principal may
involve or give authority to teachers or subordinates for decision-making with regard to school
development. Several problems can be decided together with teachers and subordinates based on
mutual agreement, but for problems that are considered the principal can decide on his/her own, which
will be decided by the school principal himself/herself because the principal has the authority to make
decisions.

                                                                                                                               603

Mulawarman, W. G., Komariyah, L., Suryaningsi. (2021). Women and leadership style in school management: Study of gender perspective.
      Cypriot Journal of Educational Science. 16(2), 594-611. https://doi.org/10.18844/cjes.v16i2.5638


     Decision-making by the principal of SDN 002 in Muara Badak District using a democratic style as
conveyed by Likert in Usman, namely the task objectives and decisions related to work are made by the
group. If the leader makes a decision, the decision is taken after considering the group's opinion. The
principal of SD Negeri 002 Muara Badak includes teachers and employees in the decision-making
process, and the principal is willing to share problems, accept criticism and suggestions from teachers,
is open to criticism conveyed by teachers, especially criticism or suggestions that are constructive for
the good of the school, and conversely, the problems of teachers and employees will be heard.
     In the decision-making process in general, female school principals involve all school members and
are willing to listen to input and ideas from teachers or subordinates, in providing direction or influence
to teachers and principal employees of SDN 002 by doing so in formal and informal ways, as both a
group and individually, to teachers and employees who disagree or disagree with existing decisions or
policies at school, there is a friendly and persuasive approach made by female school principals, so it is
hoped that teachers and subordinates can support the policies that have been decided by the school
principal.
     The principal in making decisions is to use a democratic style, namely prioritising deliberation to
reach a consensus in accordance with the theory that a leader must take several important factors into
consideration while making decisions based on agreed decisions and involve all school members. A
leader should make decisions based on the agreement of all school members as it will be very helpful
for the development and progress of the school; then what are the school's goals to be achieved
effectively and efficiently and produce quality output in accordance with what is expected together. In
the decision-making process, sometimes it is not based on mutual agreement, although it rarely
happens; thus, the result of the decision is not optimal. If teachers and employees are not satisfied with
the results of the decisions taken by the principal, it will have an impact on decreasing the quality and
performance of teachers and employees, wherein they are less enthusiastic in carrying out their duties
and responsibilities.
3.6 The leadership style of the female principal in carrying out management functions in SDN 002 School
3.6.1     Planning function
      The female principal of SDN 002 has the same leadership pattern in carrying out management
functions at school. The planning function is carried out by them by holding a teacher council meeting
before the policy or programme is implemented (Al-Moamary, Al-Kadri, Al-Moamary, & Tamim, 2020).
In the planning process, the principal of SDN 002 tends to use a democratic leadership style that involves
all existing teachers. This can be seen from the indication that the principal is willing to share problems
and always involves teachers and subordinates participating in every preparation of school work
programmes. Determining each programme that is carried out so that the plan can be achieved or
decisions are not one-sided but are discussed together by listening to opinions, ideas, input and
suggestions from teachers and subordinates in meetings held jointly with all teachers. The principal in
planning also gives credence to the teachers in implementing any programme that has been prepared,
and if there are programmes that are considered not to support the development programmes of the
school or the lack of funding will be discussed and communicated together before taking the decision
to cancel the programme.
3.6.2     Organizing function
     In compiling the organisational structure of the school at SDN 002, the principal is more likely to
use a participatory democratic leadership style. This can be seen from the school principal always giving

                                                                                                                               604

Mulawarman, W. G., Komariyah, L., Suryaningsi. (2021). Women and leadership style in school management: Study of gender perspective.
      Cypriot Journal of Educational Science. 16(2), 594-611. https://doi.org/10.18844/cjes.v16i2.5638


the opportunity to all school members to participate in an activity and is responsible for a position given
to subordinates. The democratic leadership style carried out by the principal can also be seen from the
division of teacher duties by involving the teachers and employees in these activities. Changes in
leadership style in school management activities are often carried out according to situations and
conditions.
     Likewise, with the principal of SDN 002, that all responsibilities and authorities of each position are
in accordance with the educational background of teachers and employees, although there are still
some that are not appropriate due to the limited number of teachers willing to teach in the area so that
there is one teacher who does not teaches. According to their field and educational qualifications, the
teacher has the ability to teach in that type of field of study so that they are given the responsibility to
teach in that field of study.
     Based on the results of the interview, it can be concluded that the organising process carried out
by the principal of SDN 002 always involves teachers and employees, in giving assignments, establishing
two-way communication so that information to teachers and employees becomes clear and the
principal always prioritises cooperation in terms of organisation.
3.6.3. The function of the movement or implementation
     The principal of SDN 002 in Muara Badak District in the process of moving subordinates tends to
use a democratic participatory leadership style, and this can be seen from the principal in paying
attention to subordinates in activities that can motivate subordinates to be able to do a good job. This
can be seen from the giving of awards or rewards to outstanding teachers or subordinates, namely
praise, gratitude and participating in accompanying any activities carried out outside of school. In
addition, the organisational process carried out by the school principal provides opportunities for all
teachers to participate in an activity, which is in accordance with the theory that the preparation and
planning of a programme must always provide opportunities for subordinates to participate and
develop and be responsible for the task assigned to them. In providing direction, guidance and guidance
to subordinates, the principal is a good cooperative relationship to increase work motivation for
teachers and subordinates. They can improve their performance and can achieve organisational goals
in accordance with the vision and mission that have been set together. The pattern applied by the
principal of SDN 002 in mobilising subordinates is a pattern that emphasises good and correct
cooperation by even giving rewards and work motivation for subordinates to always excel so that they
are always enthusiastic in working to achieve school goals.
3.6.4. The supervision function
     The principal is based on the results of interviews and observations of the author; the leadership
behaviour of the principal of SDN 002 in implementing the supervisory function is felt well by the
teachers. In addition to scheduled supervision, it is also carried out suddenly, and the principal has a
class supervision programme, although it is rarely carried out. In the process of supervision, the principal
uses the democratic leadership style, which is to provide opportunities and freedom for teachers to be
creative and decide for themselves to carry out these tasks. Supervision of school principals is not
routine because school principals give teachers confidence in their work. Likewise, the principal of SDN
002 for monitoring and supervision of teachers or subordinates is not strictly carried out; the principal
always provides the opportunity for subordinate teachers to prepare themselves in preparing all
learning tools in the classroom, while the principal mother gives confidence to the subordinates
regarding their duties; there is good cooperation between teachers and school principals. Thus, from
the results of the interview, it can be concluded that the supervision carried out by the principal of SDN
                                                                                                                               605

Mulawarman, W. G., Komariyah, L., Suryaningsi. (2021). Women and leadership style in school management: Study of gender perspective.
      Cypriot Journal of Educational Science. 16(2), 594-611. https://doi.org/10.18844/cjes.v16i2.5638


002 in democratic signature, namely there is direction, cooperation, kinship and responsibility shared,
can be seen from the process (Wahyuningtyas, 2017). Regarding their work, supervision is not carried
out regularly and continuously, so in theory, not too contrary to the principle, the principle of
supervisory states that ‘monitoring should be performed periodically for example once every 3 months
and not according to the interests and opportunities owned by the superintendent or principal … etc’
(Hmieleski & Sheppard, 2019). So if the supervision is carried out continuously, the development of the
performance or the results of the work of teachers and subordinates can be known by each principal.
      The management control system is a control used by the organisation to control all activities carried
out by subordinates so that it is in line with and does not deviate from the goals of educational
institutions. Gender contributions to leadership styles in school management show that women are not
always feminine and men have masculine characters. The inherent character in a person will ultimately
differentiate the ways of leading men and women in educational institutions. Not always women tend
to have a transformational leadership style, and men have a transactional leadership style; a person can
have a combination of the two types of leadership styles as a result of the culture, habits and values
instilled by parents (Barrios, Prowse & Vargas, 2020). So that the combination of characters that exist
in a person will ultimately complement each other in exercising good control of school management as
is found in school management. A strong and dominating masculine character results in better control
over the results and better results. In addition, with the support of existing feminine characters, SDN
002 school residents become obedient figures like children to their mothers (Mattson Molnar et al.,
2019). This is because they feel for themselves the love of a leader for his/her subordinates.

4.    Discussion
     The success of an educational institution is very dependent on the leadership style of the principal
in implementing the learning system so that the quality of graduates is maintained. Styhre and Eriksson‐
Zetterquist (2008) determine that the leadership style has three types, namely charismatic leadership,
transformational leadership (democratic) and transactional leadership (participative). The results of the
study, by looking at the results of interviews and observations of the behaviour of principals who
interact with school members, indicate that there are two kinds of leadership in one person, namely
transformational (democratic) and transactional (participatory) leadership. This leadership reflection is
characterised by an assertive, task-oriented nature. The democratic leadership style is very relevant to
the feminine nature of a woman. The natural attributes of women who are sensitive, intuitive,
empathetic, caring, cooperative and accommodating can make organisational processes effective. In
addition, the democratic leadership style is reflected by leaders who are happy to accept suggestions.
Democratic leadership styles are very relevant to the feminine nature of a woman. The natural
attributes of women who are sensitive, intuitive, empathetic, caring, cooperative and accommodating
can make organisational processes effective.
     In addition, the democratic leadership style is reflected by leaders who are happy to receive
suggestions and criticism, prioritise cooperation and teamwork or coordination, and give freedom to
their subordinates to dare to act and criticise, prioritise cooperation and teamwork or coordination, and
give freedom to their subordinates to dare to act.
     This study supports the research conducted by Eagly and Johnson in Situmorang which concluded
that women's leadership is more democratic than men in the same organisational environment. It is




                                                                                                                               606

Mulawarman, W. G., Komariyah, L., Suryaningsi. (2021). Women and leadership style in school management: Study of gender perspective.
      Cypriot Journal of Educational Science. 16(2), 594-611. https://doi.org/10.18844/cjes.v16i2.5638


further said that differences based on gender are based on differences between men and women in
terms of personalities and work skills.
     In the traditional view, women are still identified with a weak, subtle and emotional figure.
Meanwhile, men are described as brave and rational. This view has positioned women as creatures who
ought to be protected and always dependent on men. As a result, it is very rare for women to be able
to appear as leaders, because they are marginalised by male domination with their male chauvinism.
     By considering logical and objective factors, the character of a school leader at SDN 002 can be
seen from daily behaviour in managing educational institutions, such as caring, sharing, being full of
togetherness and building mutual respect. If you look at two different characters that actually replace
each other, it is possible for each leader to have more than one leadership characteristic. This leadership
style is strongly influenced by the environmental values, culture and religion.
     Based on the results of the research by Efferin, Frisko & Hartanto (2016), gender-based school
management is based on the control of a gender culture that shapes the design and implementation of
process and outcome controls. By understanding the foundation of school culture, one can understand
why process and control outcomes work in a certain way, and school management does not have to
differentiate between school members based on gender, but it includes and excludes performance
parameters based on a gender perspective so that this supports this study, namely that in fact what
affects a control is not gender, but characteristics of gender that exist in the culture, teachings and
values of the leader, and this influences how a person leads and applies process control and outcome
control in a company. This supports this study which found the findings that the process control and
outcome control carried out by Mrs. Inaq are in line with masculine characters, namely her assertiveness
in giving rewards and punishments in result control even though Mrs. Inaq actually hopes that
employees can reflect on herself without the need for punishment but because employees tend to make
mistakes if they are not monitored, giving rewards and punishments must be upheld and feminine
characteristics should be taught from childhood, namely by holding joint activities to strengthen
cooperation and closeness to each other and the attentiveness shown by him/her during the control
process. The masculine character possessed by Mrs. IU is needed in monitoring school members to
achieve organisational goals, while the feminine character is only used as a complement to achieving
organisational goals so that the control exercised reflects her characteristics and overall leadership
gender supports and strengthens leadership.
     In reality there are also many female leaders who are far superior to male leaders because they try
harder, are more resilient and last long enough. Unfortunately, the failure of women leaders is often
not due to external factors but internal factors that make things difficult for them, such as despair,
suspicion of gender discrimination, unstable emotions and inability to control. Democratic leadership
models value the potential of each individual, are willing to listen to advice, suggest subordinates and
acknowledge subordinates’ expertise. This is in accordance with Kartono Yang's opinion that democratic
leadership respects the potential of each individual, is willing to hear advice and suggestions from
subordinates, is also willing to acknowledge specialist expertise in their respective fields, is able to utilise
the capacity of each member as effectively as possible at the right times and conditions. Democratic
leadership is also often referred to as the leadership group developer.
     Democratic leaders usually view their role as coordinators of various elements and components of
the organisation so that they move as a totality, because the democratic leadership style is the ideal
and most coveted leadership style. Indeed, it must be admitted that democratic leaders are not always
effective leaders in the life of social organisations because there are times when in terms of acting and

                                                                                                                               607

Mulawarman, W. G., Komariyah, L., Suryaningsi. (2021). Women and leadership style in school management: Study of gender perspective.
      Cypriot Journal of Educational Science. 16(2), 594-611. https://doi.org/10.18844/cjes.v16i2.5638


making decisions there can be delays as a consequence of the involvement of subordinates in the
decision-making process. Even so, democratic leaders are still seen as the best leaders because their
weaknesses outweigh their deficiencies in their views on gender. In research on school management at
SDN 002 it is known that her life, in this case, her childhood life to act freely as desired and the demands
of Mrs. IU's life made her grow into a person who tends to have a masculine character, although she
cannot escape from her feminine character. In addition, because she has to live as a single parent, she
has to be a strong and independent person so that for her a woman must be able to stand alone without
having to depend on other people and have to believe in herself. This is supported by the research of
Efferin et al. (2016), which states that one's leadership cannot be separated from one's view of the
values of gender. These values have been socialised since childhood through family education and the
social environment. Therefore, if a social environment believes that masculine characteristics are
superior to feminine characteristics, the leader will also share these values and consider them as part
of his belief in leading others.
      The independence that has been ingrained since the beginning builds trust and courage in making
decisions, making Mrs. IU tend to be more masculine than feminine. She said that to become a leader
one must have characters that can be used as a basis and role model for colleagues in school. In her
daily life, Mrs. IU appears to be active, moving, dominant, decisive and courageous in making decisions,
all of which are characteristics of a masculine leadership style. However, as a woman, Mrs. IU still has a
feminine character, such as being full of togetherness, caring, friendly, attentive and even more flexible
to teaching staff, education staff and other school members, happy to have relationships with school
members. For Mrs. IU, her feminine character is only so that school residents feel comfortable in
educating at school. This is supported by a statement from Efferin et al. (2016) which emphasises that
both masculine and feminine characters are needed to realise the goals of educational institutions. The
findings of this study confirm that masculine characters and feminine characters can be exchanged
between men and women, in fact the two characters are needed to complement each other, not
mutually degrading or detrimental, but masculine characters are more needed to create strong control,
while feminine characters are the support for relationships with harmonious school residents.
      The research findings show that the success of Mrs. IU as the principal at SDN 002 is marked by a
leadership style that has high tolerance while managing the 002 Public Elementary School in Muara
Badak district. The results are as follows: that Mrs. IU managed to manage the teaching staff well and
make the teaching staff disciplined according to the rules and go together according to organisational
goals. Those who are not in line with the goals of the organisation will be left silent or must be dismissed
if they put up a fight. This contrasts the research of Rhee & Sigler (2015), which states that male leaders
are judged to be more effective than female leaders in all conditions and that school members prefer
to work for male leaders than female leaders. This is because it is not gender that actually determines
the effectiveness of a leader, but rather the character of gender the leader.

5.    Conclusions
     The results of the research on women's leadership in school management at SDN 002 Muara Badak
district can be concluded as follows: During her leadership, Mrs. IU for two periods managing the school
had a mixed leadership style, namely democratic and participatory leadership styles. These two
leadership styles complement and support each other so that the target goals of educational institutions
can be realised. Moreover, the character possessed by Mrs. IU stems from her childhood experience
that her parents had to live independently and freely so as to create a masculine character, while her
feminine character was influenced by the beliefs of Mrs. IU it created a masculine character, while her

                                                                                                                               608

Mulawarman, W. G., Komariyah, L., Suryaningsi. (2021). Women and leadership style in school management: Study of gender perspective.
      Cypriot Journal of Educational Science. 16(2), 594-611. https://doi.org/10.18844/cjes.v16i2.5638


feminine character was influenced by IU's belief that fellow humans must love each other, respect each
other, share information, be open and help each other to improve the quality of SDN 002 education.
     In the school management process, Mrs. IU as the joint leader of the school community designs
school programmes every semester by exploring the wishes of the resident’s school which refers to the
curriculum in the stages of school management. Ibu IU is accustomed to instilling the principle of
togetherness by making it a habit to share something for teachers or education personnel. In their daily
lives, the school leadership looks more masculine, especially the deputy principal at SDN 002, all of
whom are male, assisted by the deputy principal and education staff. The masculine character is more
dominant in the school management process through programmes reward and punishment. IU is
accustomed to living independently; the masculine leadership style is reflected in IU's mother rather
than the feminine leadership style because she is more oriented towards results. Ibu IU's masculine
leadership style made school members more respectful towards her. However, the character of
feminism is still maintained, especially by establishing good relationships with school members and by
protecting, being open, and cherishing the school community in realising the quality of the school by
creating a pleasant and comfortable working atmosphere to work in.


References
Al-Moamary, M. S., Al-Kadri, H. M., Al-Moamary, S. M., & Tamim, H. M. (2020). The leadership authenticity of
     women       in   the     academic    setting.   Health   Professions    Education,    6(1),   99–104.
     https://doi.org/10.1016/j.hpe.2019.05.006
Allen, E., Lyons, H., & Stephens, J. C. (2019). Women’s leadership in renewable transformation, energy justice and
      energy democracy: Redistributing power. Energy Research & Social Science, 57, 101233.
      https://doi.org/10.1016/j.erss.2019.101233
Angrisani, M., Lee, J., & Meijer, E. (2020). The gender gap in education and late-life cognition: Evidence from
      multiple countries and birth cohorts. The Journal of the Economics of Ageing, 16, 100232.
      https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jeoa.2019.100232
Barrios, L. M., Prowse, A., & Vargas, V. R. (2020). Sustainable development and women’s leadership: A
      participatory exploration of capabilities in Colombian Caribbean fisher communities. Journal of Cleaner
      Production, 264, 121277. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jclepro.2020.121277
Bhatta, T. P. (2018). Case study research, philosophical position and theory building: A methodological discussion.
     Dhaulagiri Journal of Sociology and Anthropology, 12, 72–79. https://doi.org/10.3126/dsaj.v12i0.22182
Bryman, A., Bell, E., & Harley, B. (2019). Business research methods (5th ed.). Oxford University Press.
Clark, R., Hartline, M., & Jones, K. (2009). The effects of leadership style on hotel employees’ commitment to
      service quality. Cornell Hospitality Quarterly, 50. https://doi.org/10.1177/1938965508315371
Compère, L., Charron, S., Gallarda, T., Rari, E., Lion, S., Nys, M., Anssens, A., Coussinoux, S., Machefaux, S.,
    Oppenheim, C., & Piolino, P. (2021). Gender identity better than sex explains individual differences in
    episodic and semantic components of autobiographical memory: An fMRI study. NeuroImage, 225, 117507.
    https://doi.org/10.1016/j.neuroimage.2020.117507
Eagly, A. H., Eagly, L. L. C. A. H., & Carli, L. L. (2007). Through the labyrinth: The truth about how women become
      leaders. Harvard Business Press.
Efferin, S., Darmadji, S. H., & Tan, Y. (2008). Metode penelitian akuntansi: Mengungkap fenomena dengan
      pendekatan kuantitatif dan kualitatif. Graha Ilmu.
Efferin, S., Frisko, D., & Hartanto, M. (2016). Management control system, leadership and gender ideology. Journal
                                                                                                                               609

Mulawarman, W. G., Komariyah, L., Suryaningsi. (2021). Women and leadership style in school management: Study of gender perspective.
      Cypriot Journal of Educational Science. 16(2), 594-611. https://doi.org/10.18844/cjes.v16i2.5638


      of Accounting in Emerging Economies, 6(4), 314–339. https://doi.org/10.1108/JAEE-10-2013-0052
Eger, C., Miller, G., & Scarles, C. (2018). Gender and capacity building: A multi-layered study of empowerment.
      World Development, 106, 207–219. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.worlddev.2018.01.024
Ferretti, F., & Mariani, M. (2017). Gender discrimination, gender disparities in obesity and human development.
      Heliyon, 3(3), e00263. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.heliyon.2017.e00263
García-Raga, L., Grau, R., & López-Martín, R. (2017). Mediation as a process for the management of conflict and
      the improvement of coexistence in educational centres. A study based on the perceptions of secondary
      school     students.     Procedia     -    Social   and      Behavioral     Sciences, 237,     465–470.
      https://doi.org/10.1016/j.sbspro.2017.02.091
Hmieleski, K. M., & Sheppard, L. D. (2019). The Yin and Yang of entrepreneurship: Gender differences in the
     importance of communal and agentic characteristics for entrepreneurs’ subjective well-being and
     performance.         Journal         of        Business       Venturing,       34(4),        709–730.
     https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jbusvent.2018.06.006
Hoyt, C. L., & Burnette, J. L. (2013). Gender bias in leader evaluations: Merging Implicit theories and role congruity
      perspectives.       Personality      and       Social     Psychology      Bulletin,     39(10),     1306–1319.
      https://doi.org/10.1177/0146167213493643
Jones, S. S., Jones, O. S., Winchester, N., & Grint, K. (2016). Putting the discourse to work: On outlining a praxis of
     democratic          leadership      development.          Management         Learning,      47(4),      424–442.
     https://doi.org/10.1177/1350507616631926
Klasa, K., Greer, S. L., & van Ginneken, E. (2018). Strategic purchasing in practice: Comparing ten european
      countries. Health Policy, 122(5), 457–472. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.healthpol.2018.01.014
Leiva, M. V., Montecinos, C., Ahumada, L., Campos, F., & Guerra, S. (2017). Novice principals’ instructional
      management practices in high poverty, low performing schools in Chile. Procedia - Social and Behavioral
      Sciences, 237, 3–9. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.sbspro.2017.02.003
Llantos, O. E., & Estuar, M. R. J. E. (2019). Characterizing instructional leader interactions in a social learning
      management system using social network analysis. Procedia Computer Science, 160, 149–156.
      https://doi.org/10.1016/j.procs.2019.09.455
Manwa, H. A. (2014). Gender gap in management positions: A survey of male and female managers in Zimbabwean
    hotels. Gender and Behaviour, 12(3), 5936–5945. https://journals.co.za/content/genbeh/12/3/EJC154463
Maranto, R., Teodoro, M. P., Carroll, K., & Cheng, A. (2019). Gendered ambition: Men’s and women’s career
    advancement in public administration. The American Review of Public Administration, 49(4), 469–481.
    https://doi.org/10.1177/0275074018804564
Mattson Molnar, M., Von Thiele Schwarz, U., Hellgren, J., Hasson, H., & Tafvelin, S. (2019). Leading for Safety: A
     Question     of    Leadership   Focus.     Safety     and    Health     at      Work,     10(2),    180–187.
     https://doi.org/10.1016/j.shaw.2018.12.001
Miles, M. B., Huberman, A. M., & Saldana, J. (2018). Qualitative data analysis: A methods sourcebook (4th ed.).
      SAGE Publications.
Mulawarman, W. G. (2015). Career Development Prospects of Women Teachers in the Schools of Samarinda City.
    US-China Education Review B, 5(3), 199–205. https://doi.org/10.17265/2161-6248/2015.03.005
Neuman, W. L., Winterdyk, J., & Wiegand, B. (2004). Criminal justice research methods: Qualitative and
    quantitative approaches. Pearson. https://www.worldcat.org/title/criminal-justice-research-methods-
    qualitative-and-quantitative-approaches/oclc/52324125?referer=di&ht=edition
Olson, R. E., McKenzie, J., Mills, K. A., Patulny, R., Bellocchi, A., & Caristo, F. (2019). Gendered emotion

                                                                                                                               610

Mulawarman, W. G., Komariyah, L., Suryaningsi. (2021). Women and leadership style in school management: Study of gender perspective.
      Cypriot Journal of Educational Science. 16(2), 594-611. https://doi.org/10.18844/cjes.v16i2.5638


      management and teacher outcomes in secondary school teaching: A review. Teaching and Teacher
      Education, 80, 128–144. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.tate.2019.01.010
Palmén, R., Arroyo, L., Müller, J., Reidl, S., Caprile, M., & Unger, M. (2020). Integrating the gender dimension in
     teaching, research content &amp; knowledge and technology transfer: Validating the EFFORTI evaluation
     framework through three case studies in Europe. Evaluation and Program Planning, 79, 101751.
     https://doi.org/10.1016/j.evalprogplan.2019.101751
Popa, D., & Gavriliu, D. (2015). Gender representations and digital media. Procedia - Social and Behavioral Sciences,
     180, 1199–1206. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.sbspro.2015.02.244
Postema, B. F., & Haverkort, B. R. (2018). Evaluation of advanced data centre power management strategies.
     Electronic       Notes       in       Theoretical      Computer       Science,    337,     173–191.
     https://doi.org/10.1016/j.entcs.2018.03.040
Rahardjo, M. (2017). Studi kasus dalam penelitian kualitatif: Konsep dan prosedurnya.
     https://docplayer.info/47404253-Studi-kasus-dalam-penelitian-kualitatif-konsep-dan-prosedurnya-tulisan-
     ke-3-selesai.html
Rhee, K. S., & Sigler, T. H. (2015). Untangling the relationship between gender and leadership. Gender in
     Management: An International Journal, 30(2), 109–134. https://doi.org/10.1108/GM-09-2013-0114
Rodríguez, P., Montequín, V. R., Morán, H., & de Arriba, L. (2017). Gender influence in project management:
     analysis of a case study based on master students. Procedia Computer Science, 121, 461–468.
     https://doi.org/10.1016/j.procs.2017.11.062
Skirstad, B. (2009). Gender policy and organizational change: A contextual approach. Sport Management Review,
      12(4), 202–216. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.smr.2009.03.003
Stepanikova, I., Acharya, S., Abdalla, S., Baker, E., Klanova, J., & Darmstadt, G. L. (2020). Gender discrimination and
     depressive symptoms among child-bearing women: ELSPAC-CZ cohort study. EClinicalMedicine, 20, 100297.
     https://doi.org/10.1016/j.eclinm.2020.100297
Styhre, A., & Eriksson‐Zetterquist, U. (2008). Thinking the multiple in gender and diversity studies: Examining the
      concept of intersectionality. Gender in Management: An International Journal, 23(8), 567–582.
      https://doi.org/10.1108/17542410810912690
Wahyuningtyas, D. E. (2017). Pengaruh tingkat pendidikan orangtua dan prestasi belajar siswa mata pelajaran
    prakarya dan kewirausahaan terhadap minat berwirausaha siswa kelas xi smk negeri 1 surakarta tahun
    pelajaran 2015/2016. https://eprints.uns.ac.id/33403/
Woods, P. A., & Gronn, P. (2009). Nurturing democracy: The contribution of distributed leadership to a democratic
    organizational landscape. Educational Management Administration & Leadership, 37(4), 430–451.
    https://doi.org/10.1177/1741143209334597
Yin, R. K. (2002). Case study research: Design and methods (2nd ed.). SAGE Publications.




                                                                                                                               611