Sapientia Foundation Journal of Education, Sciences and Gender Studies (SFJESGS), Vol.4 No2 June, 2022;   pg. 163 – 169
ISSN: 2734-2522 (Print); ISSN: 2734-2514 (Online)

 SUPERVISION IN SCHOOL MANAGEMENT: CHALLENGES AND WAY FORWARD

                               NGAFI EMMANUEEL WONGEH,
                   Department of Educational Foundations and General Studies,
                          Federal University of Agriculture, Makurdi

                                      TERNA KONDOM,
                   Department of Educational Foundations and General Studies,
                          Federal University of Agriculture, Makurdi

                                        AGNES ALPHA
                   Department of Educational Foundations and General Studies,
                          Federal University of Agriculture, Makurdi

                                             EDWARD NYAMLA
                                          Department of Art Education
                                               University of Jos

                                                     &
                                      IYALLA CHRISTOPHER FRIDAY
                                       Department of Science Education
                                              University of Jos



                                               ABSTRACT
          Supervision is characterized by collaboration, science, integrated, standing and
          flexible. The functions of supervision such as goal development, paper examines the
          characteristics of supervision which include; Collaboration, standing, motivation,
          professional growth, programme development, problem solving, control and
          coordination, this and evaluation of educational outcomes. Effective supervision in
          school management is being challenged by shortage of external supervisors, staff
          inadequacy, inadequate instructional materials, lack of training, lack of time, fiscal
          inadequacy, and inadequate instructional materials. The ways by which supervision
          can be improved upon has been discussed in this paper. These are: joint effort, work-
          related skills, personal skills, dual focus, attitudes, growth and orientation, clear
          understanding, proactivity, knowledge and information and systematic process.

Keywords: Supervision, School, Management, Challenges, Forward.

Introduction
Organizations and institutions supervise and evaluate employee’s performance for several
reasons including retention, promotion and accountability for completing job related task.
Educational institutions are not different as it requires supervision of classroom instruction to
evaluate teachers’ effectiveness. Also, education aim at bringing about the relative change in
behavior of the learners, as a result of learning. The behavioral change can only occur in
learners based on the amount of instruction given to the at any level of education vis-a-vis
how such instruction is being delivered during the teaching and learning process. However,
SUPERVISION IN SCHOOL MANAGEMENT: CHALLENGES AND WAY FORWARD…                                163

Sapientia Foundation Journal of Education, Sciences and Gender Studies (SFJESGS), Vol.4 No2 June, 2022;   pg. 163 – 169
ISSN: 2734-2522 (Print); ISSN: 2734-2514 (Online)

well packaged instruction is at any level of education but without effective supervision during
lesson delivery period, such instruction may fail to achieve its desired result.




In Nigeria, education is on the concurrent list of government and makes the issue of
instructional supervision to vary from state to another. However, some state some state has
‘adequate arrangement in the place to effectively supervise at all level of education
particularly at the secondary level whereas some states failed to put the necessary machineries
in place to effectively supervise instruction at the secondary level. For example, Ondo State
government in 2009 created Quality Assurances Education Agency as a parastatal under the
Ministry of Education to supervise instruction both at the primary and secondary schools
within the state.

Secondary education occupies a unique position among all levels of broad education. The
goals of secondary education include: the preparation of the individuals for useful living
within the society and higher education. Thus, in order to achieve the stated goals, there is
need effective supervision of instruction in secondary schools. In general, instructional
supervision is geared toward the improvement of the teaching and learning process for the
benefit of both the teachers and the learners. Evidence from previous studies conducted by
scholars (Handal&Lauvas, 1987; Gregory, 2010) showed that instructional supervision has
always been regarded as essential and integral parts of school administration and basically
geared towards the improvement of all factor in teaching and learning.

Supervision is a professional activity concerned with the development, maintenance, and
improvement and must be carried regularly in order to identify the problems militating
against the progress of the school system and also to proffer solutions to these problems. This
paper has explained the characteristic, functions challenges and the way forward to effective
supervision for better performance in school management.

Concept of Supervision
Supervision has been defined by several scholars in different ways. The term supervision is
derived from the Latin word “super video” meaning to oversee (Adepujo, 1998). Supervision
is a professional activity concerned with the development, maintenance, and improvement of
school instructional programmes, especially its curriculum and teaching staff (Ochai,2013).
According to Nwaogu (2002), supervision is playing the role in deciding the nature, the
content of the curriculum, and selecting the materials to facilitate teaching and learning
process. Chike-Okolo (2016), asserted that supervision is a process that brings about
improving the quality of instruction of people who are working with students. He further
stated that supervision involves stimulating the growth and helping teachers to help learners.
Supervision is therefore a tool for enhancing teachers’ knowledge, attitudes and skills in
teaching and learning process to facilitate the achievement of educational goals and objectives.
According to Asemah (2010), supervision is a way of advising, stimulating, guiding,
improving, refreshing, encouraging and overseeing their operations, in order for the
supervisors to be successful in their task of supervision. Abenga (1995) maintain that
supervision should not aim at witch-hunting or fault finding. It should focus on helping the
teachers to correct their mistakes and giving them some guidance when the need arises. It
SUPERVISION IN SCHOOL MANAGEMENT: CHALLENGES AND WAY FORWARD…                                                             164

Sapientia Foundation Journal of Education, Sciences and Gender Studies (SFJESGS), Vol.4 No2 June, 2022;   pg. 163 – 169
ISSN: 2734-2522 (Print); ISSN: 2734-2514 (Online)

should counsel those who encounter problems that may likely affect their performance.
Ogunsanya(2006) is of the opinion that effective supervision will lead to the improvement of
teachers’ quality of performance.
Supervision can therefore be said to be all the effort of designated school officials directed
toward providing leadership to teachers and others educational workers in the improvement
of teacher’s performance.

Characteristics of Supervision
The characteristics of supervision as outlined by Osburn (2012) in Omorobi (2012) are as
follows:
   I.  Collaboration: Participants in educational process are expected should make
       suggestions and provide useful services to separate supervisory administrative staff,
       which little impact. In reality, there should be cooperation among those involved
       supervisory duties. In actuality, all supervisory responsibilities should be shared
       rather than separated by the parties involved. The objective of the school be thwarted
       if maximum cooperation is not achieved because it is anticipated to be a cooperative
       process in which all the parties involved work together to improve teaching and
       learning practices in schools.
  II.  Integrated: Supervision has a single goal of ensuring that all the school units are
       working are working in same direction toward a single goal in order to avoid in order
       to avoid wasting time, effort, and resources in the pursuit of those goals. This means
       that school supervision aims to bring the goals of the school together.
 III.  Flexible: Unlike traditional inspection, School supervision must be flexible. It should
       be flexible and adaptive or dynamic in nature.
 IV.   Science: Supervision should be specifically structured, based entirely on controlled
       teaching and learning process, to ensure that the result will provide recommendations
       for consistentre adjustment with the focus on training more adapted and effective
       learners.
  V.   Standing: School supervision should not be interrupted and should not be permanent
       in the sense that it should encourage those involved in the teaching learning process.

Functions for School Supervision
These functions define the numerous activities that take place during the supervisory process.
The function can be divided into seven categories, as indicated below (Wiles &Loveel, 1975)
in National Open University (2019).
   i.    Goal development: The primary function of supervision is to guarantee that teachers
         and supervisors collaborates achieve the school’s objectives. It’s worth noting that the
         school’s objectives are derived from societal objectives. Goal development as a
         function of supervision is a continuous that requires constant investigation,
         evaluation, modification, (if necessary) change of the teaching/learning process goal
         through collaborative effort of both the teachers and supervisors. Regularity of goal-
         development concern is a clear is a clear evidence of monitoring systems sensitivity
         and responsiveness to the dynamism of the societal goal.
  ii.    Motivation: Everyday, teachers and learners re confronted with a wide range of
         problems of varied degrees of difficulty. These issues could be related to educational
         organizational inputs, expected learning outcomes, curricula programs, and actual
         learning. While the teacher may be able to handle some of these issues on his own right
SUPERVISION IN SCHOOL MANAGEMENT: CHALLENGES AND WAY FORWARD…                                165

Sapientia Foundation Journal of Education, Sciences and Gender Studies (SFJESGS), Vol.4 No2 June, 2022;   pg. 163 – 169
ISSN: 2734-2522 (Print); ISSN: 2734-2514 (Online)

          away, many may others may take days to overcome and will require the supervisor’s
          support. In all situations, the supervisory mechanism in place should be capable of
          quickly resolving new issues.
 iii.     Professional Growth: Teachers are experts in their fields. They are educated, yet the
          requirements, challenges, and goals of the society that owns the educational system,
          as well as the society’s expectations of teachers, are constantly changing. Teachers, as
          stewards of the society’s education, must adapt to and reflect changes in technology,
          goal development, learning engagements, and the learning environment of
          educational institutions. Teachers must be exposed to a continuous, comprehensive,
          and systematic program of in-service training to enable them to cope with these
          changes. It is the responsibility of supervision to initiate the support, coordinate, and
          facilitate the implementation of the professional development program for teachers
          and supervisors. As the educational system grew, more professional supervisors and
          teachers are needed.
 iv.      Programme Development: Teachers are primarily responsible for developing
          curricula and co-curricular activities. In this case, the supervisor’s job is to provide
          appropriate supplementary technical and professional services and support. The
          programme developed for teaching/learning process at the level of either an
          educational sub-system or an individual school or classroom. As a result,
          modifications in these objectives are expected to lead to acceptable outcomes Changes
          in the programmed development is aided by the supervisory system.
  v.      Control and coordination: Education is system comprised of of a number of
          interacting parts. Each unit has its own objectives to meet while also contributing to
          the system’s or sub-system’s broader objectives. It is a basic role of supervision to
          ensure that the various units are properly coordinated. In order to develop the
          supervisory system and increase and increase the quality of education for learner,
          effective coordination necessitates the establishment of a complete system of
          communication among the units.
 vi.      Problem solving: Teachers and learners are often confronted different problems of
          varying degree of difficulty. These problems may be related to inputs into educational
          organization, anticipated learning outcomes, curricula and co-curricular programmes
          and actual learning. Some of these problems may be solved by the teacher immediately
          and some which requires intervention of the supervisor, may take some days or weeks.
          The supervisory system put in place should that which is readily prepared to facilitate
          the resolution of emerging problems.
vii.      Evaluation of educational outcomes: Evaluation is the process of ascertaining the
          decision area of concern, selecting appropriate information, collecting, and analyzing
          the information in order to report the summary of the data which is usefully policy
          makers in selecting among alternatives. Evaluation is the act of examining the worth,
          significance, quality, amount, degree, emphasis or condition of some the comparison
          of situation used as standard of comparison whose quality is well known. Therefore,
          supervision is worthless if the actual need is perceived beforehand. No effective
          guidance can be provided without evaluation.

Challenges to Supervision in School Management
There are several problems which tend to militate against effective supervision of schools in
Nigeria. According to Enaigbe (2009:240) in (Ochai,2013), identified the following problems:
SUPERVISION IN SCHOOL MANAGEMENT: CHALLENGES AND WAY FORWARD…                             166

Sapientia Foundation Journal of Education, Sciences and Gender Studies (SFJESGS), Vol.4 No2 June, 2022;   pg. 163 – 169
ISSN: 2734-2522 (Print); ISSN: 2734-2514 (Online)

   i.     Staff Inadequacy: The quantity of professionally trained supervisors in school is far
          insufficient to meet the demands of an effective and efficient supervision program.
          The school’s student population has beyond the stipula: teacher-pupil ratio to the
          point where most school administrators do nothing in terms of instructions. It is the
          responsible of the department of instruction to guarantee that there are enough
          teachers to cover the classes.
  ii.     Shortage of external supervisors: External supervisors are usually Ministry of
          Education or Education Bureau officers who are expressly designated to assess the
          level of conformity 0f school instructional activities with approved government
          standards. Unfortunately, due to the enormous number of schools and instructors,
          hence causing shortage of supervisors to effectively carryout the supervisory activities
          as expected. According to (Ogunu,2005), the consequences of this shortage of qualified
          supervisors is that supervision is being carried out by quacks.
 iii.     Inadequate Instructional materials: Without instructional materials, there can be no
          effective delivery of instruction; however, experience has shown that most schools lack
          even most basic teaching materials and equipment, such as textbooks, chalkboard and
          suitable classrooms for students. Apart from the circumstances when the supervisor
          has nothing to supervise, there are others where the issue is lack of facilities and
          materials for the supervisor to supervise.
 iv.      Fiscal Inadequacy: A lack of cash often prevents supervisors from organizing in-house
          orientation and training programs for their employees or travelling to other school
          resource centres to learn about new development, advice, and instruction that could
          benefit the school and government.
  v.      Lack of Training: Many newly appointed school’s supervisors are not properly
          trained and lack proper orientation that can equip them with the required skills to
          effectively carryout their instructional supervisory functions. They manage for many
          years without understanding what instructional supervision entails.
 vi.      Lack of Time: According to Ogunu, (2005), school supervisors are overloaded with
          the routine of administrative activities so much so that they hardly find time to visit
          the classrooms to supervise the teachers. The manager spends more time attending to
          the correspondence with the Ministry of Education, community affairs and parents,
          hence neglecting their primary function which is supervision.

The Way Forward
Supervision within the school system can improved upon using various means (Ochai, 2013).
Some of the ways of improving school supervision are as follows:
   i.    Joint effort: Supervision is not something done to employees, but rather a
         collaborative activity in which each party has a critical role to play. The supervisors
         and the staff member work on plans for completing duties such as defining unit
         priorities, scheduling and allocating work, and coordinating the division’s efforts are
         worked out jointly by both parties.
  ii.    Dual focus: Employees must believe that they have a significant say in selecting and
         defining the unit’s goals, as well as developing ways to achieve them. If employees
         believe that goals are being imposed on them, they are less likely to make personal
         investment in achieving the unit’s objectives.
 iii.    Knowledge and information: To efficiently accomplish their job obligations,
         employees must comprehend what is expected of them. Understanding student
SUPERVISION IN SCHOOL MANAGEMENT: CHALLENGES AND WAY FORWARD…                                167

Sapientia Foundation Journal of Education, Sciences and Gender Studies (SFJESGS), Vol.4 No2 June, 2022;   pg. 163 – 169
ISSN: 2734-2522 (Print); ISSN: 2734-2514 (Online)

          growth, current laws and other legal parameters of practice, standards, and
          institutional norms and regulations are all examples of this.
 iv.      Work-related skill: Supervisors must ensure that staff members are up to date on
          emerging trends in the field of student development and that they are trained in a
          interpersonal communication, goal setting, and computer skills. These skills must be
          refreshed on a regular basis for student affairs professionals to remain effective. This
          is especially true for skills that are not used frequently. Supervisors must also provide
          opportunities for staff members to grow and learn new skills.
  v.      Attitudes: Supervision must instill a positive attitude in their employees. Individuals
          with positive attitudes are more likely to apply their knowledge or skills to achieve
          personal, unit, and division goals. As a result, their attitudes toward people,
          particularly students.
 vi.      Personal skills: The synergic approach to supervision emphasizes a holistic approach
          to supervision. Similarly, consideration must be given to the development of personal
          skills or work -related skills. Individual must learn skills to function successfully as
          professionals. Time management, anger management, diet, exercise, and retirement
          planning.
vii.      Growth orientation: Career development of staff is one of the major responsibilities
          of supervision. As supervisors are pursuing meaningful work that is personally
          satisfying to them, the should ensure that assistance is being provided to the staff
          members. This can only be achieved if the supervisor understands the staff.
viii.     Clear understanding: It is essential that supervisors have a clear understanding of the
          adult theory of development to best to and aid the development of staff at various
          stages of life. Someone who has been in the job has personal, professional needs that
          different from a new staff. Therefore, these two individuals can’t be supervised in the
          same way.
 ix.      Proactivity: Supervision focuses on identifying problems instead of reacting to
          problems that have building over time. Supervision emphasizes on early identification
          of problems and developing strategies to lessen the effect or prevent jointly by the
          supervisor and staff. Therefore, staff should be free to seek advice or assistance from
          the supervisors and the supervisor shouldn’t see as weakness on their part.
  x.      Goal based: Supervisors and teachers are expected to have a clear expectation of one
          another as supervision requires. Goal and expectations are be jointly developed by
          them and commitment to reviewing them regularly are to be made. The set goals are
          be evaluated at regular intervals to determine the level of progress.
 xi.      Systematic process: Supervisory session should be held regularly on proactive basis
          and not as a response to crises or inadequate job performance by staff members.

Conclusion
Supervision is an essential component of educational administration which aims at improving
both the teachers and the learners. The performance of any school is dependent on the quality
of supervision. Effective supervision in schools help in the proper use of educational resources
and identifying the problems bedeviling effective supervision as well as proffering solution
to the identified issues. Therefore, it is advisable for school managers to supervise their
teachers regularly.



SUPERVISION IN SCHOOL MANAGEMENT: CHALLENGES AND WAY FORWARD…                                                             168

Sapientia Foundation Journal of Education, Sciences and Gender Studies (SFJESGS), Vol.4 No2 June, 2022;   pg. 163 – 169
ISSN: 2734-2522 (Print); ISSN: 2734-2514 (Online)




References
Abenga, F.M (1995). Principles and Practices of School Administration in Nigeria. Makurdi:
       Onvaivi Printing & Publishers.
Adepoju, T. L. (1999). Principles and Practice 0f Primary Education in Nigeria. Ibadan:
       Corporate Publication.
Asemah, J.I. (2010). Perspectives in Educational Management and Administration. Makurdi:
       Destiny Ventures.
Chike-Okolo, A. (2016). Application of Supervisory Techniques. Calabar: Uniniversity of
       Calabar Printing Press.
Enaigbe, A.P. (2009). Strategy for Improving Supervisory Skills for Effective Primary
       Education in Nigeria. Ed Journal of Counselling, 2(2) 236- 241. Ile-Ife: University Press.
Gregory, C.F (2010).Instructional Supervision: A descriptive study focusing on the
       observation and evaluation of teachers in cyber schools. A dissertation submitted to
       postgraduate school at Idiana University Pennsylvania.
Handal, G. &Lauvas, P. (1987). Promoting Reflective Teaching: Supervision in Action. Milton
       Keynes: Open University Press.
National Open University of Nigeria (2019). Supervision of
       Instruction.www.nou.edu.ng/courseware, retrieved 18/6/22
Nwaogu, J.T. (2002). Educational Supervision. Ibadan: Heinemann Education Books.
Ochai, G. (2013). Fundamentals of Educational Management. Makurdi. Success World
       Publication.
Ogunu, M. A. (2005). Introduction to Educational Management. Benin City: Mabagun
       Publishers.
Ogusanyu, S. (2006). Educational supervision Perspectives and Practices in Nigeria.
Omorobi, G. O (2021). School Supervision and Educational Management in Nigeria,
       Conference Paper University of Calabar.
Wiles, K. and Loveli, J.T. (2005). Supervision for Better schools. Englewood: Cliffs, New Jersey
       Practice-Hall Inc




SUPERVISION IN SCHOOL MANAGEMENT: CHALLENGES AND WAY FORWARD…                                                             169