JURNAL PENDIDIKAN NUSANTARA
                    http://ejournal.tahtamedia.com/index.php/nusantara
                           e-ISSN: 2809-6495; p-ISSN: 2809-7041


                       Effective School Management
                    Through Total Quality Management

                *Agantina Venalia1, Burgawanti 2, Siti Dwiningrum 3
     1,2,3Universitas Negeri yogyakarta (UNY), Daerah Istimewa Yogyakarta,

                                             Indonesia
                     3    orcid id: https://orcid.org/0009-0004-3428-5566
                          *agantinavenalia.2022@student.uny.ac.id

Keywords:                Abstract
Management
                         Realizing the quality of education that is good and remains controlled,
Effective Schools
                         there must be a national standard of school management. The purpose of
Total Quality
                         this research is to analyze and describe in depth, through a literature
Management.
                         review, effective school management through Total Quality Management
                         (TQM). The study employs a qualitative method; the data is collected
                         using a literature review that is critically and comprehensively reviewed.
                         TQM in program implementation requires high commitment from the
                         members or individuals involved. The eight TQM components should
                         ensure the success of its activities. School principals play an important role
                         because they must be able to develop, train, and implement these eight
                         components in the implementation of educational programmes in schools.
                         TQM will fail if it is not based on ethics, integrity and trust. Training for
                         TQM empowerment as well as specific technical skills are essential for
                         program implementation as they can create a work environment conducive
                         to program objectives. The lack of communication between sections and
                         implementers can be a burden or obstacle in the implementation of
                         activities.

Kata Kunci:              Standar nasional manajemen sekolah diperlukan untuk mencapai
Manajemen                pendidikan yang berkualitas dan terkendali. Mendorong adanya
Sekolah                  pendekatan baru dalam pengelolaan peningkatan mutu
yang efektif             pendidikan. Tujuan penelitian ini adalah menganalisis dan
Total Quality            mendeskripsikan secara detail manajemen sekolah yang efektif
Managemen.               melalui total quality management (TQM) melalui tinjauan literatur.
                         Penelitian ini menggunakan metode kualitatif, data dikumpulkan
                         menggunakan tinjauan literatur yang ditinjau secara kritis dan
                         komprehensif. TQM dalam implementasi program memerlukan
                         komitmen tinggi dari anggota dan pemangku kepentingan yang
                         terlibat. Keberhasilan kegiatannya diharapkan dapat dijamin oleh
                         delapan komponen TQM. Kepala sekolah memegang peran penting
                         mampu mengembangkan, melatih, dan menerapkan kedelapan
                         komponen tersebut dalam pelaksanaan program pendidikan di
                         sekolah mereka, yang merupakan tugas yang sangat penting. TQM
                         tidak akan berhasil tanpa didasarkan pada etika, integritas, dan
                         kepercayaan. Pelatihan untuk mendukung total quality
                         management (TQM) dan keterampilan teknis khusus sangat
                         penting untuk pelaksanaan program karena dapat menciptakan




                                                                                                          56

                           Effective School Management Through Total Quality Management



                        lingkungan kerja yang sesuai dengan tujuan program. Tidak
                        adanya elemen komunikasi antara departemen dan pelaksana
                        dapat menyulitkan dan menghambat pelaksanaan kegiatan.

        Received: 22 January 2024; Revised: 3 April 2024; Accepted: 24 April 2024
                                            http://doi.org/10.55080/jpn.v3i1.50

                                            This is an open access article under the CC–BY license


1. Introduction
   The education unit or school, as the primary formal education implementation
unit with a varied range of pupils who require diverse educational services and
environmental conditions that differ from one another, must be dynamic and
creative in carrying out its job in order to strive for educational excellence. This is
possible if the school, with its diversity, is given the autonomy to organize and
manage itself based on environmental conditions and student needs. To sustain
quality and control the quality improvement process, there must be nationally
agreed-upon criteria that serve as indications of the effectiveness of quality
improvement. A new approach to education, especially the management of
quality improvement, which enables all schools resources to be accustomed in a
way that allows them to achieve their goals, has been promoted by this thinking.
   The main considerations in the decision-making process under the new
management are the diverse learning needs of students, the diverse professional
development needs of teachers and other staff, the various school environments,
and the expectations of parents and communities for quality education for their
children, as well as the demands of the business world to obtain quality
personnel. This raises the prospect of using various theories, perspectives, and
frameworks in the decision-making process to improve educational quality by
involving various community groups, particularly those concerned with
education. The school is at the forefront of the educational process, while the
community is encouraged to participate in order to gain a better understanding
of education, and the central government assists in establishing the basic
framework of education policy.
   This technique differs from the traditional notion of school administration. The
central bureaucracy dominated the education decision-making process in the old
system, which comprised both macro and micro policies. Schools tended to
simply apply these policies, which were not always in accordance with children'
learning requirements, the school environment, or parents' expectations.
Experience has shown that the old approach frequently resulted in
inconsistencies between what the school requires and the policies that must be
applied in the process of increasing educational quality. The phenomenon of
school autonomy demonstrates a shift in thinking from a rational, normative, and
prescriptive approach to educational decision-making to an awareness of the
complexities of educational decision-making.
   The principal, teachers, and instructional staff are among the school's
resources. Improved resource quality is one of the issues that schools must
address in order to achieve effective schools through Total Quality Management
(TQM). Total Quality Management (TQM) is a service management method that
aims to maximize resource quality through the continuous improvement of
goods, services, personnel, procedures, and surroundings.



DOI: http://doi.org/10.55080/jpn.v3i1.50                Jurnal Pendidikan Nusantara; Vol. 3 No.1, 2024   57

     Agantina Venalia, Burgawanti, et al.




        According to Bounds et al. (1994), Total Quality Management (TQM) has two
     sides to quality: the hard side and the soft side. The Hard Side of Quality
     encompasses all efforts to improve service processes, from product design to the
     use of control tools such as Quality Function Development, Just In Time, and
     Static Process Control, as well as other organizational changes (such as
     organizational structure), with the expectation that such efforts will improve
     service quality, thereby meeting public needs.
        The goal of total quality management (TQM), a human-centred management
     approach, is to create more value while also increasing the value that may be
     offered to service recipients (Bounds et al., 1994). Total quality management is a
     management philosophy whose main goal is to ensure satisfaction with products
     and services by prioritizing teamwork attitudes and behaviours in terms of
     educational cooperation between school components. Total quality management
     requires a full commitment from the school principal, and this commitment
     extends to the teachers within the school system. The headteacher plays a very
     strategic role in the school he leads. The school principal is responsible for the
     overall implementation of the school and can mobilize school life to achieve the
     school's goals (Arifin, 2019; Mustiningsih et al., 2020). This article discusses the
     analysis of how effective school management is through Total Quality
     Management (TQM).

     2. Methods
         This research method utilizes qualitative research. The research target is useful
     to analyze how to improve effective school management through Total Quality
     Management (TQM). This research uses data collection techniques in the form of
     literature studies. This article was prepared by using a literature review that was
     critically and comprehensively reviewed. In connection with various sources that
     are examined and reviewed using reference sources, namely reference sources in
     the form of previous scientific works and scientific articles that have been
     published with an index that has high credibility.
         The guidelines that are also the basis for conducting this research refer to the
     characteristics of literature studies proposed by Zed (2014), which are as follows:
     (1) Researchers work directly with text or data rather than direct field knowledge
     or eyewitness accounts of events involving people or other objects. (2) It is "ready-
     made", which means that the researcher does not have to go anywhere other than
     to deal directly with the source material that is already in the library. (3) Library
     data is generally secondary data, which means that researchers obtain it
     secondhand rather than directly from the library. This is not original field data.
     (4) The data conditions are not limited by space or time.

     3. Result and Discussion

     3.1 Definition of Effective School
        In developing education, in addition to using a macro approach, it is also
     necessary to pay attention to the micro approach, namely by focusing more
     broadly on the school institution with regard to the overall condition of the
     school, such as the school climate and the individuals involved in the school,
     both teachers, students, and school principals, as well as their respective roles
     and relationships that occur with each other (Koster, 2005). Meanwhile,




58   Jurnal Pendidikan Nusantara; Vol. 3 No.1, 2024      DOI: http://doi.org/10.55080/jpn.v3i1.50

                           Effective School Management Through Total Quality Management




Brookover (1979) revealed that school inputs are important, but much more
important is how to utilize these inputs related to the individuals in the school.
    Understanding the school institution as a whole is critical because the school
is the primary foundation of education (Hegar Harini et al., 2024). Understanding
school effectiveness is important not only for improving educational quality but
also for aligning with national policy, specifically the decentralisation of
education in the context of implementing regional autonomy. In terms of
educational decentralisation, the Ministry of National Education has developed
the concept of school autonomy, also known as school-based management, in the
field of primary education. The government aims to achieve equity, relevance,
and efficiency in education through this concept, in addition to raising the
standard of instruction. With more autonomy, it is anticipated that schools will
be able to allocate resources more freely in order to meet the needs of the local
community, be more responsive to those needs, and engage the community in
both supporting and directing education management at the school level.
    A school is an institution composed of teachers, pupils, and administrative
personnel, each of whom is responsible for initiating the program. Schools, as a
formal education institution, are expected to create graduates with specific
academic abilities, skills, attitudes, mental, and other personalities for them to
continue their education or work in jobs that require their knowledge and talents.
Based on the goals and objectives of education at the school level in line with
national education objectives, as well as the length of time that education takes
place in schools, school success is a micro measure of how well these goals can be
accomplished in a given amount of time. Effective and ineffective schools are
known from the standpoint of school success, which refers to the extent to which
schools can achieve the educational goals and objectives that have been set. In
other words, a school is said to be effective if it can accomplish its goals. The
broad definition of effective schools is linked to the formulation of what should
be done and what has been accomplished. If there is a strong relationship
between what has been formulated to be done and the results achieved by the
school, the school is said to be effective; otherwise, the school is said to be
ineffective if the relationship is weak (Getzel, 1969).

3.2 Characteristics of an Effective School
   Several specialists, including Squires et al. and Scheerens, have been
successful in identifying the traits of successful schools. The qualities of
successful schools were effectively formulated by David A. Squires et al. in 1983.
Specifically: (1) there is a level of discipline that applies to principals, instructors,
students, and personnel in the school; (2) there is a regularity in the routine of
classroom activities; (3) there is a very high standard of school accomplishment;
(4) students are expected to reach the planned goals; (5) students are expected to
graduate by acquiring academic information; (6) there are prizes for students
who succeed; (7) students think that hard effort is more essential.
   Meanwhile, Jaap Scheerens (1992) characterizes an effective school as
possessing five essential elements. The first five characteristics include high
standards for student success, frequent evaluation of student-designed
programmes, a friendly climate, strong leadership, and an emphasis on
mastering core skills. Additional characteristics of successful schools include the
following: (1) the ability to demonstrate proficiency in comparison to a set of



DOI: http://doi.org/10.55080/jpn.v3i1.50            Jurnal Pendidikan Nusantara; Vol. 3 No.1, 2024   59

     Agantina Venalia, Burgawanti, et al.




     standards; (2) the establishment and pursuit of clear goals; (3) the presence of
     strong leadership; (4) the positive relationship between the school and parents;
     and (5) staff development and a learning-friendly environment (Townsend,
     1994). Standardized testing, the reputation approach, school evaluation, and
     development activities are other ways to determine which schools are effective.
        Edward Heneveld (1992) carried out a more thorough analysis of effective
     schools and identified 16 factors that were associated with effective schools: 1)
     community and parental support; 2) the educational system's effective support;
     3) enough material assistance; 4) competent leadership; 5) good teaching; 6)
     flexibility and autonomy; 7) adequate time in school; 8) high student
     expectations; 9) positive teacher attitudes; 10) rules and discipline; 11) Organized
     curriculum; 12) rewards and incentives. 13) adequate learning time; 14) variety of
     instructional tactics; (15) frequency of homework; and (16) frequent assessment
     and responses.

     3.2 Efforts Made to Become an Effective School
        To summarize, the way to make schools more effective is to empower the
     resources that schools own. However, according to the SMU Consultant Team
     (2004), it is possible to improve school effectiveness by implementing the
     following strategies: (1) With more open and transparent communication,role
     holders will feel more positive about the school, creating a strong foundation to
     support school development. (2) Shared decision-making: all role holders should
     have decision-making authority; role holders feel more involved in the process;
     and they believe the principal values their opinions. The decision-making
     hierarchy has been established, and it shows who makes decisions for each
     roleholder. (3) Attention to teacher needs: the school pays more attention to
     teacher needs because this can provide a variety of teacher motivations. (4)
     Focusing on student needs: schools that focus on student needs are more
     accepted by students, parents, and the community. Improving teaching,
     providing more teaching time, adding extracurriculars, involving students in
     problem-solving       decisions,     and     developing   training   programmes
     (extracurriculars) to prepare students for the world of work are all examples of
     student needs. (5) Striking for School and Community Integration Schools play
     an important social role in society, which includes the community in this context.
     The primary tool for connecting schools and parents. Typically, at the School
     Committee meeting, the principal's recommendations are reviewed, and its
     members decide which recommendations are supported as key issues and
     require funding. The roleholder's concerns have been communicated formally
     through meetings or informally through individual discussions with the
     principal. The above narrative can be visualized in Figure 1.




60   Jurnal Pendidikan Nusantara; Vol. 3 No.1, 2024      DOI: http://doi.org/10.55080/jpn.v3i1.50

                           Effective School Management Through Total Quality Management




                          Figure 1. Effective School Development Models

   One of the benefits of the school development model depicted in Figure 1 is
that the school can become self-sufficient once it has achieved optimal levels of
open communication and shared decision-making. This implies that the principal
serves as a coordinator of the school's various functions. The main issues are the
school's development direction and the identification of financial resources to
assist the school's development, which can be ongoing in the principal's
activities. This approach allows school development to continue even when a
new principal is appointed in an education system where principals are
periodically replaced.

3.4 Implementation of Total Quality Management in Effective Schools
   TQM adoption is more than simply a management programme to
complement or sweeten activities; it is necessary to boost work productivity.
TQM must be goal-oriented to increase organizational performance (Thomas
Packard, 1995). The eight parts that must be applied in organizational activities
are elements that work together to form a TQM structure. Consider the following
figure 2 :




      Figure 2. Total Quality Management's supporting elements foster communication.




DOI: http://doi.org/10.55080/jpn.v3i1.50            Jurnal Pendidikan Nusantara; Vol. 3 No.1, 2024   61

     Agantina Venalia, Burgawanti, et al.




     3.4.1 Foundation forming
        The foundation group is a collection of sections on ethics, integrity, and trust.
     Through TQM, a good work foundation will be established through ethics,
     integrity, and honesty. These three parts will open up and show the potential of
     TQM in an activity. The explanation of the three parts is as follows:
     First, Ethics. Ethics is the study of right and wrong under all circumstances.
     There are two aspects of ethics that need to be taken into account. The first is
     organizational ethics, which determines the state of the organization by
     establishing guidelines that employees must follow in order to perform well. The
     second is individual ethics, which deals with the proper and improper conduct of
     every person involved in acting out or carrying out an activity within an
     organization. Monitoring and evaluation activities require ethics, both from the
     organization conducting the M&E and from the individuals carrying it out. The
     results of a monev will not accurately represent the outcomes of a programme's
     implementation if ethics are lacking. While individual implementers must
     uphold ethics when gathering monev data and interacting with programme
     participants, organizational ethics refers to how the individuals involved can
     adhere to the rules that have been planned for monev procedures. This ensures
     that valid data is obtained.
         Second, Integrity. Integrity is the manifestation of honesty, morals, values,
     justice, obedience, and sincerity towards the organization's reality. This condition
     will exhibit a specific characteristic, namely what (internal and external) the
     customer is expected and entitled to obtain. Duplicity (being disloyal or two-
     faced) is the polar opposite of integrity. TQM will fail if there is dishonesty in the
     workplace. Integrity is required of Monev implementers in their work. The truth
     of monev results must be considered in the absence of integrity. Monev's
     integrity is manifested in the assertiveness of his work, which prioritizes Monev's
     performance over siding with its object. Furthermore, fairness in data collection
     and reviewing monev's results from various programs must be maintained in
     order for monev's objectives to be met.
         Third, Trust. Integrity and ethics produce trust. TQM performance cannot be
     built or realized without trust. Trust will aid in the development of full
     participation from all members of the organization. In addition to the
     commitment of activity implementers, trust is required to make decisions at all
     levels of the organization and to encourage each individual to take risks to
     improve their performance to help the organization improve. Because trust is a
     factor that promotes and ensures user (customer) satisfaction, it can be
     interpreted that trust can foster environmental cooperation to support TQM.

     3.4.2 Foundation of Bricks
         TQM walls will be formed on a strong foundation of honesty, ethics, and
     integrity to serve as a place or means to reach the roof that protects the entire
     TQM building. TQM requires training, teamwork, and leadership to realize the
     wall.
         First, Training. Training must be completed in order to achieve a productive
     workforce or implementer. Supervisors or assistants are in charge of
     implementing TQM in each section and teaching the TQM philosophy.
     Interpersonal capabilities, collaborative skills, problem solving, decision-making,
     technical skills, and other necessary talents are all required. These trainings



62   Jurnal Pendidikan Nusantara; Vol. 3 No.1, 2024       DOI: http://doi.org/10.55080/jpn.v3i1.50

                           Effective School Management Through Total Quality Management




should be implemented during TQM implementation so that everyone involved
can become more effective in organizational performance. It is necessary to
receive training for monev implementation, particularly for creating monev tools.
Additionally, training in report writing, data processing and review, and
implementation procedures is necessary for any project that involves a sizable
number of participants or implementers of activities. With the support and
guidance of a group of specialists or managers, it is envisaged that monev
operations will proceed as planned.
     Second, Teamwork. Individuals cannot carry out monitoring and evaluation
work; this activity requires teamwork; this condition is consistent with the TQM
philosophy that group work is the key to TQM activities. An activity is expected
to be completed more quickly with teamwork, and necessary problem solving
will be improved. People will feel more comfortable opening up or expressing a
problem in a teamwork setting and receiving assistance from other team
members to solve the problem. TQM allows for three different types of work
teams to be used: (1) Quality Improvement Team or Excellent Team (QITS).
Teams are non-permanent (temporary) work teams that aim to solve specific
problems that occur frequently. This team usually works for a period of 3 to 12
months. (2). Problem-solving teams (PSTs). The team is a small group of skilled
people who may share tasks and responsibilities. Employee engagement teams,
self-management teams, and quality circles are all instances of team structures.
These teams normally work for one or two hours per week. (3) Natural Wok
Teams. The team is a small group of skilled people who may share tasks and
responsibilities. Teamwork concepts include employee engagement teams, self-
management teams, and quality circles. These teams normally work for one or
two hours per week.
     Third, Leadership. The most significant part of TQM is leadership. TQM
leadership necessitates visionary leaders who can direct activities in a way that
all implementers understand and who can provide guidance on organizational
performance. Supervisors in the activity process must understand TQM, be
committed, and consistently outperform in order to serve as a role model for
other implementers. A supervisor or activity assistant must also ensure that the
activity's strategy, philosophy, values, and objectives are communicated to the
entire scope of the organization in order to maintain focus and clarity of
direction. Dheeraj Mehrotra (2007) asserts that a leader needs to be aware of what
students, service users, or consumers desire or will receive, regardless of their
role as a supervisor, teacher, principal, or activity assistant. To ensure that the
activity goals are sustained, all parties involved—from the top down to the
lowest level—must demonstrate their commitment to shaping and promoting the
value of excellent work.

3.4.3 (Binding Mortar)
   Information is exchanged interactively between the sender and the recipient in
communication. Communication between suppliers, users of goods or services,
and other members of the organization is essential to the success of Total Quality
Management (TQM). Supervisors or assistants need to open the environment for
implementers to receive and transmit information about the TQM process.
Accurate information sharing and two-way communication are essential. Such
communication needs to be clear, and the recipient needs to understand it in line



DOI: http://doi.org/10.55080/jpn.v3i1.50            Jurnal Pendidikan Nusantara; Vol. 3 No.1, 2024   63

     Agantina Venalia, Burgawanti, et al.




     with the sender's intended meaning in order to be considered reliable. In TQM,
     there are three distinct channels of communication.

     3.4.4 Roof
        The roof or roof formation is the last activity from the formation of a house,
     meaning that the roof can overshadow all activities and give a tangible form to the
     entire TQM implementation.

     3.4.5 Recognition
         The last component of a TQM system is recognition, which is bestowed upon
     groups and individuals who have executed the activity and met its goals. Every
     participant in an activity has proven their abilities both individually and as a team.
     It is the responsibility of the partner or manager in the field to determine whether
     a job is successful. Awards have the power to improve someone's self-esteem,
     productivity, and work quality. Since awards are given right after a job is
     completed, they must be given out right away.
         Based on the above description, TQM is a quality assurance concept that aims
     to achieve the highest service quality. the best quality of service. TQM is more than
     just empty slogans or formality programmes; it is a genuine effort to maintain the
     quality of planned and implemented organizational services. Efforts to maintain
     organizational service quality that are planned and implemented in a systematic,
     structured, and measurable manner. The TQM concept is implemented using the
     principle of recording what is done and doing what is recorded. The point is to
     compile quality procedures according to organizational activities that are usually
     carried out and perform organizational activities according to established quality
     procedures.
         The limitations of the research are that it does not specifically discuss what policy
     programmes are implemented by schools through Total Quality Management
     (TQM), only to provide a view of how to realize effective schools through TQM. So
     that there are other indicators that might appear. Then, this study only discusses,
     based on the results of the literature and the critical thinking of researchers in
     solving problems of improving the quality of education, including the problem of
     effective school management.

     4. Conclusion
        The significance of comprehending school effectiveness lies not only in its
     relationship to enhancing educational quality but also in its alignment with national
     policy, specifically the framework's devolution of education enacting local self-
     government, which is linked to school autonomy. It is anticipated that by
     distributing educational resources in accordance with priority needs, schools will be
     able to manage them more freely. Schools can be more responsive to the needs of
     the local community by allocating resources based on the needs that are most
     important. able to involve the community in supporting and managing school-level
     education management and be more receptive to the needs of the local community.
        TQM in programme implementation requires high commitment from the
     members or individuals involved. The eight TQM components should ensure the
     success of its activities. School principals play an important role because they must
     be able to develop, train, and apply these eight components in the implementation
     of educational programmes in schools. TQM implementation will fail if it is not



64   Jurnal Pendidikan Nusantara; Vol. 3 No.1, 2024       DOI: http://doi.org/10.55080/jpn.v3i1.50

                           Effective School Management Through Total Quality Management




based on ethics, integrity and trust. Training for TQM empowerment as well as
specific technical skills are essential for programmeme implementation as they can
create a work environment conducive to the programmeme objectives. Leadership
and teamwork complement each other in the implementation of an activity. Losing
the communication factor between sections and implementers can be a burden or
obstacle to the implementation of activities. Appropriate rewards for programme
implementers must be realized as soon as they finish implementing and achieving
their work achievements. Through the application of TQM, a good quality of work
will be obtained, creating a comfortable working atmosphere, sharing knowledge
that is mutually beneficial, and obtaining rewards according to their performance.

5. References
Bennis, W. (1989) On Becoming a Leader. Reading, MA: Addison Wesley.
Bounds, G. (1994). “Beyond Total Quality Management Toward the Emerging
    Paradigm”. New York: McGraw Hill Inc.
Brookover, W., & Lezotte, L. (1979). Changes in school characteristics coincident with
    changes in student achievement. East Lansing: The Institute for Research on
    Teaching, Michigan State University.
Edward, Heneveld. (1992). Planning and Monitoring the Quality of Primary
   Education IN Sub-saharan Africa. AFTGR Technical Note. World Bank,
   Washington, D.C.
Cohen, S. & Brand, R. (1993). Total Quality Management in Government. San
    Francisco: Jossey-Bass, Inc.
Consultant Team. (2004). External review of ECA : report of the independent
    consultant team. United Nations.
David A. Squires, et.al. (1983). Effective schools and classrooms: A research-based
    perspective. Association for Supervision and Curriculum Development. 225 North
    Washington Street, Alexandria, VA 22314 (Stock No. 611-83298).
Dheeraj Mehrotra (2007) Applying Total Quality Management In Academics, artikel
    internet htpp/www/iSixSigma LLC, CTQ Media LLC/ v3.0lb, 0.0
Hegar Harini, Fina Kholij Zukhrufin, Afiful Ikhwan, & Hana Dinul Qoyimmah
    Wahyusi. (2024). Manajemen Sarana dan Prasarana dalam Meningkatkan
    Mutu Lembaga Pendidikan Islam. Journal Islamic Education (JIE), 9(1), 1–20.
    https://doi.org/10.52615/jie.v9i1.329
Ikhwan, A. (2021). Metode Penelitian Dasar (Mengenal Model Penelitian dan
    Sistematikanya). Tulungagung: STAI Muhammadiyah Tulungagung.
Ikhwan, Afiful, Pengembangan Kurikulum Pendidikan Agama Islam (PAI) Untuk
    Kalangan Dosen, Guru, Guru Pendidik, Mahasiswa maupun Umum,
    (Tulungagung, STAIM Press: 2014).
Khurram Hashmi (2007) Introduction and Implementation of Total Quality
    Management,artikel internet , htpp/www/iSixSigma LLC, CTQ Media LLC/
    v3.0lb, 0.1.
Mustiningsih, M., & Arifin, I 2019, ‘Quality Management Education in the Industrial




DOI: http://doi.org/10.55080/jpn.v3i1.50            Jurnal Pendidikan Nusantara; Vol. 3 No.1, 2024   65

     Agantina Venalia, Burgawanti, et al.




           Revolution Era 4.0 and Society 5.0’, In 5th International Conference on Education
           and Technology (ICET 2019) htpp: 565-570, doi:10.2991/icet-19.2019.141.
     Nayanthara Padhi (2007) The Eight Elements Of TQM. Artikel internet.
         htpp/www/iSixSigma LLC, CTQ Media LLC/ v3.0lb, 0.2
     Scheerens, J. 1992. School effectiveness in developed and developing countries; a review
         of the research evidence. World Ban Paper.
     Thomas Packard, D.S.W (1995) Total Quality Management in the Social Service.
        Albany,NY: Rockefeller College Press.
     Tichey, N. (1983). Managing Strategic Change. New York: John Wiley & Sons.
     Wayan Koster 2005, Analisis Komparatif Antara Sekolah Efektif dengan Sekolah Tidak
        Efektif. Accessed on December 12, 2023 : www.depdiknas.go.id
     Zed, M. (2014). Metodologi Penelitian Kepustakaan . Jakarta: Yayasan Pustaka Obor
          Indonesia.




66   Jurnal Pendidikan Nusantara; Vol. 3 No.1, 2024        DOI: http://doi.org/10.55080/jpn.v3i1.50