This may be the author’s version of a work that was submitted/accepted
for publication in the following source:

Williamson, Ben & Hogan, Anna
(2020)
 Commercialisation and privatisation in/of education in the context of
Covid-19.
Education International, Brussels, Belguim.

This file was downloaded from: https://eprints.qut.edu.au/216577/


© Consult author(s) regarding copyright matters

This work is covered by copyright. Unless the document is being made available under a
Creative Commons Licence, you must assume that re-use is limited to personal use and
that permission from the copyright owner must be obtained for all other uses. If the docu-
ment is available under a Creative Commons License (or other specified license) then refer
to the Licence for details of permitted re-use. It is a condition of access that users recog-
nise and abide by the legal requirements associated with these rights. If you believe that
this work infringes copyright please provide details by email to qut.copyright@qut.edu.au


License: Creative Commons: Attribution-Noncommercial-Share Alike 4.0


Notice: Please note that this document may not be the Version of Record
(i.e. published version) of the work. Author manuscript versions (as Sub-
mitted for peer review or as Accepted for publication after peer review) can
be identified by an absence of publisher branding and/or typeset appear-
ance. If there is any doubt, please refer to the published source.

https:// www.ei-ie.org/ en/ detail/ 16858/ edtech-pandemic-shock-new-ei-research-launched-on-covid

Education
International
Research




   Commercialisation and
   privatisation in/of education
   in the context of Covid-19
   Ben Williamson & Anna Hogan
   July 2020

About the authors:

  Ben Williamson
  Ben Williamson is a Chancellor’s Fellow in the Centre for Research
  in Digital Education at the University of Edinburgh, UK, where his
  research focuses on education policy, technology and data. He is an
  editor of the journal Learning, Media and Technology, and the author of
  Big Data in Education: The digital future of learning, policy and practice.

  Anna Hogan
  Anna Hogan is a senior lecturer in education at The University of
  Queensland, where her research focuses on education privatisation
  and commercialisation. She is an editor of the journal Critical Studies
  in Education, and has a forthcoming edited collection, Privatisation and
  Commercialisation in Public Education: How the Nature of Public Schooling
  is Changing.




Education International (EI)
  Education International represents organisations of teachers and
  other education employees across the globe. It is the world’s largest
  federation of unions and associations, representing thirty million
  education employees in about four hundred organisations in one
  hundred and seventy countries and territories, across the globe.
  Education International unites teachers and education employees.

                                  Education
                                International
                                  Research




   Commercialisation and
privatisation in/of education
 in the context of Covid-19

                           Ben Williamson,
     University of Edinburgh, United Kingdom
                               Anna Hogan,
          University of Queensland, Australia
                                     July 2020




    This work is licensed under a Creative   Published by Education International - July 2020
    Commons Attribution-NonCommercial-
    ShareAlike 4.0 International License.    ISBN        978-92-95109-97-1 (PDF)
    (CC BY-NC-SA 4.0)

    Cover picture: Education International


Table of Contents


Summary                                                   1
Introduction                                             4
I.     Review of relevant literature                     7
      1. The Global Education Industry                    7
      2. Policy mobility                                  8
      3. Edtech markets                                   9
      4. Data collection and ownership                   11
II.    Mapping organisations and networks                14
      1.   International organisations and coalitions    14
             Covid-19 edtech funding programs            15
             International coalitions                    17
      2.   Government-commercial partnerships            21
      3.   Commercial coalitions                         24
             Commercial online school solutions          25
             Public-private open schools                 27
      4.   Intermediaries                                29
             Philanthropy                                29
             Think tanks                                 34
             Edtech impact and evidence intermediaries   35
      5.   Edtech market-makers                          37
      6.   Big tech companies enrolling schools          41
             Microsoft                                   41
             Google                                      44
             Amazon                                      46
      7.   The edu-business sector                       49
             Online schooling platforms                  49
             School and learning management platforms    51
             AI-based technologies                       52
             Student monitoring and safeguarding         52
             Online learning resources                   54

            Education International



    III. Key issues, research priorities, and recommendations                55
       1.   Global education industry expansion during the emergency         55
       2.   Global and national, public and private policy networks          56
       3.   Experimental pandemic prototyping for future education systems   57
       4.   New private infrastructures of education                         58
       5.   Pandemic profit-making                                           59
       6.   Digital and data risks                                           60
       7.   Ownership and control                                            62
       8.   Research priorities                                              62
       9.   Recommendations for education unions                             64
    Conclusion                                                               66
    References                                                               68




6

      Commercialisation and privatisation in/of education in the context of Covid-19



Summary

              Commercialisation and privatisation
           in/of education in the context of Covid-19
The Covid-19 emergency has affected education systems worldwide. The
‘pivot’ to ‘online learning’ and ‘emergency remote teaching’ has positioned
educational technology (edtech) as an integral component of education
globally, bringing private sector and commercial organisations into the
centre of essential educational services. The effects are likely to persist for
some time, first of all in temporary ‘blended’ models of ‘socially distanced’
schooling during the period of pandemic recovery, and perhaps for
longer in ‘hybrid’ approaches in which edtech is embedded in curriculum,
pedagogy, assessment, and school management. This report explores
how privatisation and commercialisation of education have advanced
during the 2020 pandemic, with a particular focus on edtech. It maps out
the activities of a range of organisations, considering their consequences
for the future of education beyond the crisis, and identifying key issues,
research priorities and recommendations to be considered as education
systems begin the process of recovery. The summary findings include:
  •     Global edtech industry solutionism. A ‘global education
        industry’ of private and commercial organisations has played
        a significant role in educational provision during the Covid-19
        crisis, working at local, national and international scales to insert
        edtech into educational systems and practices. It has often set the
        agenda, offered technical solutions for government departments
        of education to follow, and is actively pursuing long-term reforms
        whereby private technology companies would be embedded in
        public education systems during the recovery from the Covid-19
        crisis and beyond it in new models of ‘hybrid’ teaching and learning.
        During the pandemic, this instantiation of the global education
        industry produced and circulated powerful ideas about Covid-19 as
        a novel ‘opportunity’ to ‘reimagine’ education, treated home-based
        learning as a ‘microcosm’ of a digital future for blended forms of
        education, and encouraged ‘experimentation’ and ‘innovation’
        to shape education systems for the future. It established the
        crisis as a catalytic opportunity for educational transformation.
  •     Covid coalitions and public-private policy partnerships.
        The role of commercial providers has been supported, promoted

                                                                                       1

        Education International



        and advanced by a range of organisations that cut across public,
        private and third sectors. Some of the most influential promoters
        of edtech solutions during the pandemic include international
        multilateral organisations such as the World Bank, OECD and
        UNESCO, in many cases operating in global multisector coalitions
        to promote ‘best practices’ for policymaking centres to emulate.
        Commercial edtech providers and advocacy organisations have
        also formed powerful networks and coalitions to highlight and
        promote edtech products for use by schools, teachers and
        parents. These coalitions illustrate the emergence of new kinds
        of multisector public-private partnerships and policy networks
        in relation to edtech expansion, and the enhanced role of
        the private sector in educational delivery and governance.
    •   Pandemic philanthropy ‘reimagining’ education. Financial
        support and political advocacy for edtech solutions to school
        closures during the pandemic have been provided by technology
        philanthropies such as the Gates Foundation and the Chan
        Zuckerberg Initiative. They have dedicated new multimillion dollar
        funds to a range of edtech programs and sought to consolidate
        the long-term role of the private sector and commercial technology
        in public education. Wealthy individual tech philanthropists have
        also been given positions of authority as experts in ‘reimagining’
        education for the future, in ways which reflect their pre-existing
        visions, their financial support for technology-centred models
        of schooling, and their efforts to influence policy agendas.
    •   Edtech market-making. Financial organisations, market
        intelligence agencies, venture capital, and impact investors have
        sought to capitalise on the pandemic. With edtech investment
        already at high levels, especially in the US and southeast
        Asia, market predictions have been made to stimulate capital
        markets, with the Covid-19 treated as a catalytic opportunity
        to capitalise on the sudden rise in use of technologies in
        education. Financial models including venture capital, private
        equity, impact investing and social bonds have all been utilised
        to fund educational technologies during the pandemic. Market
        projections of the value of digital learning technologies over the
        coming decade are likely to attract further investors seeking
        profit from new disruptive models of public education.
    •   Private re-infrastructuring of public education. Major
        multinational technology corporations including Google, Microsoft
        and Amazon have experienced a huge surge in demand for their

2

    Commercialisation and privatisation in/of education in the context of Covid-19


      products and services due to their capacity to deliver solutions at
      international scale, at speed, and for free. Supported by multilateral
      policy influencing organisations and national government
      departments, these companies have integrated schools, teachers
      and students into their global cloud systems and online education
      platforms, raising the prospect of long-term dependencies of
      public education institutions on private technology infrastructures.
      Social media platforms including YouTube and TikTok have also
      sought to grow their presence in education through content
      creation partnerships for students learning at home, thereby
      increasing their revenue through attracting advertisers and turning
      education into a vehicle for the commercial advertising industry.
•     Edu-business expansion. Educational companies of various
      types—from global edu-businesses like Pearson to new startups—
      have rapidly marketed and promoted their products for use by
      schools, often for free or heavily subsidised for a temporary period.
      Online schooling platforms are promoted by many education
      companies as long-term alternative models for education. ‘AI’
      technologies have also experienced significant growth, especially in
      China, owing to their capacity to provide ‘personalised’ education
      in the absence of teachers, and student surveillance technologies
      have been adopted to monitor students’ virtual attendance, assess
      social-emotional learning and well-being, and enable schools to
      fulfil their safeguarding responsibilities. These developments will
      extend the reach of edu-businesses to new areas of schooling,
      and heighten their long-term influence in classrooms.




                                                                                     3

           Education International




    Introduction

    Natural disasters, wars, economic crises, and now, pandemics – and
    their aftermaths – are characterised by ‘disaster capitalism’ (Klein,
    2007). As Klein (2007) describes, in the ‘shock’ of dealing with crisis, the
    private sector often steps up with calculated, free market ‘solutions’ to
    seemingly insurmountable public ‘problems’. Yet, Klein also warns, these
    solutions often exploit and exacerbate existing inequalities, and are
    fundamentally underpinned by private sector interests of profit making
    and shareholder value maximisation. Recently, Klein has argued that the
    Covid-19 pandemic has caused significant global shock and a worst-case
    scenario that combines health, economic, social and political crises in
    one.1 Covid-19 has crippled the global economy, with many nations on
    the verge of recession. The human cost is immeasurable, not only for
    the heartbreaking loss of life, but the physical, emotional and financial
    hardships that billions of individuals now face.
    Young people are not immune from the effects of Covid-19. Following initial
    school and university closures in southeast Asia in February 2020, by April
    approximately 1.6 billion students were affected in almost 200 countries
    (90% of the global student population).2 Endeavouring to facilitate the
    continuity of learning, schools and teachers have rapidly adopted online
    learning. To help them do this, commercial educational technology (edtech)
    players have sprung up as ‘emergency respondents’ offering free, or heavily
    subsidised, access to a vast array of products and services. We want to be
    clear from the outset that there is a lot to be thankful for in this commercial
    response to the crisis, to recognise that even before the pandemic many
    public education systems were fraught with problems, and acknowledge
    that commercial edtech has a long and uneven history in education
    systems. However, as Klein prompts us, we need to think critically about
    how this response might shape schooling for years to come. Our intention
    is to do so without taking a nostalgic view of pre-pandemic public education
    or a dystopic view of its commercialised future.
    The aim of this research is to map the powerful networks of commercial
    edtech players and coalitions that are coming together to define
    how education systems should respond to the Covid-19 pandemic.
    We adopt a deliberately broad conception of edtech that includes

      1   Solis, M. (2020, March 16). Coronavirus is the perfect disaster for ‘disaster capitalism’. Vice.
          https://www.vice.com/en_au/article/5dmqyk/naomi-klein-interview-on-coronavirus-and-disaster-capitalism-shock-doctrine
      2   UNESCO (2020). Education: from disruption to recovery. UNESCO.
          https://en.unesco.org/covid19/educationresponse


4

    Commercialisation and privatisation in/of education in the context of Covid-19


specific digital programs, apps and platforms, but also encompasses
some large-scale digital infrastructures, platforms and data systems
produced by technology companies and widely used by schools, as well
as technologies such as television and radio. Rather than referring to
a specific bounded ‘edtech industry’ of organisations and companies,
we also develop a more expansive account of a whole range of
organisational types that are, in various ways, involved in developing,
promoting, funding, evaluating, and selling or giving technologies for use
in schools – including education businesses and startups, government
departments, research and development labs, evidence centres,
university research departments, technology corporations, multilateral
agencies, philanthropies, investors and other sources of funding and
finance. Similar to other fields of scientific or technical innovation
and development, we understand edtech to be a multifaceted field of
technologies, activities and organisations that is embedded in a range of
social, geo-political and economic contexts and that affects a very wide
range of processes and practices.
The research documented in this report was conducted through detailed
and meticulous internet searches, and through following the activities of
various organisations during April, May and June 2020, as reported on
their websites, on social media, and in the press. We started by cataloguing
individual organisations offering products or services to support the use of
educational technologies during the crisis, and identified a number of key
categories that described these activities. The organisations and activities
ranged from individual vendors offering temporary free access to specific
products, to multinational, cross-sector coalitions and networks involving
government departments, multilateral agencies, private sector companies,
and other types of intermediary organisations.
In the key mapping exercise, we aimed to provide a broad cartographical
rendering of the emerging landscape of commercialisation, privatisation
and education technology during the pandemic, noting its key features,
connections, and likely implications for processes and practices of
schooling in the short and long term. We highlighted organisations and
relationships that exemplified the key categories and conducted more
detailed searches of their websites, press coverage and social media
presence in order to develop the series of key case studies contained
in this report. Informed by previous research, we also sought to analyze
and interpret the range of activities documented in the mapping exercise,
resulting in identification of a series of key issues, research priorities and
recommendations for education unions.
The research was necessarily constricted to English language sources
and materials, with the focus primarily on OECD countries (although

                                                                                     5

           Education International



    we have identified some examples of activity in Africa, Asia and Latin
    America), and concentrates on the K-12 schools sector, though many of
    the same dynamics are occurring in Higher Education.3 Our attention is
    mainly on the activities of large, powerful and influential organisations
    and their interrelationships. These organisations and networks, many
    working beyond and across national borders as well as crisscrossing
    the public and private sectors, exemplify how educational technology
    has moved from a relatively enclosed area of product development,
    policy interest, and educational practice to a full-blown global industry,
    international policy priority, and a transnational source of influence on
    teaching, learning and schooling. The evolution of edtech has taken place
    over a prolonged temporal period, but many of the issues confronted
    by research in the past have now been compressed and given extra
    urgency in the context of Covid-19. In the report, then, we document how
    various organisations and emerging networks across sectors and national
    borders are both seeking to solve the global disruption of education
    in the immediate short term, and paving the way for longer-term
    transformations to education systems, institutions and practices. Like
    others, we wonder what might happen after the crisis ends. Will schools
    stop using the edtech services they adopted? Or, are these part of the
    ‘new normal’ once face-to-face schooling returns? What are likely to be
    the long-term changes to public education? While we cannot fully answer
    these questions, we can map the commercial response to Covid-19,
    consider the potential consequences, and help inform future responses.
    In what follows we first provide a brief review of the literature to highlight
    the positioning of education within the political economy, and the rapid
    growth of this in the market making of crisis capitalism. We focus on
    issues of policy and practice and also outline the concerns of previous
    research focusing on edtech. In the second and substantive section, we
    broadly map the commercial platforms and products being widely used
    in the pandemic, as well as the players and coalitions coming together
    in response to the crisis, illustrated by a selective series of case studies
    documenting emergent issues that relate to concerns discussed in the
    literature review. Third, we provide a synthesis of the main themes and
    potential concerns that emerge across these case studies about the
    extent to which privatisation and commercialisation are being promoted
    as a response to the Covid-19 pandemic, and identify a series of urgent
    research priorities and recommendations for education unions.



      3   Williamson, B. (2020, May 6). Datafication and automation in higher education during and after the Covid-19
          crisis. Code acts in education. https://codeactsineducation.wordpress.com/2020/05/06/datafication-automation-
          he-covid19-crisis/


6

      Commercialisation and privatisation in/of education in the context of Covid-19



I. Review of relevant literature


1. The Global Education Industry
The emergence of the Global Education Industry (GEI) represents the
growth of the market into various aspects of public service delivery
(Verger, Lubienski & Steiner-Khamsi, 2016). Education has seen the rapid
growth of quasi-markets over recent decades, particularly in reference
to assessment services, teaching and learning resources, professional
development, administration support and edtech (Burch, 2009). As Verger
and colleagues observe, the GEI is dynamic and ever shifting, and has
the potential to rapidly configure new markets in response to particular
contexts. This market making happens beyond national boundaries, is
largely driven by non-government organisations, commercial enterprises
and philanthropists, and often happens in response to government
calls for increased efficiency in public policy (Verger, Fontdevila &
Zancajo, 2016). Ball (2012) argues that the expanding influence of the
private sector is an effect of the increasing ‘business opportunities’ that
have been created within government by ‘new forms of outsourcing,
contracting and public–private partnerships’ (p.94). Among the key
features of the GEI are:
  •     Participation of both non- and for-profit sectors in
        the provision of education goods and services;
  •     Global scale operations, including cross-border supply of
        educational services such as online learning technologies;
  •     Competition between businesses, and with conventional
        public providers in ways that incentivise public
        providers to operate like business actors;
  •     For-profit motives as the main drivers for private actors, and
        some non-profit and state actors, to participate in education;
  •     Access to financial capital markets to support
        operational expansion, including venture capital,
        equity funds and other forms of investment; and
  •     Various integrations, mergers and acquisitions between companies
        and organisations in the education sector (Verger et al 2016).

                                                                                       7

           Education International



    Much research has detailed the resultant effects of this phenomenon,
    including various claims that market mechanisms are working to
    insert private sector interests into the realms of public policy provision
    (Ball & Youdell, 2008; Ball & Junemann, 2012; Reckhow, 2012). There
    are commensurate concerns here that the private sector can shape
    ‘solutions’ to education ‘problems’ in ways that are commercially beneficial
    to themselves or their shareholders (Riep, 2019).
    In general, the GEI combines privatisation and commercialisation as
    two distinct – but often related – phenomena in the provision of public
    services. Hogan and Thompson (2017) propose that privatisation
    happens to schools through the development of quasi-markets through
    institutional policy and structures e.g. state regulated private sector
    participation in schooling. Commercialisation happens in schools and
    involves the creation, marketing and sale of educational goods and
    services for commercial gain. As we detail in our mapping below, the
    global response to Covid-19 shows the overlapping nature of privatisation
    and commercialisation.4 For example, privatisation is apparent as a ‘policy
    tool’ that is reflecting and responding to a rapid shift in the modality of
    schooling. Public-private partnerships and commercial contracts are
    being formulated as part of a deliberate government strategy to use the
    private sector to help move schooling online in response to the crisis.
    Commercialisation, on the other hand is about how actors profit from
    the ‘commodification’ of education. Interestingly, commercialisation is
    simultaneously prolific and hidden in our mapping of the global response
    to Covid-19. The sheer scale of products and services on offer to schools,
    teachers and parents to assist with online learning is mind boggling.
    Yet, many of these are being offered ‘free’ for a limited time. We would
    argue, like many others, that this social response is a key feature of
    ‘disaster capitalism’ (Klein 2007) and evidence of how ‘pandemic politics’
    is beginning to affect practices of schooling, with the global education
    industry likely capitalizing on an avenue of future profitability (Williamson,
    Eynon & Potter 2020).


    2. Policy mobility
    It is now clear that the dominant education policy preoccupation
    globally is how to deliver schooling without schools and degrees
    without campuses. The primary policy solution has been identified as
    digital technology and online ‘remote learning’ (West, 2012). Despite

      4   Hogan, A. (2018, December 12). Marketisation, privatisation and commercialisation in education: Defining
          key terms. Unite for Quality Education. https://www.unite4education.org/global-response/marketisation-
          privatisation-commercialisation-in-education-defining-key-terms/


8

      Commercialisation and privatisation in/of education in the context of Covid-19


considerable debate about the difference between well-designed online
learning and emergency remote learning5, consensus on digitally-
mediated distance education has become a remarkable instance of policy
mobility (Williamson, 2019). According to policy researchers, rather than
solely emanating from central authorities, many contemporary policy
processes are now distributed across different sectors, giving non-
governmental organisations, businesses and other experts much more
influence in the direction of policy, the dissemination of policy ideas, the
formulation of policy advice, and the enactment of policies (Ball, 2012;
Gunter & Hall, 2017; Fontdevila & Verger, 2019). A single policy may be
the result of myriad interests and concerns being slowly translated and
aligned into shared objectives. Policies also travel across borders, are
borrowed, shared, adapted and recontextualised, and are fashioned and
refashioned through the involvement of diverse actors from a range of
sectors (Steiner-Khamsi & Waldow, 2012).
The mobile, networked policymaking condition has proven ideal to the
expansion of educational technologies and media. Edtech is increasingly
present within formal education policies as a result of the significant effort
of advocacy networks, think tanks, consultancies, campaign coalitions,
and business lobbying. Policy discourses and agendas around digital
education, ‘personalised learning’ and ‘AI in education’ have travelled at
speed around the world, lubricated by network relations (Williamson,
2017). These edtech power networks are actively intervening in education
systems in ways that suggest new forms of power and influence over
education and its future. While edtech has long been presented as a
powerfully ‘disruptive’ force in education, during the ongoing coronavirus
crisis, new pandemic power networks have begun to coalesce around
claims that edtech is not just disruptive, but palliative too.


3. Edtech markets
Schools have long been considered brick and mortar institutions, but
with the rise of the platform economy, virtual schools are becoming
more prominent. For example, in 2017, Pearson observed that it was
the second largest provider of virtual schools in the US, and that there
was a need to capitalise on a rapidly growing $1.5 billion market. Like
many commercial operators, Pearson’s business strategy – before
Covid-19 – was to accelerate its shift towards the reduced need for
schools and teachers in order to grow the market for data-driven

  5    Hodge, C., Moore, S., Lockee, B., Trust, T., & Bond, A. (2020, March 27). The difference between emergency
       remote teaching and online learning. Educause Review. https://er.educause.edu/articles/2020/3/the-difference-
       between-emergency-remote-teaching-and-online-learning


                                                                                                                       9

            Education International



     personalised learning that can be provided direct to consumers (Sellar &
     Hogan, 2019). In the past few years, Pearson has adopted a ‘digital first’
     strategy, begun ditching its production of textbooks, and embraced new
     forms of ‘platform’ delivery (Williamson, 2020). It has also reconceived
     its customers as ‘Gen Z’ student-consumers who prefer ‘on-demand
     streaming’ content to conventional educational delivery, and developed a
     ‘Global Learning Platform’ to position itself as the ‘Netflix of Education’.6
     Since the onset of the pandemic, edtech investments have spiked,
     and as the investment bank BMO Capital Markets claims, ‘While we
     are uncomfortable citing “winners” in the coronavirus situation, some
     companies … that specialise in online education could see increased
     interest should the situation worsen’.7 BMO Capital Markets singled out
     major market leaders including K12 and Pearson as potential for-profit
     beneficiaries of mass education closures. Indeed, by June 2020 Pearson
     announced a new £350million, ten-year finance scheme to support online
     learning for the long term,8 backed up by statistics showing the impact
     of the company on ‘learning through a pandemic’.9 These companies
     have already created the technologies to support ‘remote’ forms of
     teaching and learning across both the schooling and higher education
     sectors (Williamson, 2020). Thus, these are not changes that Pearson
     and its competitors are simply offering up, opportunistically, in response
     to sudden coronavirus measures. Instead, they are part of a concerted
     long-term strategy by the edtech industry to actively reorganise public
     education as a market for its products, platforms and services (Sellar &
     Hogan, 2019). The global pandemic has appeared as an opportunity to
     rapidly grow market share, generate competitive advantage, and boost
     stock market valuation, with a view to long-term consolidation of market
     share and to reshaping public education at the same time.
     The global coronavirus pandemic is also an opportunity to produce
     very large quantities of student data, as students are forced online into
     data-intensive digital learning environments at unprecedented scale.
     For researchers and organisations invested in data scientific forms of
     analysis in education, as Jonathan Zimmerman put it in The Chronicle of
     Higher Education, coronavirus is an opportunity for a ‘great online learning
     experiment’:



       6   High, P. (2018, August 20). How 174 year old Pearson is developing the Netflix of education. Forbes.
           https://www.forbes.com/sites/peterhigh/2018/08/20/how-174-year-old-pearson-is-developing-the-netflix-of-
           education/#24cd145613c0
       7   EdSurge. (2020, March 5). Analysts watch for coronavirus impact on edtech stocks. EdSurge. https://www.
           edsurge.com/news/2020-03-05-public-markets-watch-for-coronavirus-impact-on-edtech-stocks
       8   Pearson. (n.d.). Social bond framework. Pearson. https://www.pearson.com/investors/social-bond-framework.html
       9   Pearson. (2020). Learning through a pandemic. Pearson. https://www.pearson.com/content/dam/one-dot-com/
           one-dot-com/global/Files/investors/social-bond/Pearson_Pandemic_3.pdf


10

       Commercialisation and privatisation in/of education in the context of Covid-19


       Coronavirus … has created a set of unprecedented natural
       experiments. For the first time, entire student bodies have been
       compelled to take all of their classes online. So we can examine
       how they perform in these courses compared to the face-to-face
       kind, without worrying about the bias of self-selection. It might
       be hard to get good data if the online instruction only lasts a few
       weeks. But at institutions that have moved to online-only for the
       rest of the semester, we should be able to measure how much
       students learn in that medium compared to the face-to-face
       instruction they received earlier.10

The working assumption here is that coronavirus is a natural
experimental opportunity for education data scientists – both those in
academic education research and analysts working in edtech companies
and other edu-businesses – to demonstrate the effectiveness of online
education over face-to-face teaching. Though the results of such
experimentation remain to be seen, it is clear many actors both within
academic research and commercial edtech see the pandemic as a
significant period for rolling out, testing, and proving the beneficial value
of digital learning services, platforms and products.


4. Data collection and ownership
This rise of edtech, and in particular the rapid response to Covid-19, has
not resolved any of the outstanding issues and challenges associated with
the broad scale adoption of online learning. Prominent here are concerns
surrounding data collection and ownership. Every digital platform and
separate online service has its own capacity to track, store and analyze
student usage, outcomes and interactions at a granular level. While this
is interpreted within the edtech industry as a significant opportunity to
improve, and personalise learning, it has also raised genuine concern for
the potential misuse of data.
The collection and use of student digital data raises questions about
privacy, consent, ownership, bias, as well as openness (Sellar & Hogan,
2019). While users actively give consent to sharing their data when they
enter it into online forms, they are typically less aware that data is also
collected about their interactions on platforms. This can make it difficult
for users of digital services to understand exactly what data is collected
and for what purposes (Willis, Slade & Prinsloo, 2016). This relationship

  10    Zimmerman, J. (2020, March 10). Coronavirus and the great online learning experiment. The Chronicle of Higher
        Education. https://www.chronicle.com/article/Coronavirusthe-Great/248216


                                                                                                                        11

             Education International



     can complicate questions about data ownership and responsibility, as
     well as accountability for good management of data. The risk of data
     breaches has become part of the lifecycle of large edtech companies
     (Royal Society, 2017). Many data privacy statements are purposively
     ambiguous so that data might be commercialised, either by selling it onto
     third parties (Bulger, McCormick, and Pitcan, 2017) or using it for internal
     processes of product development, particularly large scale data mining
     and analytics that is needed to progress the development of Artificial
     Intelligence in education (Sellar & Hogan, 2019). User data can also be
     collected, aggregated, processed and traded to create personalised
     online advertising, which carries particular concerns for privacy and
     intrusiveness (Estrada-Jiménez, Parra-Arnau, Rodríguez-Hoyos, & Forné,
     2017).
     Research has also identified that students can feel a loss of autonomy
     due to continuous monitoring of their online learning activities (Majeed,
     Baadel & Ul Haq, 2017). For example, the recent concerns raised by
     higher education students about the use of ProctorU - a service that
     monitors a student taking an exam through eye movement, noise and
     keystrokes, and also turns off copy and paste functionality, turns off
     background apps and prevents any new web pages or tabs being opened
     - has been widely critiqued as eroding a student’s right to privacy.11
     Similarly, there are various Intellectual Property (IP) issues at play,
     where many edtech services rely on the creation of content by students
     that they can then mine and use for pattern detection - to sell their
     commercial services. For example, TurnItIn exists in this ethical ‘greyzone’
     where it has been challenged multiple times on copyright infringement
     and questions of data ownership.12 Moreover, research has pointed to
     issues of commercialisation more broadly, where products are designed
     by software developers, based on algorithms best suited to profit making
     by corporate entities (Williamson, 2017). New forms of data analytics have
     the ability to usher in new forms of discrimination and the move towards
     personalised or individualised learning tends to reduce curriculum
     to what can be produced (or coded) online, consequently limiting the
     broader social goals of schooling (Wyatt-Smith, Lingard & Heck, 2019). It
     also raises ethical questions regarding emerging inequalities of access
     to digital services (Sellar & Hogan, 2019), particularly within and across
     national systems.
     A point we return to later in this document is that the response to
     Covid-19 is haphazard and plays out differently in different contexts; in

       11   Mason, R. (2020, March 29). Privacy concerns raised over exam provider, ProctorU. Honi Soit. http://honisoit.
            com/2020/03/usyds-online-exam-provider-proctoru-raises-privacy-concerns/
       12   Zimmerman, T. (2017). Twenty years of Turnitin: In an age of big data, even bigger questions remain. UC Santa
            Barbara. https://escholarship.org/content/qt3fc6t3d6/qt3fc6t3d6.pdf#page=18


12

       Commercialisation and privatisation in/of education in the context of Covid-19


some places it appears the state is driving increased partnerships with
edtech players, in other settings, the edtech industry is banding together
to show systems, schools and even parents, what the private sector can
offer them in the absence of an orchestrated public response to crisis. In
general, the response to Covid-19 accentuates the broad privatisation of
schooling, and leaves many of the issues discussed above, unanswered
or ignored. Organisations like Privacy International have already raised
concern that the accelerated uptake and distribution of edtech solutions
in schooling is happening without any substantive analysis of risk.
They make the point that 80% of the edtech tools reviewed in 2019 by
Common Sense - a non-profit US edtech evaluator - did not meet their
minimum level of sufficient safeguards.13 Thus, there are real and active
concerns for the safety of students using a vast array of edtech products
as ‘solutions’ to the Covid-19 crisis.




  13    Privacy International. (2020, April 24). Schools and Covid-19. PI. https://privacyinternational.org/news-
        analysis/3709/schools-and-covid-19


                                                                                                                    13

              Education International




     II. Mapping organisations
         and networks

     In this main substantive section we map the commercial platforms
     and products being widely used in schooling during the pandemic, as
     well as the players and coalitions coming together in response to the
     Covid-19 crisis. We have been purposively selective in this exercise.
     It is not possible to capture the entirety of the edtech response to
     Covid-19. Instead, we have selected organisations and networks that
     allow us to draw out key dynamics and issues of education privatisation
     and commercialisation that are emerging, growing and shifting through
     this pandemic. We have organised this section into a series of seven
     interrelated and overlapping themes:
          1. International organisations and coalitions;
          2. Government-commercial partnerships;
          3. Commercial coalitions;
          4. Intermediaries;
          5. Ed-tech market-makers;
          6. Big tech companies enrolling schools; and
          7. The edu-business sector.
     Throughout these cases we clearly evidence a growing demand for
     edtech solutions to the Covid-19 pandemic.


     1.      International organisations and coalitions
     International organisations with long-term aims to influence education
     policy and practice have actively sought to form large-scale coalitions,
     funding initiatives and partnerships to develop educational responses
     and recovery from the Covid-19 crisis. These organisational coalitions
     and funding schemes have formed to ensure continuity of education
     and learning, especially by promoting and supporting the accelerated
     rollout and uptake of educational technologies. As a consequence, the
     actions of international organisations have become catalysts of expanding

14

       Commercialisation and privatisation in/of education in the context of Covid-19


commercialisation as they have opened up opportunities for technology
and education businesses to expand product reach and penetration
into new educational settings, to take a leading role in the provision of
pedagogy and curriculum resources, and to act as delivery partners for
emergency forms of global education policy. Moreover, these coalitions
have begun to enact their longer-term reformatory aspirations within
the context of the pandemic, utilising the emergency as an opportunity
to reimagine and reinvent education systems according to their own
organisational agendas and visions.

  Covid-19 edtech funding programs

  The funding initiatives are primarily aimed at low and middle income
  countries, and are designed to help mitigate the effects of the
  pandemic on the poorest and most vulnerable children. The Global
  Partnership for Education (GPE) dedicated a US$500m fund for up
  to 67 eligible developing countries to ‘ensure learning can continue’,
  making it ‘the largest provider of funds dedicated solely to education
  in the global coronavirus response.’14 The funds have been awarded to
  Ministries of Education and their partners to assist them in purchasing
  laptops and tablets for use in distance learning, producing educational
  radio and television programs, distributing materials such as textbooks
  to households, equipping schools to re-open, and collecting ‘data
  to know that learning is happening’, while also ‘building resilient
  education systems for the future’.15 A key aspect of the emergency
  program involves the collection of data to track student participation
  and progression in remote learning, which is closely related to GPE’s
  institutional priority of supporting developing countries to develop
  strong data systems: 94% of its awards in 2018 included funding for
  educational management information systems or learning assessment
  systems.16 The GPE, a trust fund of the World Bank, is one of the largest
  and most prominent transnational multi-stakeholder partnerships in
  education, with members that include private foundations and private
  companies including Microsoft and Pearson, as well as donor and
  developing countries, multilateral organisations, civil society and the
  teaching profession.. The GPE expectation with its Covid-19 grants is
  that new public-private partnerships will be developed, such as with
  telecommunications companies to organise internet connectivity and

  14    Global Partnership for Education. (2020, June 3). Factsheet: GPE and Covid-19 (coronavirus). GPE.
        https://www.globalpartnership.org/content/factsheet-gpe-and-covid-19-coronavirus
  15    Global Partnership for Education. (2020). Response to Covid-19 (coronavirus) pandemic. GPE.
        https://www.globalpartnership.org/gpe-and-covid-19-pandemic
  16    Global Partnerships for Education. (2020). Data systems. GPE.
        https://www.globalpartnership.org/what-we-do/data-systems


                                                                                                            15

           Education International



     data plans or with local enterprises to create online learning platforms
     and resources.17
     The GPE is a partner of Education Cannot Wait, a fund administered
     by UNICEF from international humanitarian aid contributions and
     private donations, which has prioritised ‘scaling up distance education
     programs, particularly via interactive radio’.18 These GPE activities,
     and its partnership arrangements, need to be understood in the
     context of GPE’s wider approach to public-private partnerships to
     improve education in developing countries. In particular, GPE led a
     Data Solutions program ‘to improve the availability and use of accurate
     and timely education data in developing countries, and mobilised
     support from the private technology sector (including Microsoft and
     HP) ‘to co-create innovative solutions and new technologies with other
     development stakeholders to drive improvements in education at
     community, regional, national and ultimately global levels’. While there
     is no doubt the GPE’s funding has been crucial to enabling low and
     middle income countries to develop distance learning capacity during
     the pandemic, this has clearly also involved significant investment in
     the purchase of technology hardware and software, the intensification
     of public-private partnerships, and the expansion of educational
     data systems in ways that reflect GPE’s strategic focus on data-driven
     educational management and policymaking.
     Other funding initiatives have emphasised crisis mitigation responses
     that more specifically promote educational technologies. The
     World Bank announced a Strategic Impact Evaluation Fund ‘to fund
     experimental and quasi-experimental evaluations that examine the
     extent to which technology can accelerate learning and skills for both
     children and adults in low- and middle-income countries who are
     currently not learning adequately with their current set of services’.19
     The Covid-19 emergency funding call prioritises projects building
     quantitative evidence, primarily through randomised control trials,
     on ‘remote learning approaches that achieve high coverage, high
     uptake, and learning’, including the benefits and costs of scalable and
     affordable technology-based interventions; successful implementation
     of technology-based interventions; innovative uses of data, including
     administrative data and data from apps used by families and service
     delivery organisations; and the use of machine learning such as
     ‘adaptive learning software’.

     17   Global Partnerships for Education. (2020). Pakistan. GPE. https://www.globalpartnership.org/where-we-work/
          pakistan
     18   Education Cannot Wait. (2020). The fund. ECW. https://www.educationcannotwait.org/about-ecw/
     19   World Bank. (2020, March 23). Call for proposals 5: Can technology accelerate learning and skills. The World
          Bank. https://www.worldbank.org/en/programs/sief-trust-fund/brief/call-for-proposals-can-technology-
          accelerate-learning-and-skills


16

     Commercialisation and privatisation in/of education in the context of Covid-19


The World Bank strategic fund, while not directly supporting
commercial organisations, is building evidence to support educational
technology solutions to mass educational disruption. It also extends
the World Bank’s existing provision of guidance and resources
dedicated to remote learning, edtech and Covid-19,20 its international
‘best practice’ catalogue of how different countries are using edtech
to support access to remote learning,21 and a further resource list
compiled by the World Bank’s Edtech Team.22 These documents
highlight partnerships with internet service providers to enable online
learning on subsidised data plans, use of commercial platforms for
remote teaching and learning (such as Google’s G Suite for Education,
Microsoft 365, YouTube channels), online learning providers (EdModo,
Schoology, Khan Academy), learning management systems (Moodle,
Canvas), mobile e-learning apps, videoconferencing (Zoom, Skype,
Amazon Chime), social media communication tools (WhatsApp, Google
Hangouts) as well as government-led portals, resource banks, websites,
online learning platforms, and radio and television broadcasting. As
such, the World Bank has become a key global promoter of commercial
edtech and associated technologies during the Covid-19 crisis and,
along with GPE, has been instrumental in supporting public-private
partnerships between government agencies and private sector
technology suppliers in developing countries.

International coalitions

Coalitions of varying sizes and intensity have formed to promote
educational technologies as emergency responses to the pandemic,
and to promote such approaches as longer-term solutions to
schooling. One example is a collaborative edtech network facilitated
by the UK venture investment company Emerge Education.23 Badged
as an ‘EdTech industry collaboration to help schools and colleges
deal with CV19 and the need for home learning,’ the online summit
featured a diverse cross-sector mix of US-based tech businesses
(Adobe, Amazon Web Services, Google, Microsoft), alongside UK-
based edtech and education businesses and their supporters.24 Its
20    World Bank. (2020). Remote learning, edtech and Covid-19. The World Bank. https://www.worldbank.org/en/topic/
      edutech/brief/edtech-covid-19
21    World Bank. (2020). How countries are using edtech (including online learning, radio, television, texting) to support
      access to remote learning during the Covid-19 pandemic. The World Bank. https://www.worldbank.org/en/topic/
      edutech/brief/how-countries-are-using-edtech-to-support-remote-learning-during-the-covid-19-pandemic
22    World Bank. (2020, April 10). Remote learning, distance education and online learning during the Covid-19
      pandemic: A resource list by the World Bank’s edtech team. The World Bank. http://documents.worldbank.org/
      curated/en/964121585254860581/pdf/Remote-Learning-Distance-Education-and-Online-Learning-During-the-
      COVID19-Pandemic-A-Resource-List-by-the-World-Banks-Edtech-Team.pdf
23    Emerge Education. (2020). Investing in the future of learning and work. Emerge Education. https://emerge.
      education/
24    Emerge Education. (2020, March 27). Edtech industry collaboration to help schools and colleges deal with CV19
      and the need for home learning. Hopin. https://hopin.to/events/help-for-home-learning


                                                                                                                              17

           Education International



     key aim was to help school leaders and teachers learn how ‘curated
     EdTech resources (both online and offline) are available to set up
     effective homeschooling.’ Emerge Education has positioned itself as a
     key investor in UK-based edtech, with a portfolio of investments that
     includes educational platforms, learning management systems, and
     apps aimed at both the HE and schools markets.
     Another emerging coalition, the COVID-Education Alliance (COVIDEA),
     coordinated by the International Science Council, aims to make ‘a
     substantive contribution to addressing the educational challenges
     associated with the pandemic’ and ‘digital education for the future’.25
     Its proposed activities include the creation of new algorithms to find
     and assess existing courses online and identify tools and resources for
     teachers; evaluating technological solutions, on-line courses, tools and
     practices for their potential to substantially contribute to addressing
     the educational challenges associated with the pandemic; making
     operational recommendations to governments, academic bodies,
     and the private sector; and ‘providing intelligence and insight on the
     socio-economic and skill changes needed to transition towards more
     sustainable development patterns in a time of deep technological
     changes’. COVIDEA exemplifies the ways that international coalitions
     have formed both to respond immediately to new educational
     needs, such as locating online resources, and to develop longer-term
     proposals and blueprints for large-scale educational transformation to
     suit technological changes.
     UNESCO is a key international organisation in advising nations around
     the world on emergency remote education. By the end of March 2020,
     its Global Education Monitoring project reported that ‘all countries are
     introducing or scaling up existing distance education modalities based
     on different mixes of technology’, but noted significant inequalities in
     access to ICT-based learning.26 To address this equity gap, UNESCO
     launched a Global Education Coalition as a ‘multi-sector partnership to
     provide appropriate distance education for all learners’.27 Specifically,
     the coalition aims to help countries mobilise resources and implement
     ‘innovative and context-appropriate solutions to provide education
     remotely, leveraging hi-tech, low-tech and no-tech approaches’,
     identify ‘equitable solutions and universal access’, ensure ‘coordinated
     responses and avoid overlapping efforts’, and facilitate ‘the return of

     25   International Science Council (2020). Call for nominations: COVID-Education Alliance. ISC. https://council.science/
          call-for-nominations-covidea/
     26   GEM Report. (2020, March 24). How are countries addressing the Covid-19 challenges in education? A snapshot
          of policy measures. World Education Blog. https://gemreportunesco.wordpress.com/2020/03/24/how-are-
          countries-addressing-the-covid-19-challenges-in-education-a-snapshot-of-policy-measures/
     27   UNESCO. (2020, March 26). UNESCO rallies international organisations, civil society and private sector partners
          in a broad Coalition to ensure #LeanringNeverStops. UNESCO. https://en.unesco.org/news/unesco-rallies-
          international-organisations-civil-society-and-private-sector-partners-broad


18

     Commercialisation and privatisation in/of education in the context of Covid-19


students to school when they reopen to avoid an upsurge in dropout
rates.’
The coalition enrolled partners from across sectors, including
international multilateral organisations (UNICEF, the WHO, World
Bank, Global Partnership for Education, OECD, Education Cannot
Wait), civil society/not-for-profits (Khan Academy, code.org, ISTE),
private sector companies (Microsoft, Facebook, Google, Weidong,
Zoom, Coursera, Moodle), and a variety of other media organisations
and networks (although UNESCO ‘does not endorse any product,
service, brand or company’ according to a legal notice)28. Moreover, as
part of its Covid-19 response, UNESCO compiled a resource bank of
relevant educational applications, platforms and resources to support
distance education.29 ‘While these solutions do not carry UNESCO’s
explicit endorsement, they tend to have a wide reach, a strong user-
base and evidence of impact’, it stated. The resource bank included
learning management systems (Google Classroom, Edraak, EdModo,
Nafham, Moodle, ClassDojo, Schoology, SeeSaw), mobile apps, online
learning platforms (EdX, Coursera, Canvas, Udemy, FutureLearn, Khan
Academy), live video communication platforms (DingTalk, Google
Hangouts, MS Teams, WeChat, WhatsApp), and a range of other
resources for teacher-created content hosting and self-directed
student learning.
An additional objective of the UNESCO Global Education Coalition,
however, is to look beyond the context of the current emergency to
catalyse longer-term transformations to education:

     Investment in remote learning should both mitigate the immediate
     disruption caused by COVID-19 and establish approaches to
     develop more open and flexible education systems for the future.30

The technology partners are well-established private companies with
the capacity to rapidly scale up to new territories in order to address
inequalities in technology access. But the short-term emergency
response also needs to be understood in terms of the longer-term
aims of increasing ‘investment’ in online learning technologies in order
to build ‘education systems for the future’. Commercial technology
organisations such as Google and Microsoft have experienced huge
escalations in their user base during the pandemic, propelled by
unofficial endorsement by UNESCO. The coalition has also brought
substantial credibility to private sector technology companies and
28    UNESCO. (2020). Legal notice. UNESCO. https://en.unesco.org/covid19/legalnotice
29    UNESCO. (2020). Distance education solutions. UNESCO. https://en.unesco.org/covid19/educationresponse/solutions
30    UNESCO (2020) Global Education Coalition. UNESCO https://en.unesco.org/covid19/educationresponse/globalcoalition


                                                                                                                         19

            Education International



     edtech businesses, potentially raising the public image of these
     organisations by associating them with efforts to enhance digital and
     educational equity during the emergency.
     UNESCO’s Institute of Statistics has also released guidance on
     collection of ‘student performance data’ during and following the
     pandemic—as part of its role in monitoring progress toward SDG4—
     and has advised national governments to focus on the collection and
     reporting of ‘essential data’ on: student participation in all platforms of
     education delivery disaggregated by individual student characteristics,
     such as gender and poverty; teacher participation in all platforms of
     education delivery disaggregated by individual teacher characteristics,
     such as gender and contract status; and use of quick and short tests
     for the frequent measurement of student learning. These ‘essential
     data’ will ultimately act as an evidence base for assessing the
     effectiveness of online learning platforms in promoting and improving
     students’ participation and performance in education, potentially
     assisting private technology companies to enhance their penetration
     into new territories as evidence-based solutions to persistent
     inequalities in education that pre-existed, but have been exacerbated
     by, the Covid-19 emergency.
     The OECD is a major multilateral partner of the UNESCO coalition,
     and has also positioned itself as a source of expert advice, policy
     recommendations, and educational leadership during the pandemic.
     Its emphasis is overtly on the benefits of educational technologies,
     not just as a short-term emergency mode of delivery but as long-
     term transformative forces in education systems around the world.
     As part of a package of policy proposals covering many governmental
     sectors,31 the OECD published a briefing entitled ‘Education responses
     to Covid-19: Embracing digital learning and online collaboration’, with
     policy proposals for national governments to tackle school closures:

          Every week of school closure will imply a massive loss in the
          development of human capital with significant long-term
          economic and social implications. While this is a strong stress
          test for education systems, this is also an opportunity to develop
          alternative education opportunities. … The current wave of school
          closures offers an opportunity for experimentation and for
          envisioning new models of education and new ways of using the
          face-to-face learning time.32

     31    OECD. (2020). Tackling coronavirus (Covid-19): Contributing to a global effort. OECD. http://www.oecd.org/coronavirus/en/
     32    OECD. (2020, March 23). Education responses to Covid-19: Embracing digital learning and online collaboration. OECD.
           https://read.oecd-ilibrary.org/view/?ref=120_120544-8ksud7oaj2&Title=Education%20responses%20to%20covid-19:%20
           %20Embracing%20digital%20learning%20and%20online%20collaboration


20

          Commercialisation and privatisation in/of education in the context of Covid-19


     These opportunities, according to the OECD, include exploring ‘different
     time and schooling models’ to enable students to ‘learn in different
     places and at different times’ with the support of digital learning
     solutions’ that might ‘bring communities, homes, and schools closer
     together’. A further opportunity is empowering teachers to ‘test out
     different digital learning solutions, and understand how technology
     can be used to foster deeper student learning’. A subsequent
     OECD ‘Framework to guide an education response to the COVID-19
     Pandemic of 2020’ emphasised the ‘imperative’ to invest in the relevant
     technological infrastructure for remote learning, such as providing
     devices and connectivity to students and teachers, and developing ‘a
     model of online learning that allows the greatest possible interaction
     in real time among students, among students and teachers, and with
     parents’.33 The framework document also reported on ‘unexpected
     positive educational results of the changes caused by the crisis’, including
     ‘the introduction of technologies and other innovative solutions and an
     increase in the autonomy of students to manage their own learning’.
     The OECD’s pursuit of positive opportunities for re-envisioning
     education during the pandemic is part of its much longer education
     reform ambitions focused on building ‘human capital’ for the ‘digital
     economy’ through the application of new educational technologies and
     ‘personalised learning’ approaches. This is an overtly political project,
     aimed at ensuring future economic productivity through educational
     reforms, that the OECD is now seeking to enact through the
     ‘opportunity’ of the Covid-19 pandemic. The OECD’s education director
     Andreas Schleicher even claimed:

          ‘It’s a great moment…. All the red tape that keeps things away is
          gone and people are looking for solutions that in the past they did
          not want to see. … Real change takes place in deep crisis. You will
          not stop the momentum that will build’.34


2.          Government-commercial partnerships
Governments and education departments around the world have been
working to provide technology solutions to enhance remote learning
opportunities for students, many – especially in developing contexts –
under the guidance of international organisations such as the World Bank,
     33    Reimers, F. & Schleicher, A. (2020). A framework to guide education response to the Covid-19 pandemic of
           2020. OECD. https://read.oecd-ilibrary.org/view/?ref=126_126988-t63lxosohs&title=A-framework-to-guide-an-
           education-response-to-the-Covid-19-Pandemic-of-2020
     34    Anderson, J. (2020, March 30). The coronavirus pandemic is reshaping education. Quartz.
           https://qz.com/1826369/how-coronavirus-is-changing-education/


                                                                                                                       21

              Education International



     UNESCO and OECD, or supported by funding from Global Partnership for
     Education. This has included rapid upscaling of pre-existing government
     learning platforms, the broadcasting of educational content on free-to-air
     television, national radio, and YouTube, and a considerable investment
     in ensuring that, 1) students have access to devices and the internet,
     and 2) that schools and teachers have the ability to host online virtual
     classrooms.35 These commitments, often made on a concern for equity,
     have demonstrated a particular reliance on the commercial sector, or at
     least on partnerships between governments and commercial providers.
     For example, in the UK, the government has committed over £100 million
     to boost remote education capacities of all students.36 This includes the
     provision of laptops or tablets and 4G hotspot devices for disadvantaged
     children, and moreover, allows all schools to access Google for Education
     or Microsoft Office 365 Education free of charge to ensure that all schools
     have a platform to deliver remote learning. The Department for Education
     invested £14 million in ‘expert help for staff to get set up’ on either
     the Google or Microsoft system, despite claims that the government’s
     investment in technical support for Google and Microsoft was ‘restrictive’
     and failed to recognise the much wider range of platforms for online
     learning already used by or available to schools.37
     In China, school closures and rapid shifts to online education were
     characterised by surging use of AI-based products and services, such as
     VIPkids, Squirrel AI, SenseTime and Yuanfudao.38 During the period of
     school shutdowns in major Chinese cities, the Beijing-based Yuanfudao
     edtech company received the largest venture capital investment ever
     recorded for a startup in the edtech sector for its AI-based homework
     and tutoring platform, with its US$1bn investment taking its total value
     to an estimated $7.8bn.39 Yuanfudao also invested itself in coronavirus
     support with donations and free AI-enabled online classes and products:
            During the New Coronary Pneumonia epidemic, Ape Counseling
            Online Education took the lead in donating RMB 10 million to
            support Wuhan, and launched free live classes and opened all
            the core functions of its learning products to help primary and
            secondary school students nationwide study at home.40

       35    UNESCO. (2020). National learning platforms and tools. UNESCO. https://en.unesco.org/covid19/
             educationresponse/nationalresponses
       36    Department for Education UK. (2020, April 24). Schools to benefit from education partnership with tech giants.
             Gov.UK. https://www.gov.uk/government/news/schools-to-benefit-from-education-partnership-with-tech-giants
       37    Gibbons, A. (2020, April 28). DfE’s focus on Google and Microsoft ‘is restrictive’. Times Educational Supplement.
             https://www.tes.com/news/dfes-focus-google-and-microsoft-restrictive
       38    Qu, T. (2020, February 5). China’s traditional schools embrace online learning as coronavirus forces students
             to stay home. South China Morning Post. https://www.scmp.com/tech/enterprises/article/3048891/chinas-
             traditional-schools-embrace-online-learning-coronavirus
       39    Dai, S. (2020, April 1). Online education start-up Yuanfudao raises US$1bn as sector heats up on coronavirus
             impact. South China Morning Post. https://www.scmp.com/tech/start-ups/article/3077915/online-education-start-
             yuanfudao-raises-us1bn-sector-hots
       40    Yuanfudao. (2020). https://www.yuanfudao.com/


22

       Commercialisation and privatisation in/of education in the context of Covid-19


The major investment in Yuanfudao and its own commitment to
philanthropic donations and free product access is illustrative of how
AI-based learning technologies have expanded in reach during the
pandemic, reaching unprecedented numbers of students in their own
homes, whilst also developing their charitable profiles for supporting
educational access and equity.
According to an analysis of Chinese AI in education during the pandemic,
AI-based edtech products ‘have the potential to reshape the role of the
traditional teacher’ and ‘can, for example, replace tasks such as face-to-
face instruction with video tutorials, and automate the delivery of student
diagnosis and feedback with adaptive learning systems’, but they may also
entail the collection of sensitive personal, biometric and facial data:

       If schools are capable of tracking every keystroke, knowledge
       point and facial twitch, they are effectively furnishing either a
       technology company or the Chinese state with an eternal ledger of
       every step of a child’s development. This is potentially problematic
       because, whereas the human teacher assumes change, AI assumes
       continuation. … [A]n intelligent tutoring system could not only store
       that information and tailor a personalised pathway for the student
       in the first grade, it may extrapolate that information many years
       later, when the student is in high school.41

China’s adoption of AI in education is the result of large-scale venture
capital investment and increasing parental willingness among
more wealthy families to pay for private tutoring and supplemental
education services and products, but is primarily driven by public-
private partnership arrangements and the strong support of the state
for private sector technologies (Knox, 2020). SenseTime, an ‘online AI
learning platform’, was offered for free nationwide during the pandemic
with the argument that AI-based education would help secure longer-
term economic advantage for the Chinese state. ‘Today’s education will
turn into tomorrow’s technology and bear economic fruit the day after,’
the company statement said. ‘As AI serves its value in big data, disease
screening and diagnosis amid the coronavirus outbreak, it has become a
brand new productive force of social development’.42
In other countries, rather than governments brokering large scale
commercial partnerships, they have adopted a more individualised

  41    Liu, Y. (2020, May 18). The future of the classroom? China’s experience of AI in education. Nesta.
        https://www.nesta.org.uk/report/the-future-of-the-classroom/#content
  42    Dai, S. (2020, February 18). China’s AI champion SenseTime latest to offer online learning after students told
        to stay home amid coronavirus outbreak. South China Morning Post. https://www.scmp.com/tech/enterprises/
        article/3051183/chinas-ai-champion-sensetime-latest-offer-online-learning-after


                                                                                                                         23

                Education International



     approach of vouchers and grants. In the US, Education Secretary, Betsy
     DeVos, has announced $180 million in ‘relief’ money that can be applied
     for by parents or states to expand virtual education.43 This includes
     ‘microgrants’ for families to access private education services (including,
     for example, tutoring, summer programs, tuition to an online program,
     test preparation, access to textbooks, etc.), the creation of state-wide
     virtual schools or programs, and the creation of ‘models for providing
     remote education not yet imagined’. Winning states are likely to receive
     grants in the order of $5 to $20 million depending on their initiative.
     Other governments have not necessarily advertised funding for online
     learning initiatives but have offered guidance about which commercial
     providers might provide the most useful solutions. In Indonesia for
     example, the Minister of Education and Culture, Nadiem Makarim, issued
     a circular for all schools in early March recommending that students
     could be encouraged to learn from home through the adoption of one
     of eight platforms, including Indonesian-based ed tech companies like
     Ruangguru, Sekolahmu, Rumah Belajar, Zenius and Kelas Pintar, as well
     as international players, including Google for Education, Microsoft 356,
     and Quipper School. Makarim has since acknowledged that technological
     ‘discrepancies’ between schools has meant that home-based learning is
     not effective for all students.44 The Ministry has thus launched a series of
     education programs to be televised by the state-owned broadcaster from
     April 13 to help those students learn from home that have limited access
     to internet due to economic challenges or geographical location.


     3.        Commercial coalitions
     During the Covid-19 pandemic there has also been a rapid coalition
     building of commercial providers. Often, not-for-profit organisations
     are assembling these coalitions and providing curated lists of ‘free’
     resources to support the transition to online learning, targeting either
     teachers or parents. The general claim is that these providers are
     coming together to offer limited-time free access to resources, guides,
     webinars and podcasts to help teachers, parents and students navigate
     the ‘unchartered waters’ of online learning. Some of these commercial
     coalitions are highlighted below, including a brief overview of what they’re
     offering during the Covid-19 pandemic, as well as their role with schooling

          43   Barnum, M. (2020, April 27). DeVos to states: For extra relief money, create a virtual school or voucher like
               program. Chalkbeat. https://www.chalkbeat.org/2020/4/27/21239017/betsy-devos-coronavirus-states-grants-
               vouchers-virtual-schools
          44   Pinandita, A. (2020, May 15). Home learning hindered by technology gap, Nadiem acknowledges. The Jakarta
               Post. https://www.thejakartapost.com/news/2020/05/15/home-learning-hindered-by-technology-gap-nadiem-
               acknowledges.html


24

       Commercialisation and privatisation in/of education in the context of Covid-19


previously. We feel this helps to hypothesise what exactly motivates these
coalitions to form, and perhaps consider what it is they hope to achieve
beyond the life of the pandemic.

  Commercial online school solutions

  The not-for-profit International Society for Technology in Education
  (ISTE) and EdSurge – which was merged under ISTE in 2019 for an
  undisclosed amount - has developed Learning Keeps Going.45 This
  website has been designed to support educators and parents during
  the extended school closures caused by Covid-19, and includes a
  curated list of free tools and resources, as well as an ‘Educator Help
  Desk’ where experts can answer online learning questions. ISTE
  received $500,000 in funding from the Chan Zuckerberg Initiative (CZI)
  in support of this initiative, and has assembled over 60 non-profit
  organisations in what they call ‘The Covid-19 Education Coalition’.
  This coalition is ‘creating resources focused on seven areas: centering
  equity; connectivity; international engagement; personalised learning;
  social emotional learning; safety, privacy and digital citizenship; and
  higher education’.46 To date, this coalition has curated 913 ‘free tech
  resources for learning’. Interestingly, one of the categories that users
  can filter this list by is ‘duration of free access’, and only 312 resources
  are considered ‘always free’. This provides some basic insight into the
  sheer number of resources that are being offered free for a limited
  time during the Covid-19 crisis. For example, included within this list is
  CodeMonkey.47 Schools can usually access a plan for $39 per child, per
  year, but currently, full access is being granted to closed schools ‘until
  further notice’.
  An alternative coalition was announced by Common Sense Media.
  Common Sense describes itself as an independent, non-profit,
  research-backed, ‘leading source of entertainment and technology
  recommendations for families and schools’. It is funded primarily by a
  large number of private foundation partners with interests in children’s
  use of technology, media and edtech, among them the Bill and Melinda
  Gates Foundation and the Chan Zuckerberg Initiative.48 In response
  to Covid-19, Common Sense similarly organised a group of 25 partner
  organisations that ‘share a vision’ to help teachers and families learn

  45    Learning Keeps Going. (2020). Covid-19: Learning Keeps Going. Learning Keeps Going. https://www.
        learningkeepsgoing.org/
  46    ISTE. (2020, March 24). ISTE convenes sectorwide response to support educators in responding to Covid-19.
        ISTE. https://www.iste.org/explore/iste-convenes-sectorwide-response-support-educators-responding-covid-19
  47    CodeMonkey. (2020). CodeMonkey’s response to Covid-19. CodeMonkey. https://www.codemonkey.com/covid-19/
  48    Common Sense Media. Foundation partners. Common Sense Media. https://www.commonsensemedia.org/
        about-us/supporters/foundation-supporters


                                                                                                                     25

            Education International



     from home, and launched Wide Open School.49 As described by
     Common Sense, ‘Wide Open School is a free collection of the best
     online learning experiences for kids curated by the editors at Common
     Sense. There is so much good happening, and we are here to gather
     great stuff and organise it so teachers and families can easily find it and
     plan each day’. Interestingly, Wide Open School’s main page makes an
     explicit note on privacy:

          While we have tried to favour sites that don’t require login, some
          do require registration. The provided resources include links to
          external websites or applications that are governed by their own
          privacy policies or information-collection practices, which may be
          substantially different from those of Common Sense. We encourage
          you to review the privacy policies and information-collection
          practices of any external websites and apps before using them
          with children. Many organisations have stepped up and made their
          resources free for kids during this critical time.

     This website can redirect users to external commercial webpages,
     including the likes of Apple, Amplify, Google, Khan Academy, Scholastic,
     Zoom, YouTube and others. It can, however, also plan a full school day
     for users:

          For example, a fourth grader may be pointed to Prodigy’s math
          games, YouTube art tutorials and Khan Academy reading resources
          in the morning, then instructed to read a book, draw or listen to
          music during their screen-free lunch break. In the afternoon, they
          may take social studies via Google Earth, study science through
          Amplify and take P.E. by way of GoNoodle. The site even suggests
          evening activities that can be done as a family, like bedtime reading
          or movies to stream, among other things.50

     While we discuss some of these commercial players in later sections,
     we feel it is useful to note here that there seems to be a desire to
     partner with commercial coalition frameworks, perhaps as a means for
     more direct advertising or redirection of educators and parents to the
     ‘best’ free resources. It seems obvious that a day in which students are
     exposed to various commercial products may allow these students,
     their parents and teachers to further investigate, and perhaps register
     for those products they find most suitable.

     49    Common Sense Media. Wide Open School. Common Sense Media: https://wideopenschool.org/
     50    Perez, S. (2020, April 1). Wide Open School organizes free educational resources to help parents and teachers
           homeschool. TechCrunch. https://techcrunch.com/2020/03/31/wide-open-school-organizes-free-educational-
           resources-to-help-parents-and-teachers-homeschool/


26

     Commercialisation and privatisation in/of education in the context of Covid-19


Public-private open schools

Not every coalition we have observed is led by technology-based
organisations, or obviously driven by commercial interests, such as the
government-backed Oak National Academy in England.51 Populated
by resources created by a group of primary and secondary school
teachers in response to Covid-19, Oak National Academy provides
enough video lessons and supporting resources to meet the equivalent
of three hours a day for primary school students and four hours a
day for secondary. The online classroom has the support of various
education organisations including Teach First, a founding partner of the
global Teach for All network of employment-based teacher professional
education; a number of academy trust chains of publicly-funded and
privately-run schools (Harris Federation, ARK, Future Academies);
a range of institutions dedicated to alternative models of teacher
education and educational research (Ambition Institute, Institute for
Teaching, researchED); and is financially backed by the Department for
Education.
Despite its self-presentation as teacher-created, Oak National Academy
is in fact headed up by staff from many of its supporting organisations,
many of which have overtly reformatory aims, private sector links, and
governmental connections. Its principal, for example, is a government
advisor on teacher professional development and founder of the
Ambition Institute. The various academy trusts involved in Oak National
Academy are all part of longstanding reform efforts in England to
publicly fund private bodies to run schools and displace local authority
control or local governors from involvement in public education. In
addition, Teach First lists Oak National Academy as a key resource
supporting its response to the Covid-19 emergency.52 Teach First
approaches teacher education as a career development opportunity
for business leaders rather than embedded an academic discipline,
and was originally conceived by the consultancy group McKinsey and
Company.
One commentator writing in the Times Education Supplement described
Oak as the product of entrepreneurs who are on ‘ministers’ speed dial’,
‘the creation of a national curriculum template from the engine rooms
of the very institutions that were gifted a dispensation not to follow the
national curriculum’, and a ‘20th-century model of learning … rolled
out for the short-term but with serious implications for the future of

51    Oak National Academy. (2020). Online Classroom. Oak National Academy. https://www.thenational.academy/
      online-classroom
52    Teach First. (2020). School Covid-19 resources. TF. https://www.teachfirst.org.uk/shut-in-not-shut-out/school-
      resources


                                                                                                                       27

           Education International



     English education policy’.53 As such, Oak National Academy, for all its
     practical benefits during school closures, needs to be understood as
     the product of reformatory practices that have long been sought and
     achieved through new forms of public-private partnership in English
     public education. Its seed funding by the Department for Education
     may position it advantageously in future planning for schools during
     post-pandemic austerity.
     Already social commentators in the UK have voiced the need for ‘open
     schools’ like the Oak National Academy to continue to exist beyond
     the Covid-19 crisis so that it might serve disadvantaged students and
     isolated communities.54 Indeed, the UK national public broadcaster the
     BBC - which also launched a large range of home learning resources
     under its revamped BBC Bitesize initiative - has begun considering
     its own longer-term involvement, through partnership with other
     organisations, in such an ‘open school’. The BBC’s director general
     described a hybrid model of classroom-based schooling and online
     learning as a potential new ‘public infrastructure’ for education that
     could help address longstanding problems in state schooling while also
     ‘growing the market for commercial providers’.55
     These coalitions are significant because they propose new models
     of curriculum provision based on digital resource banks created
     by a variety of commercial organisations, politically-connected
     entrepreneurs, teacher-creators, public and charitable institutions.
     Together, they signify increased commercial penetration into state
     schooling through a mixed economy of new providers and public-
     private partnerships, some of which may exist only temporarily
     and some which have longer-term ambitions to persist as parts
     of new infrastructural arrangements underpinning educational
     transformations beyond the pandemic. The question these coalitions
     raise is a sociological one about their power to control the curriculum,
     not just during the Covid-19 crisis but beyond. Coalitions such as Oak
     Academy, with its extensive network of support and financial backing
     of the Department for Education56, have come to the forefront as
     curriculum content suppliers during the pandemic, and are already
     being treated as potential templates for long-lasting school change

     53   Diamond, C. (2020, May 15). ‘Everyone must have a say in the future of education’: Oak National Academy, the
          government-backed online teaching hub, could have a big impact. Times Educational Supplement. https://www.tes.
          com/news/coronavirus-learning-school-teaching-reopen-online-learning-oak-national-academy-future-education
     54   Brighouse, T. & Moon, B. (2020, May 12). Like the Open University, we now need an Open School for the whole
          country. The Guardian. https://www.theguardian.com/education/2020/may/12/like-the-open-university-we-now-
          need-an-open-school-for-the-whole-country
     55   Hall, T. (2020, May 30). The idea of a national Open School is an excellent one. The BBC is ready to make it
          happen. The Guardian. https://www.theguardian.com/education/2020/may/30/the-idea-of-a-national-open-
          school-is-an-excellent-one-the-bbc-is-ready-to-make-it-happen
     56   On 22 June 2020, Oak Academy was granted funding of £4.34 million from the Department of Education to expand.
          See: Dickens, J. (2020). Oak Academy will create 10,000 lessons for next year with £4.34 DfE funding. Schools Week.
          https://schoolsweek.co.uk/oak-academy-will-create-10000-lessons-for-next-year-with-4-3m-dfe-funding/


28

          Commercialisation and privatisation in/of education in the context of Covid-19


     processes involving the public, private and third sectors working in
     partnership.


4.         Intermediaries
Private sector and commercial activities in public education are
frequently catalysed, financed, designed and promoted by intermediary
organisations such as philanthropic foundations, think tanks and
consultancies whose motivation is to participate in policy agenda-
setting and reform of state-funded school sectors in education (Verger
et al, 2016). In the context of Covid-19, various philanthropies, think
tanks and other intermediary organisations with key interests in edtech
and educational transformation have actively sought to intervene in
‘reimagining’ education for the future.

  Philanthropy

     In recent decades, private foundations have increasingly sought
     influence over education policy while also pursuing profit
     through new modes of ‘venture philanthropy’, ‘philanthropy 3.0’
     or ‘philanthrocapitalism’ (Junemann & Olmedo, 2019). Venture
     philanthropy is exemplified by the Bill and Melinda Gates Foundation,
     which has advanced corporate interests in education reform through
     funding awarded to advocacy groups, nonprofit reform organisations,
     think tanks, and research centres (Au & Lubienski, 2016). Many new
     philanthropic initiatives established from the wealth of technology
     sector entrepreneurs have even been set up as Limited Liability
     Companies (LLCs) rather than private non-profit foundations, giving
     them enhanced freedom to invest in for-profit companies as well as to
     award grants, and enabling their founders to maintain strong personal
     control (Reiser, 2019). In addition to conventional philanthropic grant-
     giving, these LLCs favour ‘impact investing’ (otherwise known as Social
     Impact Bonds or Pay for Success schemes), an increasingly popular
     financial technique used to fund social programs that are designed
     to return public monies to private investors in social programs, with
     interest added as the ‘return on investment’.57 The Bill and Melinda
     Gates Foundation, for example, utilises impact investing as a core
     part of its strategic investments approach, often in combination with
     philanthropic grants.58
     57    Carnoy, M. & Marachi, R. (2020). Investing for ‘Impact’ or Investing for Profit? National Education Policy Center.
           http://nepc.colorado.edu/publication/social-impact-bonds
     58    Bill & Melinda Gates Foundation. (2020). Our Strategy. Bill & Melinda Gates Foundation Strategic Investment
           Fund. https://sif.gatesfoundation.org/our-strategy/


                                                                                                                                29

            Education International



     The Gates Foundation has been especially active during the Covid-19
     pandemic.59 In April, New York State governor Andrew Cuomo
     announced a partnership with the Gates Foundation to ‘reimagine
     education’ beyond the pandemic, as part of a series of arrangements
     with technology billionaires, including former chief executive and
     chair of Google Eric Schmidt, to support the state’s recovery and
     long-term transformation.60 Together, Cuomo and Gates announced
     plans to build a ‘smarter education system’, with Cuomo arguing that
     the pandemic created ‘a moment in history when we can actually
     incorporate and advance [Gates’s] ideas’:
          ‘The old model of everybody goes and sits in a classroom and
          the teacher is in front of that classroom, and teaches that class,
          and you do that all across the city, all across the state, all these
          buildings, all these physical classrooms – why, with all the
          technology you have?’61
     The Foundation subsequently announced it would be advising NY State
     based on insights from its ‘long history of programmatic work in New
     York State’, including from previous work with partners including New
     Visions for Public Schools (‘a laboratory of innovation within the city’s
     public schools’) and Teaching Matters (‘a national professional learning
     organisation dedicated to increasing teacher effectiveness’), while also
     considering its long-term approach to post-pandemic education.62
     In addition to its New York partnership, the Gates Foundation has
     also committed $250million funding in response to the Covid-19
     pandemic.63 Within its US education programs, this includes support
     for high-speed broadband access for schools, policy and reform
     organisations, online learning and curriculum resources, virtual
     schooling programs, and state-level leadership advice. A guiding
     assumption of the Gates Foundation is that students will have
     experienced significant ‘learning loss’ during school closures, which
     will require rapid and transformative changes to remedy in order to
     ensure equitable outcomes for students.64 One of its grants was to the

     59    Bill & Melinda Gates Foundation. (2020). Covid-19 response. Bill & Melinda Gates Foundation. http://
           k12education.gatesfoundation.org
     60    Cuomo, A. (2020, May 5). Amid ongoing Covid-19 pandemic, Governor Cuomo announces collaboration with
           Gates Foundation to develop a blueprint to reimagine education in the new normal. Governor Andrew M.
           Cuomo. https://www.governor.ny.gov/news/amid-ongoing-covid-19-pandemic-governor-cuomo-announces-
           collaboration-gates-foundation-develop
     61    Layne, N. & Singh, R. (2020, May 6). New York to work with Gates Foundation to ‘reimagine’ schools. Reuters.
           https://www.reuters.com/article/us-health-coronavirus-usa-new-york-idUSKBN22H29Z
     62    Bill & Melinda Gates Foundation. Covid-19 updates. The Optimist. https://www.gatesfoundation.org/TheOptimist/
           Articles/coronavirus-interview-allan-golston-education-preparation
     63    Bill & Melinda Gates Foundation. (2020). The strangest school year in memory is about to end. How do we get
           ready for the next one? The Optimist. https://www.gatesfoundation.org/TheOptimist/Articles/coronavirus-mark-
           suzman-funding-announcement-2
     64    Bill & Melinda Gates Foundation. (2020). Schools and students during the Covid-19 outbreak in America:
           A conversation with Allan Golston. The Optimist. https://www.gatesfoundation.org/TheOptimist/Articles/
           coronavirus-interview-allan-golston


30

     Commercialisation and privatisation in/of education in the context of Covid-19


Foundation for Excellence in Education (ExcelinEd) to provide guidance
‘to state leaders on K12 resource allocation in a post-COVID era’.65
Founded and chaired by former state governor of Florida Jeb Bush,
ExcelinEd ‘emphasises a comprehensive reform agenda that, when
aggressively pursued, results in a measurable, objective rise in student
learning’. 66 The Gates Foundation also announced $500k funding for
the UK-based Overseas Development Institute ‘to consider how Edtech
can mitigate the impact of COVID-19 and support equitable education
access and learning’ in some of the world’s poorest communities,
indicating its international aims to help reshape education systems.
The participation of the Gates Foundation in reimagining state
education in New York State, and the prospect of longer-term and
larger-scale reformatory involvement in US education raised immediate
objections, many of them based on its previous education efforts –
such as promoting and financing ‘small schools’, the Common Core
State Standards, charter schools, teacher evaluations, and inBloom,
a $100million data collection program that collapsed after public
and media pushback related to student data privacy – which critics
have long argued are detrimental to state education systems.67
According to Kathryn Moeller and Rebecca Tarlau, the New York-Gates
Foundation partnership ‘reflects the power of foundations to propose
technical solutions to high-stakes political debates on educational
equity and quality’.68 The efforts of wealthy ‘foundations capitalising
on political opportunities created by crises such as Covid-19 to
assert their influence’ and ‘radically reshape public education without
public deliberation or accountability’ are, they continue, profoundly
‘undemocratic’ approaches that seek to ‘find technical solutions to
systemic inequities without addressing their underlying causes’.
Other technology philanthropies and LLCs have also committed
significant grants and investment funds to support the educational
response to Covid-19. Google’s philanthropic vehicle Google.org,
for example, committed a $10million Distance Learning Fund which
included $1m for Khan Academy to provide remote learning resources
in over 15 languages in order to reach over 18 million students
worldwide.69 The Emerson Collective promoted resources and best

65    Bill & Melinda Gates Foundation. (2020). Foundation for excellence in education. Grants database. https://www.
      gatesfoundation.org/How-We-Work/Quick-Links/Grants-Database/Grants/2020/04/INV-017440
66    ExcelinEd. (2020). Our Approach. ExcelinEd. https://www.excelined.org/about/approach/
67    Greene, P. (2020, May 8). Why Bill Gates is not the man to reimagine New York education. Forbes. https://
      www.forbes.com/sites/petergreene/2020/05/08/why-bill-gates-is-not-the-man-to-reimagine-new-york-
      education/#2445cf0f79cc
68    Moeller, K. & Tarlau, R. (2020, May 18). Gates Foundation’s tactics to remake public education during pandemic
      are undemocratic. The Chronicle of Philanthropy. https://www.philanthropy.com/article/Gates-Foundations-
      Tactics-to/248798/
69    Shah, A. (2020, March 20). Helping education and students stay connected. Google for Education. https://www.
      blog.google/outreach-initiatives/education/helping-educators-and-students-stay-connected/


                                                                                                                       31

             Education International



       practices from its partner network,70 developed the Graduate Together
       online graduation ceremony for US high schoolers through its XQ
       Super Schools program designed to ‘rethink high school’, and also
       partnered with the Wide Open School initiative initiated by Common
       Sense Media.71
       Mark Zuckerberg’s LLC the Chan Zuckerberg Initiative also dedicated
       $5million funds for Covid-19 responses in education, including
       awards for ‘comprehensive broadband solutions’ and professional
       development resources for remote teaching.72 It also awarded $500k
       to ISTE to support its Learning Keeps Going consortium of edtech
       providers,73 plus $300k to Common Sense Media to expand its Wide
       Open School initiative,74 and promoted the work of its existing grantees
       and investees with a list of free online resources for school leaders,
       teachers, students and families.75 At the same time, Schmidt Futures
       funded a series of articles in the EdSurge magazine dedicated to
       promoting ‘learning engineering’ as a necessary and novel approach
       to teaching and learning after the pandemic.76 Eric Schmidt himself
       wrote an op-ed for the Wall Street Journal arguing that ‘We should also
       accelerate the trend toward remote learning’ in order to bypass the
       ‘requirement of proximity, which allows students to get instruction
       from the best teachers, no matter what school district they reside in’,
       and noted that Schmidt Futures was already providing philanthropic
       support for an ‘education system based on tele-everything’.77
     Less obviously informed by the ambitions of the tech industry itself, in te
     UK, the Sutton Trust has advocated for better online learning access, and
     actively supported the Oak National Academy ‘virtual school’ funded by
     the Department for Education to provide online resources during school
     closures.78 The Trust’s founder is also chair of the Education Endowment
     Foundation, which launched an online homeschooling curriculum

       70   Emerson Collective. (2020, June 16). Resources for remote learning. Supporting Students During Covid-19.
            https://www.emersoncollective.com/covid19-resources-for-remote-learning/
       71   XQ. (2020). Let’s rethink high school together. XQ. https://xqsuperschool.org/
       72   Chan Zuckerburg Initiative. (2020, April 20). Chan Zuckerburg initiative commits $5 million to Covid-19 response
            for educators and families. CZI Covid-19 Response. https://chanzuckerberg.com/newsroom/5-million-covid-19-
            response-educators-families/
       73   Chan Zuckerburg Initiative. (2020, March 27). Chan Zuckerburg Initiative supports educators, students and
            families impacted by Covid-19. . CZI Covid-19 Response. https://chanzuckerberg.com/newsroom/chan-
            zuckerberg-initiative-supports-educators-students-and-families-impacted-by-covid-19/
       74   Chan Zuckerburg Initiative. (2020, May 18). Chan Zuckerburg Initiative expands commitment to educators
            and families during the Covid-19 pandemic. CZI Covid-19 Response. https://chanzuckerberg.com/newsroom/
            commitment-educators-and-families-during-the-covid-19-pandemic/
       75   Chan Zuckerburg Initiative (2020). Education resources. CZI. https://chanzuckerberg.com/covid-19/resources/
            education/
       76   Feldstein, M. (2020, April 16). Learning engineering is learning about learning, We need that now more than ever.
            EdSurge. https://www.edsurge.com/news/2020-04-16-learning-engineering-is-learning-about-learning-we-need-
            that-now-more-than-ever
       77   Schmidt, E. (2020, March 27). A real digital infrastructure at last. The Wall Street Journal. https://www.wsj.com/
            articles/a-real-digital-infrastructure-at-last-11585313825
       78   Cullinane, C. (2020, April 21). Learning from home: Green shoots? The Sutton Trust. https://www.suttontrust.com/
            news-opinion/all-news-opinion/learning-from-home-green-shoots/


32

       Commercialisation and privatisation in/of education in the context of Covid-19


based on its own evidence digests and guidance reports.79 The EEF also
published a rapid evidence assessment on remote teaching (funded by
the EdTech Hub) in order to inform teachers’ planning and provision
during school shutdowns.80
Internationally, the Qatar Foundation hosted a WISE online conference on
Covid-19 responses to education with a keynote by the OECD director of
education Andreas Schleicher on reimagining education systems for the
future:

       amid all the fear, panic and unknowns, new channels of innovation,
       creativity and systemic transformation are also accelerating at
       unprecedented levels. School systems have been forced to rethink
       traditional learning models, and rapidly build, test and pilot new
       structures to accommodate a completely different reality. When
       the dust settles, COVID-19 may present itself as a microcosm of
       what’s to come. … [The conference] unpacked the consequences of
       COVID-19 on the traditional school model, and considered how we
       can best optimise this time of crisis to rapidly innovate and embed
       system-wide change in our schools and education systems.81

  A further Qatar Foundation WISE article asked ‘can covid19 cure
  education systems?’, suggesting that hybrid learning models, online
  lesson planning and digitally enabled learning would ‘upgrade our
  education system to address students’ long-standing needs’.82 These
  emphases on ‘optimizing’ the opportunity of the crisis, as a ‘microcosm’
  of ‘system-wide change’ and ‘upgrading’ of education systems, reflects
  the solutionist assumption common in the tech-philanthropy field that
  complex social institutions can be fixed and transformed with the right
  mix of innovation, technology and entrepreneurial imagination.
  These philanthropic and investment efforts, including their
  relationships with political leaders, government departments and
  policy influencers, indicate the strengthening of philanthropy aimed at
  enhancing and expanding the use of commercial digital technologies
  in education. They also illustrate the expanding power of technology
  philanthropists to set agendas for ‘experimenting’ in and ‘reimagining’
  state education, often in ways that support both a financially and

  79    Education Endowment Fund. (2020, June 2). Covid-19 resources. EEF. https://educationendowmentfoundation.
        org.uk/covid-19-resources/
  80    Education Endowment Fund. (2020, April 22). Remote schooling: new EEF evidence review highlights core
        features that can unlock its potential. EEF. https://educationendowmentfoundation.org.uk/news/eef-publishes-
        new-review-of-evidence-on-remote-learning/
  81    Qatar Foundation. (2020). Education disrupted, education reimagined 15-16 April 2020. WISE Qatar Foundation.
        https://www.wise-qatar.org/education-disrupted-education-reimagined/
  82    Qatar Foundation. (2020, April 21). Can Covid-19 cure our education system? WISE Qatar Foundation. https://
        www.wise-qatar.org/opinion-can-covid-19-cure-our-education-system/


                                                                                                                       33

           Education International



     socially beneficial return on their investments. Referring particularly
     to the involvement of Eric Schmidt and Bill Gates in post-pandemic
     planning in New York State, Naomi Klein has described the formation
     of a new ‘pandemic shock doctrine’ and a ‘Screen New Deal’ that is
     being brokered between governments and global technology firms by
     wealthy philanthropists.83 New York State’s experiment in reimagining
     education, she argues, will turn it into ‘a living laboratory for a
     permanent—and highly profitable—no-touch future’ characterised
     by ‘human-less, contactless technologies’, artificial intelligence, public-
     private partnerships and extensive outsourcing of government
     functions, such as state schooling, to Silicon Valley businesses.

     Think tanks
     Many think tanks have similarly projected large-scale and
     transformative aspirations for education technologies and other
     commercial involvement both during and after the Covid-19 pandemic.
     From the practical perspective of ensuring equitable access during
     school lockdowns, the UK’s Institute for Public Policy Research (IPPR)
     proposed ‘digital access funds’ to provide digital devices to families.84
     The UK Education Foundation, a think tank dedicated to supporting
     the edtech industry, produced a report recommending ‘immediate
     investment in digital infrastructure and digital devices to facilitate and
     protect learning at home’ as well as ‘superfast broadband for schools’
     to support longer-term digital approaches and edtech adoption.85 In
     Scotland, the think tank Reform Scotland produced proposals for a
     ‘virtual school’ that would deliver an ‘online national curriculum’ for all
     Scottish schoolchildren, after government announcements that the
     new 2020-21 school year would commence with a blended model of
     in-school and at-home learning.86
     The US think tank Brookings has produced a stream of reporting,
     analysis and thought leadership related to education during the
     pandemic too, including reflections on the risks and opportunities
     of edtech and related forms of digitally-mediated teaching and
     learning.87 Brookings has, in particular, pushed insights from its work
     83   Klein, N. (2020, May 9). Screen new deal: Under cover of ass death, Andrew Cuomo calls in the billionaires to
          build a high-tech dystopia. The Intercept. https://theintercept.com/2020/05/08/andrew-cuomo-eric-schmidt-
          coronavirus-tech-shock-doctrine/
     84   Weale, S. (2020, March 31). Children must not become unseen victims of coronavirus says thinktank. The
          Guardian. https://www.theguardian.com/world/2020/mar/31/children-must-not-become-unseen-victims-of-
          coronavirus-says-thinktank
     85   Home Learning UK (2020). Protecting learning: how educators and parents are supporting student learning
          during covid-19. Home Learning UK. http://www.ednfoundation.org/wp-content/uploads/Protecting-Learning-
          Low-Res_compressed.pdf
     86   Johnston, J. (2020, May 20). Scotland needs a ‘virtual school’. Reform Scotland. https://reformscotland.
          com/2020/05/scotland-needs-a-virtual-school-jenifer-johnston/
     87   Brookings. (2020). Education plus development. Brookings. https://www.brookings.edu/blog/education-plus-
          development/


34

     Commercialisation and privatisation in/of education in the context of Covid-19


on experimental school reforms and innovative financing models that
incentivise outcomes-based achievements, such as social impact bonds
‘where investors provide up-front capital to service providers with the
opportunity for a return if agreed-upon outcomes are achieved’, as
promising models to mitigate the impacts of the pandemic on learners,
especially in underserved communities and international development
contexts.88
The conservative Heritage Foundation produced its own Curricula
Resource Initiative, a collection for both schools and families that
includes a curriculum library of online resources, online resources from
different school models such as charter and private schools, and a
slim research collection that includes a 1955 article by Chicago School
economist Milton Friedman proposing that ‘educational services
could be rendered by private enterprises operated for profit’ rather
than directly financed or provided by the state.89 This market model of
state education is one of the key features of public education reforms
advocated by think tanks such as Heritage, as well as by philanthropies
such as the Gates Foundation, and which have opened up state
schooling systems to increasing level of commercial participation.
These brief examples indicate how prominent think tanks have sought
to intervene in debates about how education systems should respond
to disruptions caused by the pandemic, in ways that reflect their
existing political commitments to technological transformation, market-
based school reform and new financial models of educational funding
and investment.

Edtech impact and evidence intermediaries
Another form of intermediary organisation includes edtech ‘impact’ and
‘evidence’ specialists and networks compiling commercial resources
for schools and parents. For example, the UK EdTech Impact site acts
as a ‘global search engine for finding the best education technology on
the market’ and recently added ‘home learning and COVID-19 filters’
to enable teachers or parents to find appropriate resources, including
more than 400 ‘Covid-19 freebies’.90 Organised and ‘powered by
procurement specialists YPO and Innovate My School’, Edtech Impact
is based on ‘50 years’ experience of vetting the education marketplace’,
and is supported by the think tank and investor Nesta, the ventures
88    Gustafsson-Wright, E. (2020, May 26). Education in the time of Covid-19: Reflections from the Charcha 2020
      forum. Brookings. https://www.brookings.edu/blog/education-plus-development/2020/05/26/education-in-the-
      time-of-covid-19-reflections-from-the-charcha-2020-forum/
89    Heritage Foundation. (2020, April 15). Curricular resource initiative: Further readings. Heritage.
      https://www.heritage.org/curricula-resource-initiative/research/further-readings
90    Edtech Impact (2020). Realise your potential with education technology. Edtech Impact.
      https://www.edtechimpact.com/


                                                                                                                   35

           Education International



     firm Emerge Education, the edtech incubator Educate, and EdTechUK,
     a strategic body that ‘accelerates’ the UK edtech sector. For yearly
     subscription costs of between £300 and £900 per product, edtech
     companies can list their products, receive ‘verified reviews’, and earn
     ‘teacher choice badges’ to help promote their brand. Edtech Impact
     is also a founding member of the Edtech Evidence Group, a recently
     formed alliance of edtech industry organisations and companies that
     encourages member organisations to collect and share ‘transparent’
     evidence of their own products’ impact.91 Similarly, Edtech Denmark
     – ‘a non-profit, market-driven cluster association of private and public
     stakeholders’ – produced an ‘evidence-based list’ of free edtech
     resources for educators in the Nordic nations.92

     Likewise, in the US the Jefferson Education Exchange is ‘building a
     framework to help schools and districts understand which edtech
     tools work, where, and why’, which it has begun promoting intensively
     during the pandemic.93 The Jefferson Education Exchange is financially
     supported by the Bill and Melinda Gates Foundation, Carnegie
     Corporation of New York, and the Chan Zuckerberg Initiative, and is
     a partner of the Learning Keeps Going coalition of edtech industry
     providers and supporters convened by ISTE.94 Its edtech evidence
     framework is known as the Edtech Genome Project, a large-scale
     collaboration between education technology researchers, the edtech
     industry, educators, entrepreneurs, philanthropic ‘impact’ investors,
     and advocates, and is due for launch late in 2020 to drive up edtech
     implementation.95

     These evidence and impact groups and organisations act as new
     kinds of intermediaries in education systems, brokering consensus
     regarding the implementation and use of commercial edtech through
     the creation and presentation of novel forms of evidence, impact
     metrics, and product credentialing systems. They mediate between
     decision-makers in schools and private sector companies through the
     production of ‘objective’ data about ‘what works’, in ways that shape the
     edtech market towards particular vendors and suppliers. In the context
     of the Covid-19 crisis they have also become authoritative sources of
     advice on what edtech works for teachers and parents to mitigate the
     effects of school closures. Their influence is likely to grow and establish

     91   Edtech Evidence Group. (2020). The evidenced-based approach to edtech. EEG. https://www.edtechevidence.com/
     92   Edtech Denmark (2020). Edtech donations. Edtech Denmark. http://edtechdonor.dk/
     93   Jefferson Education Exchange. (2020, May 14). It’s urgently important that schools start reporting edtech usage
          numbers. Jefferson Education Exchange. http://jexuva.org/blog/blog-it%E2%80%99s-urgently-important-schools-
          start-reporting-edtech-usage-numbers
     94   Jefferson Education Exchange. (2020). About us. Jefferson Education Exchange. http://jexuva.org/about-us
     95   Jefferson Education Exchange. (2020). The edtech genome project. Jefferson Education Exchange. http://jexuva.
          org/edtech-genome-project


36

          Commercialisation and privatisation in/of education in the context of Covid-19


     with longer-term disruptions to in-school education and potentially
     prolonged period of at-home learning, as they mobilise the opportunity
     to become gatekeepers of edtech evidence, much of it produced by
     their own members, and to shape the market choices of teacher and
     parent consumers.


5.         Edtech market-makers
Over the past decade, public education has become a key site of venture
capital and private equity investment. As one of the fastest-growing areas
of investment, edtech is ‘a paradigmatic illustration of the exponential
growth of business interest in education as an investment opportunity
characterised by a dramatic increase in the volume and speed of
transactions’ (Santori, Ball & Junemann, 2016, p. 193). The new financial
markets and investment techniques catalysing edtech take different
forms, including specialised non-profit investment ventures, financial
advisory services offering ‘market intelligence’, education-exclusive
private equity firms; and specialised investment funds and schemes that
are designed to make long term investments in companies (Santori et al,
2016). In the context of the Covid-19 pandemic, the creation of financial
markets and investment in education are exemplified by venture capital
investors, edtech market intelligence agencies, and impact investors
seeking to capitalise on rapidly escalating demand for technological
solutions to remote teaching and learning.
The global education market intelligence consultancy HolonIQ is a
specialised education financial advisory service, describing itself as
‘Powering the new education economy’ through ‘the world’s smartest
source of education intelligence’.96 During the Covid-19 pandemic,
HolonIQ has sought to both catalogue and catalyse edtech market
activity, by projecting estimates of effects on edtech markets in China,
US, Europe, and ‘emerging markets’ in Latin America, southeast Asia and
Africa.97 In particular, HolonIQ highlighted that in the first three months
of 2020, as Covid-related disruptions set in, US$3bn of venture capital
was invested in edtech (taking the total number of edtech companies
valued at over $1bn to 18 worldwide), and although it foresaw market
fluctuations ahead, it also projected opportunities for edtech growth and
investment:


     96    HolonIQ. (2020). HolonIQ is the world’s smartest source of education intelligence to power decisions that matter:
           HolonIQ. https://www.holoniq.com/
     97    HolonIQ. (2020, May 21). Prototyping global education stock indices: experimental market cap weighted
           geographic and sector indices. HolonIQ. https://www.holoniq.com/notes/prototyping-global-education-stock-
           indices/


                                                                                                                               37

              Education International



            COVID-19 is also highlighting inequality in access to digital and
            remote learning solutions, especially in an environment where
            synchronous video and laptop-based applications have been the
            emergency response, more so in developed economies. Developing
            economies and emerging markets are more broadly seeing surging
            levels of mobile and internet access and overwhelming demand
            for stronger education to employment links. In response to the
            tragic and sudden circumstances COVID-19 has brought about,
            confounded by global inequality, access and cost issues, we expect
            EdTech to be a bumpy ride through the rest of 2020 but bringing an
            exciting opportunity to help develop a more affordable, equitable,
            impactful and resilient education economy.98

     Other edtech market intelligence and financial advisory organisations
     include Emerge Education, GSV, Metaari and Toptal, who, like HolonIQ,
     strategically deploy analyses of past edtech market data and current
     market changes to produce catalytic projections to attract investors. For
     example, HolonIQ predicts over $87bn venture capital investment in
     education technology between 2020 and 2030.99
     In this context, some of the most powerful organisations in education
     are venture capital investors and private equity firms, particularly those
     based in China, the US and India, which are stimulated by large-scale
     market predictions and by the increasingly lucrative valuations attached
     to individual edtech companies. In Europe too, new VC funding is
     becoming available to support edtech-enabled models of education.
     Emerge Education, a venture seed investment firm based in the UK,
     has actively sought to create opportunities for edtech involvement in
     education during the pandemic, has invested seed funds in several British
     edtech companies itself, and, inspired by US virtual schools such as
     OutSchool and Lambda, is promoting ‘online challenger schools’ (‘learner-
     centred, low-cost private schools’) utilising ‘online learning experiences’
     as alternatives to state provision, for which it forecasts favourable
     market potential as more parents seek out long-term homeschooling
     opportunities for their children.100
     The global education business Pearson has also established its own
     specialised investment programs to expand the edtech market and
     consolidate its own market position. Following the establishment of a

       98  HolonIQ. (2020, April 9). $3B global edtech venture for Q1 2020. HolonIQ.https://www.holoniq.com/notes/3b-
           global-edtech-venture-capital-for-q1-2020/
       99  HolonIQ. (2020, January 28). $87bn+ of global edtech funding predicted through 2030. $32bn last decade.
           HolonIQ. https://www.holoniq.com/notes/87bn-of-global-edtech-funding-predicted-to-2030/
       100 Lynn-Matern, L. (2019, December 3). Learner-centred, low cost private schools will be made possible by the
           growing homeschool community. Emerge Edtech Insights. https://medium.com/emerge-edtech-insights/learner-
           centred-low-cost-private-schools-will-be-made-possible-by-the-growing-homeschool-abe6ee18dec0


38

     Commercialisation and privatisation in/of education in the context of Covid-19


US$50million venture fund for investing in edtech companies in 2019,101
it announced in June 2020 a new GB£350million, ten-year social bond
with the net proceeds to be used exclusively to support the provision of
online learning services.102 It said 80% of the net proceeds gained from
investments in the bond will be used to finance Connections Academy,
Pearson’s K-12 online schooling platform, thus enabling the company to
grow the platform during continuing school disruptions and potentially
beyond as an alternative to physical classroom-based education. As
a social bond, Pearson’s education bond represents a form of impact
investing that will return investors a profit based on measurably beneficial
outcomes of the programs it finances. The new Education Bond will
be based on measures of impact derived from Pearson’s own Efficacy
Frameworks, the metrics by which it reports the learning outcomes of its
programs:

    Pearson will provide data on the number of learners taking each
    type of course (e.g. the number of learners in Connections virtual
    schools) as a measure of the output of the spend and as a measure
    of the impact of the spend we will show the percentage of learners
    who achieved the target level of achievement and completed the
    course.103

Additionally, it claims investments in the bond will be targeted towards
key UN sustainable development goals, thereby addressing key issues of
educational access to free and equitable quality education. It is difficult to
tell how the bond will play out but worth noting that it positions Pearson
simultaneously as the issuer of the bond, the service provider, the
evaluator of outcomes, and the payer of proceeds into its own platform
products. The bond is designed to attract new sources of investment to
the Pearson brand, and especially to heighten the profile of Connections
Academy as a market-leading platform for private online schooling.
The Covid-19 crisis has also catalysed impact investment organisations
to issue new calls for alternative models of educational financing, notably
in low-income countries and international development contexts. The
Education Outcomes Fund (EOF), for example, focuses on the use of
‘results-based finance’ to improve educational quality and outcomes in
Africa and the Middle East. The EOF partners with governments in these

  101 Pearson Ventures. (2020). Supporting entrepreneurs to create the future of education. Pearson. https://www.
      pearson.com/news-and-research/the-future-of-education/pearson-ventures.html
  102 Pearson. (2020, June 1). Pearson issues inaugural £350m education-linked social bond. Pearson. https://www.
      pearson.com/en-gb/news-and-research/announcements/2020/06/pearson-issues-inaugural-p350m-education-
      linked-social-bond.html
  103 Pearson. (2020, May). Education bonds and an introduction to sustainability at Pearson. Pearson. https://www.
      pearson.com/content/dam/one-dot-com/one-dot-com/global/Files/investors/social-bond/Pearson-Social-Bond-
      Brochure_Accessible.pdf


                                                                                                                      39

              Education International



     regions to specify learning objectives to be achieved, agree data practices
     and metrics to be used to measure ‘what works’, and to mobilise impact
     investors to fund the up-front costs with the promise of financial returns
     based on ‘independently verified’ results: ‘From a pool of public funds,
     aid, philanthropy, and corporate CSR contributions, we repay investors
     and delivering organisations their initial investment plus a return if the
     learning objectives are reached’.104 During Covid-19, the EOC issued a
     series of proposals for investment in edtech:

         more and better investment in EdTech is required to support
         building theories, evidence, dialogue and capacities; and to support
         innovators to design and adapt cost-effective solutions. This is the
         time for traditional education funders to thoughtfully partner with
         private sector companies and investors (commercial and impact-
         focused) and share the risks of appropriate innovation. So, while
         we scramble to deliver education in the times of COVID-19, let’s
         not get bogged down in evidence alone. Evidence quality, dialogue
         between the full set of actors in the EdTech space, capacities to use
         evidence and more and better investment in EdTech also need our
         attention.105

     Importantly, the EOF is not simply calling for venture capital investment in
     products, but new models of public-private partnership and investment
     in the infrastructure of edtech research, evidence generation, user
     capacity, and theory development. One of its partners to meet these
     aims is the UK-based Edtech Hub, an edtech evidence group funded
     by the Department for International Development and the World
     Bank. These developments would create new ways of measuring the
     impact of edtech implementation over the longer-term, secure impact
     investment from a range of sources, and thereby help embed edtech in
     education systems over the longer term. Pay for results schemes, which
     are also popular in the field of education philanthropy, thus emphasise
     the collection of measurable evidence of ‘what works’ and stimulate
     investment in education from organisations seeking financial return from
     the arrangement. Impact investing therefore potentially puts the focus
     on investment in programs that can deliver quick wins and financial
     gains, and that can then be ‘scaled up’ based on evidence of what works,
     rather than on longer-term programs that tackle the complex structural
     problems faced by education systems in international development
     contexts.

       104 Education Outcomes Fund. (2020). Education Outcomes Fund. https://www.educationoutcomesfund.org/
       105 Outhred, R. (2020). We need more than evidence to harness the potential of edtech to deliver on its promise.
           Education Outcomes Fund. https://www.educationoutcomesfund.org/post/we-need-more-than-evidence-to-
           harness-the-potential-of-edtech-to-deliver-on-its-promise


40

       Commercialisation and privatisation in/of education in the context of Covid-19


Market intelligence, venture capital, impact investing and private equity
favour market-led models of education that are intended to deliver
financial returns to their investors and financiers (Saltman 2019). These
forms of innovative educational financial activity have become especially
active during the Covid-19 crisis. The models that are being funded
are ‘challengers’ to public education, such as online virtual schools and
other products designed for use outside of the normal structures of the
schools sector. Although the pandemic is the immediate context for such
investments, it is clear that much longer-term returns are being sought,
as exemplified by Pearson’s 10-year education bonds and its plans to
finance Connections Academy, and by HolonIQ’s predictions about rapid
growth of online learning markets over the next decade. These new forms
of educational finance are actively catalysing markets and seeding and
scaling up commercial edtech ventures as both short-term solutions to
the pandemic and as long-term investments in public education reforms
and alternative or hybrid models of schooling.


6.      Big tech companies enrolling schools
The involvement of global technology companies in education systems
around the world has a long history, though it has intensified dramatically
during the Covid-19 pandemic. In this section we highlight some of the
key commercial technology operators that have sought to advance their
products, services and platforms during the crisis. These technology
companies are operating at very different levels, from their participation
in high-level international coalitions (where they have positioned
themselves as providers of policy solutions to school closures), to the
provision of practical home-schooling and home learning resources. In
these ways, technology corporations have become able to reach across
education systems, exerting subtle influence at the policy level while
penetrating into school systems and expanding into the learning routines
of the family home at the same time. We concentrate here on three major
transnational technology companies: Microsoft, Google, and Amazon,
which have all sought to make major in-roads to education during the
Covid-19 crisis.

  Microsoft

     Microsoft’s long track record in education includes the provision
     of Office software, hardware and IT supply, cloud services, certified
     ‘Microsoft Educator’ and ‘Teacher Academy’ training programs for
     practitioners, ‘Innovative teacher’ awards, resources for schools
                                                                                        41

            Education International



     leaders, and a wide variety of tools and resources, much of it adapted
     to different national contexts.106 During the pandemic, Microsoft-
     owned products including Minecraft Education Edition and Skype for
     videoconferencing calls have been actively promoted for use while
     schools remained closed. Microsoft also promoted its Microsoft
     Educator Center, a suite of professional development resources and
     tools designed to support teachers with distance learning,107 including
     a vast catalogue of lesson plans and teaching resources making use of
     various Microsoft applications.108
     At the height of the pandemic in 2020, Microsoft announced that it
     was rolling out a digital learning platform called the Learning Passport
     developed in partnership with UNICEF.109 The platform itself was
     already in development but was launched early and expanded rapidly
     to help mitigate the effects of school closures in conflict-affected and
     humanitarian contexts especially. It consists of both a digital platform
     and a curriculum framework that was designed to map local curriculum
     and content in a globally comparable and systematic way in order to
     allow progress and outcomes to be measured and tracked with visual
     analytics. Learning Passport was specifically launched by UNICEF and
     Microsoft as a successful exemplar of public-private partnership in
     global education provision, as part of the Generation Unlimited global
     multi-sector partnership. On its launch, UNICEF claimed ‘the Learning
     Passport is an example of how UNICEF partners with business –
     based on a shared-value approach, where producing social value
     and addressing its challenges also makes perfect business sense’.
     Microsoft’s president added:

       ‘Just as COVID-19’s impact has no borders, its solutions must
       not have borders, as it requires the collaboration across public
       and private sectors to ensure every student stays engaged and
       continues learning. UNICEF’s Learning Passport is uniquely
       positioned as a scalable learning solution to bridge the digital
       learning gap for millions of students to bring their classroom into
       their home during the pandemic.110

     The Learning Passport platform illustrates three key trends that have
     coalesced particularly during the Covid-19 crisis: 1) the expansion and
     acceleration of public-private partnership arrangements to create

     106   Microsoft Education. (2020). Microsoft in education. Microsoft. https://www.microsoft.com/en-gb/education
     107   Microsoft Education. (2020). Get started with distance learning. Microsoft. https://education.microsoft.com/en-us
     108   Microsoft Education. (2020). Education center resources. Microsoft. https://education.microsoft.com/en-us/resources
     109   Microsoft/UNICEF. (2020). The Learning Passport. UNICEF. https://www.learningpassport.org/covid-19
     110   Thompson, G. (2020, April 20). UNICEF and Microsoft launch global learning platform to help address Covid-19
           education crisis. UNICEF. https://www.unicef.org/press-releases/unicef-and-microsoft-launch-global-learning-
           platform-help-address-covid-19-education


42

   Commercialisation and privatisation in/of education in the context of Covid-19


‘solutions’ to education globally; 2) increasing focus on data-intensive
tracking and analytics across education systems; and 3) emphasis
on international comparisons between local and national education
systems and curricula as a way of assessing educational quality and
outcomes.

In two additional key ways Microsoft has significantly extended its
reach in education during school closures. The first is its Microsoft
FastTrack program providing assistance to schools to move existing
systems and data to its cloud architecture, in ways marketed as
supporting schools’ transitions to remote teaching and learning.111
Through FastTrack, Microsoft is therefore seeking to secure long term
integration of school systems with its cloud architecture as well as to
accelerate the deployment and adoption of Office 365. Closely related
to this is Microsoft’s offer of free deployment of Office 365 Education
in schools around the globe. Amplified by its international promotion
of 365 for free to schools, Microsoft has therefore sought to expand
both its key software products into public education and to integrate
school IT systems and data into its cloud architecture too. Microsoft
organised a Global Learning Week, a series of online presentations,
workshops and tips on virtual teaching livestreamed on Facebook, as
a way of preparing teachers for hybrid teaching and learning during
the recovery from the crisis, thereby sharing ‘best practices’ and ‘tips’
and helping to habituate practitioners into the new modes of practice
enabled by Microsoft’s products.112

Beyond its immediate response to school closures and its long-term
plans to embed technology products in public education, Microsoft has
also sought to use the opportunity of the Covid-19 crisis to promote
its preferred vision of the future of education. In collaboration with
New Pedagogies for Deep Learning (NPDL), a global partnership
organisation with long-running ties to the OECD, Gates Foundation and
Pearson, Microsoft published a ‘position paper on a paradigm shift for
education’ entitled ‘Education Reimagined: The future of learning’:

  The fallout of COVID-19, continuing advances in digital technology,
  and intensifying pent-up demand for student centered learning
  have combined to present an unprecedented opportunity to
  transform education across whole systems. … This powerful shift
  to a learner-centered system will be amplified by technology and

111 Microsoft FastTrack (2020). FastTrack. Microsoft. https://www.microsoft.com/en-gb/fasttrack
112 Microsoft Education Team. (2020, June 10). Celebrate with us during global learning week this June 22-26.
    Microsoft. https://educationblog.microsoft.com/en-us/2020/06/celebrate-with-us-during-global-learning-week-
    this-june-22-26/


                                                                                                                  43

            Education International



       driven by education that is steeped in purpose and meaning. We
       are excited to join Microsoft to help accelerate this development.113

     The Microsoft partnership with NPDL on the position paper is intended
     as a stimulus for education system leaders and school leaders to
     reimagine education for the future, drawing from ‘the best of traditional
     approaches, innovative practices, and insights from remote learning
     to shape new, flexible, agile hybrid learning models’.114 The key aspect
     of this program is that Microsoft has partnered with an organisation
     that already has a high level of influence, visibility and credibility in
     the education field, and that – in its model of ‘deep learning’ – is also
     mobilising the ‘unprecedented opportunity’ of the pandemic to seek to
     shape education systems to its preferred (and pre-existing) vision of a
     hybrid, agile, and highly digitalised future of education.
     As these examples indicate, Microsoft is attempting to secure itself
     multiple roles in education during and after the pandemic: as a
     technical infrastructure and platform provider, as a business partner in
     new public-private partnerships for global education delivery, and as a
     key participating node in policy-influencing networks.

     Google

     Although it was a later entrant into the education sector than Microsoft,
     Google launched the G Suite of apps in 2006 (originally known as
     Google Apps for Education), followed by Chromebook laptops in 2011,
     with Google Classroom (its hub for classroom activities including
     attendance, classroom discussions, homework, and communication
     with students and parents) launching in 2014. By offering its products
     for free, Google has bypassed the usual procurement processes
     involved in edtech purchasing, and become the dominant provider of
     edtech hardware and software globally. Chromebooks have been used
     by 30 million students and educators worldwide, while the Google G
     Suite has reached 80 million and Classroom has over 50 million users.
     Through its philanthropic Google.org initiative, it has also invested over
     $250m in education technology interventions, including access for
     underserved schools and communities. In these various ways, Google
     has attained an extremely powerful position in education systems
     around the world, with reach to millions of teachers and tens of


     113 New Pedagogies for Deep Learning: A Global Partnership. (2020). Education reimagined: the future of learning.
         Microsoft. https://edudownloads.azureedge.net/msdownloads/Microsoft-EducationReimagined-Paper.pdf
     114 Fullan, M. & Quinn, J. (2020, June 8). Reimaging education: from remote to hybrid learning. Microsoft. https://
         educationblog.microsoft.com/en-us/2020/06/reimagining-education-from-remote-to-hybrid-learning


44

   Commercialisation and privatisation in/of education in the context of Covid-19


millions of students through its low-cost Chromebooks hardware and
the G Suite of free software apps.115
During the pandemic, Google launched a service called Teach
from Home in partnership with UNESCO’s Institute for Information
Technologies in Education, as a ‘temporary hub of information and
tools to help teachers during the coronavirus (COVID-19) crisis’.116
It also provides resources for distance education through Google’s
dedicated COVID19 Information and Resources site, and announced
a ‘Teacher Approved’ badge to be displayed on select products in
the Kids section of its Google Play app store.117 Furthermore, Google
launched Learn@Home through YouTube as a resource for families
with children during school closures, with multiple channels of content
provided by selected education partners including Khan Academy, BBC
Bitesize, Sesame Street, the Wide Open School initiative, code.org, and
Google itself.118
As its main offer, Teach from Home actually consists of the standard
Google G Suite of apps for education, including Classroom, Drive,
Docs, Hangouts, Groups, as well as the additional integration of
the Teams videoconferencing application. The Teach from Home
‘temporary hub’ requires whole schools to subscribe to G Suite for
Education and create Google accounts for students, thereby further
expanding Google’s user base amongst students and opening up
new opportunities for data extraction.119 Classroom, in particular,
experienced a surge in demand as schools worldwide sought digital
learning platforms to host remote teaching. The app itself includes the
capacity for integration with other third-party apps, of which hundreds
are available, which therefore opens up any subscribing schools to a
vast array of interoperable products. This potentially enables Google
to extract valuable information from the customer usage data across
this emerging and expanding ecosystem of plug-and-play products and
companies.
The expansion of G Suite and Classroom rekindles long-standing
questions and controversies over Google extractive strategy and
privacy practices. In 2017 the Electronic Frontier Foundation formally
complained to the US Federal Trade Commission that, through
Chromebooks and G Suite, Google was involved in ‘unauthorised
collection, maintenance, use and sharing of student personal
115 Kessler, E. (2020, May 14). 10 things to know to get started with Google Classroom. Google. https://www.blog.
    google/outreach-initiatives/education/classroom-distance-learning/
116 Google Teach from Home. (2020). Teach from home. Google. https://teachfromhome.google/intl/en/
117 Brooks, M. (2020, April 15). Find high-quality apps for kids on Google Play. Google. https://www.blog.google/
    products/google-play/teacher-approved-apps/
118 YouTube Learning. (2020). Learn at home with YouTube. YouTube. https://learnathome.withyoutube.com/
119 Google. (2020). Distance learning resources. Google. https://www.blog.google/outreach-initiatives/education/
    classroom-distance-learning/


                                                                                                                    45

            Education International



     information beyond what is needed for education’.120 One of the
     significant claims against Google is that its customer-oriented policy
     documents ‘disguise the business model’ and ‘persuade the reader to
     understand Google as a free public service, divorced from marketplace
     contexts and concerns’ (Lindh and Nolin 2016, p. 650). A study of
     various platforms used for ‘emergency remote teaching’ during the
     Covid-19 pandemic found that G Suite performed worst in relation to
     data protection regulations in Europe.121 While Google does not sell
     student data collected from G Suite or Classroom specifically for third-
     party advertising, this does not prevent it utilising personal information
     for the purposes of value-creating product development. Moreover,
     Google pursues brand allegiance and familiarisation, hoping the tens
     of millions of teachers and students who become familiar with Google
     products at school will continue to rely on Google out of school, thus
     generating the data from which Google derives most of its revenue.
     In this sense, the free to use G Suite has been described as training
     ‘Google consumers from infancy’, and as a ‘brand loyalty scheme,
     presented as an education revolution.’122

     Amazon
     Amazon’s first notable entry into education was the provision of cloud
     storage for schools through its Amazon Web Services. However, it has
     subsequently made a number of education-related developments,
     including a marketplace where teachers can share or sell home-
     produced lesson plans and resources, Prime subscriptions for
     students, grants for education projects, an EdStart incubator for edtech
     companies, Business for Education deals for quantity discounts, school
     Prime accounts, AWS Educate resources to ‘accelerate cloud-related
     learning’, and an LMS Integrated Store enabling educators to build
     course content and students to select the format that ‘fits their budget
     and study preferences’.123
     During the pandemic Amazon produced guidance and resources for
     educators on remote instruction,124 promoted the digital learning
     platform EVERFI, of which Amazon founder Jeff Bezos is a major

     120 Electronic Frontier Foundation. (2015). EFF v. Google, inc. EFF. https://www.eff.org/files/2015/12/01/ftccomplaint-
         googleforeducation.pdf
     121 Ducato, R. et al. (2020, June 4). Emergency remote learning: a study of copyright and data protection policies of
         popular online services. Kluwer Copyright Blog. http://copyrightblog.kluweriplaw.com/2020/06/04/emergency-
         remote-teaching-a-study-of-copyright-and-data-protection-policies-of-popular-online-services-part-ii/?doing_wp_
         cron=1591282019.5066540241241455078125
     122 Krein, A. (2020, June). The screens that ate school. The Monthly. https://www.themonthly.com.au/issue/2020/
         june/1590933600/anna-krien/screens-ate-school
     123 Amazon Education. (2020). Products and services. Amazon. https://www.amazon.com/gp/feature.
         html?ie=UTF8&docId=1000412651
     124 AWS Educate. (2020). Supporting the rapid transition to remote learning. Amazon. https://aws.amazon.com/
         education/remote-instruction-resources-for-educators/


46

   Commercialisation and privatisation in/of education in the context of Covid-19


investor, and provided millions of dollars of Amazon devices to
schools in the US.125 Through the AWS Educate program and its AWS
Educate Cloud Ambassador Program - a program for leading ‘cloud
educators who serve as ambassadors and evangelists for AWS Educate’
- Amazon ‘created an Educator Mobilisation initiative, which leverages
its vast network of educators with experience teaching online’ to
provide guidance and support on remote teaching.126 Notably, too,
Amazon promoted its Alexa for Education API, which enables its voice
technology to be integrated into other edtech products127 (the first
application was the Pearson platform Revel), partly through an ‘EdTech
Challenge’ competition that invited proposals on innovative integrations
of Alexa in educational technology applications.128
As with the expansion of Google and Microsoft during the pandemic,
the efforts of Amazon to extend use of its services in education in
this period raises significant issues regarding data sharing, storage
and ownership. For example, ‘Using the AWS Cloud, schools and
districts can get a comprehensive picture of student performance
by connecting products and services so they seamlessly share data
across platforms’.129 It also strongly promotes its ‘Machine Learning for
Education’ services to ‘identify at-risk students and target interventions’,
‘improve teacher efficiency and impact with personalised content and
AI-enabled teaching assistants and tutors’, and ‘improve efficiency
of assessments and grading’.130 As such, AWS provides cloud-based
education infrastructure for not just solving schools’ IT infrastructure
issues, but for compiling student data and enabling its analysis within
the Amazon ecosystem of products and services, and for applying
automated machine learning processes. Amazon’s overall business
strategy is to act as an ‘infrastructure provider’ seeking ‘structural
dominance’ across a wide range of industries, from commerce and
entertainment to computing and data analytics power.131 Now, it
seems, Amazon is competing with Google and Microsoft for structural
dominance in education too, with the Covid-19 crisis as an opportunity
to market and promote its range of cloud computing, machine learning,
and voice technologies to schools.


125 Day One Staff. (2020, June 17). Amazon’s Covid-19 blog: daily updates on how we’re responding to the crisis.
    Amazon. https://blog.aboutamazon.com/company-news/amazons-actions-to-help-employees-communities-and-
    customers-affected-by-covid-19/
126 Day One Staff. (2020, April 1). Supporting teachers’ transition to learning with no-cost resources. Amazon.
    https://blog.aboutamazon.com/company-news/supporting-teachers-transition-to-remote-learning-with-no-cost-
    resources
127 AWS (2020). Alexa in Education. Amazon. https://aws.amazon.com/education/alexa-edu/
128 AWS. (2020). Amazon Alexa EdTech Skills Challenge. Amazon. https://aws.amazon.com/education/alexa-edu/
    edtech-challenge/
129 AWS. (2020). K12 and Primary Education. Amazon. https://aws.amazon.com/education/K12-primary-ed/
130 AWS. (2020). Machine learning in education. Amazon. https://aws.amazon.com/education/ml-in-education/
131 Khan, L. (2017). Amazon’s antitrust paradox. The Yale Law Journal. https://www.yalelawjournal.org/pdf/e.710.
    Khan.805_zuvfyyeh.pdf


                                                                                                                   47

             Education International



     Microsoft, Amazon and Google have been selected here owing to the
     very large range of educational resources and products they have sought
     to promote during school closures, but other international technology
     companies have also stepped up to provide free resources. Apple has
     supported a range of resources for home learning, primarily focused
     on apps to foster creativity and coding skills, as well as promoting its
     own built-in apps.132 The videoconferencing platform Zoom was offered
     for free for schools,133 along with a selection of resources to support
     educators to make use of the platform,134 although serious controversy
     emerged over its data collection and privacy practices,135 including reports
     of racist ‘zoombombing’ of online lectures.136
     Google, Microsoft, Amazon, as well as other technology companies, are
     enrolling schools at huge scale into their infrastructures and enlisting
     educators’ increased use of their products and services. New entrants
     into the ‘education market’ continue to emerge, such as the social media
     platform TikTok announcing in June 2020 it was partnering with hundreds
     of universities, experts and charities to create educational content
     for the platform after recording millions of views of content on the
     #LearnOnTikTok hashtag during the pandemic:
         ‘Going forward, LearnOnTikTok is about us investing in partners
         and content creators with a breadth of professional content... We
         think this is about applying the power of TikTok to learning: the
         effects, the audio, the transitions, the tools that make it so engaging
         and fun, to make people enjoy learning.’ 137

     Under the leadership of a new chief executive from Disney, who oversaw
     the launch of its Disney+ streaming service, TikTok is anticipated to
     build content creation partnerships to deliver high-quality ‘micro-
     learning’ videos through the platform. These plans to position TikTok
     as an educational platform pre-existed the pandemic, as it sought out
     new customers and fresh sources of revenue, but were fast-tracked
     in response to users’ own creation of educational content during the
     Covid-19 emergency. It is simultaneously investing GB£15million into the
     initiative in Europe and another US$50m in the US, with the specific hope
     that ‘educational content makes us more appealing to advertisers’.138

       132 Apple. (2020). Teach and learn. From any distance. Apple. https://www.apple.com/uk/education/k12/learning-from-home/
       133 Zoom. (2020). Zoom for education. Zoom. https://zoom.us/education
       134 Zoom (2020). Education over Zoom. Zoom. https://zoom.us/docs/en-us/covid19.html#education
       135 Cox, J. (2020, March 28). Zoom removes codes that sends data to Facebook. Vice. https://www.vice.com/en_us/
           article/z3b745/zoom-removes-code-that-sends-data-to-facebook
       136 LaBennett, O. (2020, March 31). Zoombombing university lectures brings racism home. Black Perspectives.
           https://www.aaihs.org/zoombombing-university-lectures-brings-racism-home/
       137 BBC. (2020, 18 June). TikTok makes move into education market. BBC. https://www.bbc.co.uk/news/technology-53079625
       138 Joseph, S. (2020, 18 June). ‘A shift towards maturity’: Why TikTok is investing $15m in short-form educational
           content in Europe. DigiDay. https://digiday.com/media/a-shift-towards-maturity-why-tiktok-is-investing-15m-in-
           short-form-educational-content-in-europe/


48

      Commercialisation and privatisation in/of education in the context of Covid-19


These companies are not conventionally parts of the ‘global education
industry’, and education comprises only a small part of their business
operations. They are, however, increasingly operating at huge scale in
education systems around the world, often through digital platforms and
infrastructures that are offered to schools for free or at low-cost, and that
are also extremely extensible, interoperable and able to be integrated
together. Some, like TikTok, are capitalising on students’ uses of their
services for out-of-school learning – and the potential advertising revenue
this will generate – and seeking to expand the ways that partner-created
educational content is accessed online via commercial platforms. Within
the schools sector, Google, Microsoft and Amazon, in particular, are
shifting schools to cloud infrastructures and to ecosystems of apps and
products that can be plugged together and integrated with third-party
products and services. These integrative infrastructures are opening
up unprecedented opportunities for technology companies to amass
education data at international scope and huge volume, with limited
transparency about how those data will be used. Finally, these technology
companies are treating public education as a competitive market where
each is seeking structural dominance through the large-scale enrolment
of school customers and the integration of schools’ critical information
systems into their infrastructures.


7.      The edu-business sector
This section focuses on education businesses, from international edu-
businesses such as Pearson through to single offering edtech startups.
In the former sections of this document we have been able to highlight
some of the major international corporations, philanthropists and
coalitions that have turned their attention to manufacturing continued
learning solutions to Covid-19. The sheer scale of what is happening on
the edu-business level is harder to capture and trace. We have identified
countless products and services that are competing with each other to
offer edtech services. In an attempt to provide some oversight of what is
happening we have organised our discussion into five subcategories of
products and services, including: 1) online school platforms; 2) school and
learning management platforms; 3) AI-based technologies; 4) student-
monitoring and safeguarding; and 5) online learning resources.

  Online schooling platforms

     Online schooling is a term used to capture a number of services,
     including the rapidly rising number of online public charter schools
                                                                                       49

            Education International



     and for-profit private schools (Miron & Gulosino, 2016). These
     schools deliver all teaching and learning instruction through virtual
     means (Saultz & Fusarelli, 2017). For example, Pearson’s Connections
     Academy, offers tuition-free virtual schooling for K-12 students, and
     during 2018, served more than 70,000 students across 27 states in the
     US. As their webpage currently states,

       Right now, millions of families are trying online learning for the first
       time due to the ongoing COVID-19 pandemic. We see you making
       the most of being at home—doing great things for your kids. For
       the past 20 years, Connections Academy has helped students make
       the transition to online school. We know this probably wasn’t in
       your plan, but know that you can do this. We’re here to share our
       expertise and the resources you need to succeed with online school.
       Together, we’re focused on keeping kids learning as we adjust to
       our changing world.139

     Interestingly, in Pearson’s 2017 annual report, it was noted that there
     was a need to capitalise further on the virtual schooling market, given
     it only made up 6% of their current sales (£274m), but was a market
     worth $1.5 billion. Indeed, when we consider that Pearson is offering
     free subscriptions for primary and secondary schools to Active Learn,140
     an online learning world with everything a teacher needs including
     literacy and numeracy resources, planning tools, games, activities and
     assessment’141 we might extrapolate that these resources being offered
     in support, might turn into longer-term subscriptions and enrollments.
     Learning Hub is another one of Pearson’s digital learning platforms,
     in which it provides ‘bite-sized and mobile-optimised learning content’
     for learners in ‘schools and colleges, at work, at home or on the
     go’.142 While initially targeted at apprenticeship learning, it has now
     expanded to schooling, currently showcasing their Sport+ plugin to
     support school-based BTEC qualifications. The company also compiled
     a range of resources to support distance learning,143 and launched a
     support site for parents, including extensive homeschooling curricula,
     resources and timetables.144



     139 Connection Academy. (2020). Support for parents and teachers shifting to online school. Pearson. https://www.
         connectionsacademy.com/tips
     140 ActiveLearn (2020). ActiveLearn. Pearson. https://www.activelearnprimary.co.uk/login?c=0
     141 Bristow, R. (2020). Educators. Pearson. https://www.pearson.com/uk/educators.html
     142 Pearson. (2020). Learning Hub. Pearson. https://www.pearson.com/uk/educators/schools/learning-hub.html
     143 Pearson. (2020). Distance learning support. Pearson. https://www.pearson.com/uk/educators/schools/update-
         for-schools/distance-learning-support.html
     144 Pearson. (2020). Support for parents and learners during coronavirus. Pearson. https://www.pearson.com/uk/
         learners.html


50

   Commercialisation and privatisation in/of education in the context of Covid-19


Similarly, K12145, BYJU’S146 and Outschool147 are offering limited time
free classes to ensure students have school closure alternatives during
the Covid-19 crisis. For example, Outschool suggests they are making
$1 million worth of classes available for free to families impacted by
school closures and financial hardship. Interestingly, when a family
signs up for this program they must register for classes, enter their
credit card details and they’re charged $1 to confirm their intention
and identity. This $1 is later refunded if attendance in the initial class
is confirmed. Again, we note the potential business plan sitting behind
this strategy of collecting personal information for marketing purposes,
and the possibility of upscaling subscription plans when the ‘free-trial’
period ends. While Khan Academy is slightly different to other online
schooling providers given it has always been a free-to-use platform, it
is still using the current situation to drive up donations. Currently, on
entering the site, users encounter a popup that asks for a $10 donation
to ‘make a big difference’ for a ‘nonprofit that relies on support’ to meet
the demand ‘spike’ caused by Covid-19148.

School and learning management platforms

School and learning management platforms allow educators to
maintain control of student learning, but provide a platform to
transition from physical to online spaces. Many of the businesses
offering these services advertise their ability to work alongside (rather
than replace) traditional face-to-face schooling. Since Covid-19 forced
school closures, the uptake in these services has skyrocketed. For
example, statistics published by Moodle suggest that during March
2020, 50,000 new Moodle sites have been registered and there are
now 1.67 million learners active on the Moodle cloud (compared to
453,000 at the same time last year)149. Providers are actively promoting
this rapid upscaling of their product, offering extended use to current
customers (e.g. the upgrading of services for no extra cost), and
allowing new customers to get started either for free or delayed billing
- as is the case for Schoology150 and Kinteract151 that have both decided
new customers will not pay for its services until July 2020. It is unclear
whether these companies are likely to extend their free use period

145 K12. (2020). Coronavirus school closing solutions and alternatives – we’re here to help. K12.
    https://www.k12.com/content/k12-refresh/en/coronavirus
146 BYJU’S. (2020). How does BYJU’s #LearnFromHome work? BYJU’s. https://byjus.com/free-live-classes/
147 Outschool. (2020). Free classes for families affected by U.S. public school closures. Outschool.
    https://outschool.com/2020-school-closures-offer#abkaqq71qq
148 Khan Academy. (2020). Help us do more. Khan Academy. https://www.khanacademy.org/donate
149 Pilarek, K.. (2020, May 19). Moodle in numbers during Covid-19. Moodle.
    https://moodle.com/news/moodle-in-numbers-during-covid-19/
150 Schoology. (2020). Distance learning assistance. Schoology. https://www.schoology.com/prepare/get-schoology
151 Kinteract. (2020). Capture, assign, report and share. Kinteract. https://www.kinteract.co.uk


                                                                                                                  51

            Education International



     if school closures persist to July and beyond, and equally, whether
     schools have the option to opt out of these services prior to their
     subscription shifting to a billing cycle.

     AI-based technologies
     AI in education has been promoted by the edtech industry as having
     the ability to truly personalise learning through embedded data
     analytics. With schools closed and teachers working remotely, there
     is a sense that Covid-19 is presenting an opportune time for some
     businesses to push their products onto parents looking for ‘hands-off’
     schooling from home solutions. For example, Century is offering free
     English, maths and science courses during school closures to parents
     and guardians who sign up to the service. This package replaces the
     ‘family licence’ that is usually £18.99 per month152. As stated in the
     terms and conditions of using this service, the intended products are
     for wholly personal use and cannot be used by professional tutors or
     groups (e.g. schools). Similarly, Google has launched a new kid-focused
     voice assistant, Diya, which is designed to teach children how to read
     and aimed directly at parents153. There is a sense here that online
     tutoring services marketed directly at parents and guardians might
     replace face-to-face tutoring once Covid-19 ends.

     Student monitoring and safeguarding
     During the pandemic there has also been a push towards adopting
     digital surveillance safeguarding of students, particularly in the absence
     of the natural monitoring that usually occurs in schools. For example,
     Gaggle Safety Management for Microsoft Teams is a combination of
     ‘machine learning and human safety experts that review students’
     communication and use of online tools’. School officials are alerted
     when students show signs of ‘self-harm, depression, thoughts of
     suicide, substance abuse, cyberbulling, unhealthy relationships and
     credible threats of violence against others’154. This pervasive monitoring
     is claimed to have saved countless students from self-harm155. Other
     services like Impero target health tracking, with new plugins specifically
     designed to report Covid-19 symptoms of students to a school
     administration team, and also flag signs of home abuse or potential
     152 Century. (2020). How we are helping. Century. https://www.century.tech/explore-century/parents/#how-we-are-
         helping
     153 Schwartz, E. (2020, May 8). Google launches new voice assistance and app to teach kids to read. Voicebot.ai.
         https://voicebot.ai/2020/05/08/google-launches-new-voice-assistant-and-app-to-teach-kids-to-read/
     154 Gaggle. (2020). Gaggle Safety Management for Google Teams. Gaggle. https://news.gaggle.net/microsoft-teams-
         integration
     155 Beckett, L. (2019, October 22). Under digital surveillance: how American schools spy on millions of kids. The
         Guardian. https://www.theguardian.com/world/2019/oct/22/school-student-surveillance-bark-gaggle


52

   Commercialisation and privatisation in/of education in the context of Covid-19


suicide156. These services were used by schools before Covid-19,
but there has been a remarkable increase in student monitoring. As
Gaggle founder and CEO, Jeff Patterson claims, their customer base has
increased 1,200% since the start of school closures on the basis that
schools can continue to protect students now schooling from home.157
Closely related to these safeguarding technologies is a resurgence of
digital resources to support students’ ‘social-emotional learning’ (SEL),
especially to address any psychological problems or vulnerabilities
emerging during the period of school closures and lockdown. The
US-based and Gates Foundation-funded Collaborative on Academic,
Social and Emotional Learning (CASEL), for example, has compiled a
significant body of guidance and resources for schools to use both
during closures and afterwards when students return to the classroom,
as part of its long-term campaign to enhance SEL measurement,
embed SEL in curricula, and improve SEL-based practices in schools.158
Educational technologies targeted at measuring and improving SEL
have been promoted extensively during the pandemic. For instance,
Panorama Education, a dedicated digital data platform for use by
schools to collect and analyse information about students’ social-
emotional learning, developed a range of new survey tools and
analytics for schools to assess students at a distance and deliver
targeted support.159 Finally, as part of UNESCO’s commitment to
supporting SEL internationally, the UNESCO Mahatma Gandhi Institute
of Education for Peace and Sustainability launched a dedicated website
of recommended digital resources and apps to promote student’s
social-emotional learning, many of them commercially produced.160
It seems to us likely that schools and education systems will focus
increasingly on SEL and student safeguarding as schools begin the
process of reopening, delivering hybrid teaching programs, and
dealing with negative personal outcomes of school closures and
lockdowns. Although safeguarding and SEL-based technologies were
already becoming more widespread as part of global policy interest
in measuring and improving the non-academic aspects of student
learning and development, Covid-19 may be seen as a catalytic
opportunity to embed such technologies and associated practices in
schools at much greater scale as disruptions to schooling and students’
lives continue in the aftermath of the pandemic.

156 Impero. (2020). Getting free safeguarding software and health tracking tolos into the hands of schools quickly
    and easily. Impero. https://www.imperosoftware.com/uk/impero-backdrop/
157 PR Web. (2020, April 22). Gaggle partners with districts nationwide to increase student safety while learning
    remotely. PR Web. https://www.prweb.com/releases/gaggle_partners_with_districts_nationwide_to_increase_
    student_safety_while_learning_remotely/prweb17068912.htm
158 CASEL. (2020). Covid resources. CASEL. https://casel.org/covid-resources/
159 Panorama Education. (2020). Take action on students, staff and family needs during school closures. Panorama.
    https://www.panoramaed.com/distance-learning-surveys
160 UNESCO MGIEP. (2020). Essential SEL Resources: COVID-19. UNESCO MGIEP. https://mgiep.unesco.org/covid


                                                                                                                     53

            Education International



     Online learning resources

     The last category we have identified here is an attempt to capture the
     huge amount of learning resources that are being offered for free
     or heavily discounted rates during the pandemic. Previous research
     has identified how many of these products and services are used to
     complement day-to-day teaching and learning practices in schools,
     including: online textbooks, mathematics and literacy gamification
     programs, coding software, quiz and assessment hosting, digital
     communication tools, and various virtual reality experiences, like
     science laboratory activities or field trips. Perhaps most interesting
     here is the large number of commercial gaming products that
     have been able to quickly shift and upscale to meet educational
     demands. For example, Roblox, a platform that has over 100 million
     active users - and valued at $4 billion dollars - has released ‘Learn &
     Explore’ for families and educators wanting to explore learning game
     development161. As a Roblox spokesperson cited in the Washington
     Post argues, this move was already on the ‘road map’ but was fast
     tracked when the pandemic emerged162.
     Across many of the products we reviewed, key business strategies
     included connecting with educators (both teachers and parents)
     through webinars, offering free trials, planning ready-to-go curriculum-
     linked lessons and showing how engaged students are in their
     products through customer testimonials. Regardless of the product
     it seemed clear to us that, unlike most businesses experiencing a
     downturn due to Covid-19, edu-business was largely booming. The
     question remains to what extent this uplift in use will translate to edu-
     business profits after free trial periods end and the pandemic passes?




     161 Baszucki, D. (2020, March 20). Staying connected: our response to Covid-19. Roblox. https://blog.roblox.
         com/2020/03/staying-connected-response-covid-19/
     162 Favis, E. (2020, April 16). With coronavirus closing schools, here’s how video games are helping teachers.
         The Washington Post. https://www.washingtonpost.com/video-games/2020/04/15/teachers-video-games-
         coronavirus-education-remote-learning/


54

     Commercialisation and privatisation in/of education in the context of Covid-19



III. Key issues, research priorities,
     and recommendations


1.    Global education industry expansion
      during the emergency
In this report we have captured activities that indicate some ways in which
privatisation and commercialisation of education are being accelerated
and extended in the context of the Covid-19 pandemic, with a particular
focus on education technology. Some of these developments will have
been experienced first-hand by educators and students, as they have
transitioned to digital platforms and services for online education. Much
of the activity to expand educational technology during school closures
has been clearly motivated by the necessity of ensuring educational
continuity for many millions of students. However, our attention in this
report has been drawn to activities that extend far beyond the immediate
requirement of equipping teachers and students to be able to continue
schooling in the absence of school buildings or physical proximity.
Instead, we have documented longer-term aims and ambitions from a
wide range of organisations and private, public and third sector positions,
many of which seem to indicate that the period of the pandemic will
be pivotal in large-scale changes to public education systems that may
considerably advantage and benefit commercial technology-centred
organisations.
Although a global education industry that conceives of education as a
globalised sector to be managed by private actors and organisations,
rather than left to the state alone, is not a new development (Verger et al
2016), it has amplified its influence and the scale of its penetration into
education systems considerably during the global Covid-19 emergency.
As part of this, we see evidence both of privatisation being done to
public education at the structural level, through state-supported private
sector participation in schooling, and of commercialisation occurring
through the penetration of profitable goods and services into schooling
processes and practices (Hogan & Thompson 2017). Many of the actors
and organisations we have identified in this report view the current
emergency of school closures not just as a short term opportunity
for providing charitable support to educators, students and parents,

                                                                                      55

           Education International



     but as a long term opening for expanding their business interests,
     generating revenue, gathering data, shaping teaching practices, and
     influencing policy agendas into the future. The global education industry
     has continued and considerably accelerated its expansion during the
     Covid-19 emergency, with long term consequences that so far remain
     unclear but have the potential to exert significant effects on education
     systems around the world. These developments remain in motion,
     and their evolution will require much more sustained study in order to
     understand their repercussions and consequences over the longer term.
     It is still too soon to tell what the post-pandemic landscape of public
     education will look like. We offer the following key issues as tentative
     conclusions, as indicators of unfolding dynamics, and as launchpads for
     such longitudinal work.


     2.    Global and national, public and private policy networks
     Commercial organisations have played a considerable role in education
     during school closures, but this cannot be interpreted straightforwardly
     as commercialisation of state education. Instead, organisations from
     multiple sectoral positions and national perspectives have coalesced
     around shared aims and aspirations which, in a highly compressed
     period, have become the core of an international policy agenda in
     which commercial edtech is a major component. Beyond the work of
     commercial companies and the private sector alone, the pandemic has
     been treated as a catalytic context for new forms of networked, cross-
     sector and cross-border forms of education policy. These policy dynamics
     operate at global, national and regional scales, involving a mixture of
     international multilateral organisations, global technology and education
     businesses, philanthropic grant funding and investor schemes, national
     and subnational government departments, public bodies and civil society
     organisations, as well as more ‘local’ edtech businesses and associations
     working in different countries. In this sense, we can see the distributed
     forms of policy activity documented in this report as a particularly
     accelerated and networked instance of ‘fast policy’ or ‘policy mobility’,
     where state centres of policymaking are fused to the activities of private
     organisations, business practices, venture philanthropy and capital
     markets (Peck & Theodore 2015).
     At transnational scale, the reformatory aspirations of organisations with
     global scope and influence, such as UNESCO, the OECD, World Bank,
     Pearson, Gates Foundation, Microsoft and Google, have translated into
     1) short-term emergency responses to the pandemic and 2) long-term


56

     Commercialisation and privatisation in/of education in the context of Covid-19


reforms enabling education systems to recover from the pandemic in
transformed and more effective forms. Although regional and national
government departments of education have been active in promoting
digital solutions to school closures, they have often lagged behind the
leadership of these organisations. The UK’s Department for Education
is a case in point, as it only announced funding for devices, financial
backing for Microsoft and Google products, and a grant to the Oak
National Academy in early April 2020, weeks after major coalitions were
announced by UNESCO, ISTE and other non-governmental organisations.
As such, the educational response to the pandemic was characterised by
existing trends towards dispersed policy networks, and exemplifies the
agility of multilateral organisations and commercial companies to develop
new kinds of partnership arrangements to address policy problems in
near to ‘real time’ rather than at a delay. However, this disruption of
conventional policy approaches also means that policy agendas are
being developed and led by actors with their own idiosyncratic views of
the purposes of public education and of how education systems should
be arranged and managed. In other words, new forms of public-private
governance of education, operating at variously national and international
scales, have come to the foreground during the pandemic.


3.    Experimental pandemic prototyping
      for future education systems
New imaginaries of education futures circulated by commercial
organisations and supported by like-minded advocacy networks are
proposing a radical ‘reimagining’ and prototyping of education systems.
The mass closure of schools globally has been touted as the biggest
edtech experiment in history or as a microcosm for education in the
future, and while the edtech industry is cautiously optimistic about what
the future of schooling might look like after the pandemic ends, it’s
difficult to imagine that edtech won’t play a more central role moving
forward.
While some schools might continue to use management platforms
to organise teaching and learning activities, more interesting are the
proposals emanating from governments that some of the hastily
adopted online schools - like Britain’s Oak National Academy - are here
to stay, embedded in ‘hybrid’ school models and embodied in teachers’
practices through the period of pandemic recovery and beyond. This is
a clear example of the move towards privatisation in public schooling,
where governments work in partnership with private (both commercial


                                                                                      57

           Education International



     and philanthropic) actors to deliver core public services. While these
     moves are ostensibly about catering to disadvantaged students, we echo
     arguments made previously that such provision of schooling is likely to
     increase inequity, rather than reduce it (Sellar & Hogan, 2019). Online
     schools might be a cost-effective way to educate masses of students, but
     are likely to undermine the social purposes of schooling and the ethical
     obligation societies have to the health and wellbeing of their young
     people.


     4.    New private infrastructures of education
     A key way that private sector education businesses and global technology
     companies have expanded and intensified their commercial agendas
     in public education is through the provision of digital infrastructure for
     online teaching and learning (e.g. MS365, G Suite, AWS Cloud). This has
     consolidated the market share of key private infrastructure providers. For
     example, in the UK, government support for Microsoft and Google has
     potentially restricted the market of online learning platform providers,
     by incentivising schools to opt for platforms that are both free to use
     and bundled up with government-funded technical assistance. To a
     significant extent, government investment in Microsoft and Google
     has seen these companies come to dominate the area of school IT
     infrastructure. Similarly, in China the state has invested significantly in
     AI-based edtech during the pandemic, as part of an escalation of its
     longstanding ambition to create an innovative education system that will
     enhance China’s long-term geopolitical strengths in AI development and
     deployment (Knox 2020). The involvement of technology companies in
     national and international coalitions, such as those led by UNESCO and
     ISTE, is assisting them to expand their infrastructure business to new
     geographical spaces, particular in underserved or developing contexts.
     We can understand infrastructure in a slightly different way, as
     constituting a shift from the infrastructure of physical classrooms to
     increasingly online, blended or hybrid systems of education enabled by
     digital infrastructure. Even when schools re-open, many will have new
     agreements in place - including hastily agreed consent from parents -
     for technology companies and edtech vendors to provide services and
     resources. These efforts are part of a larger project to reimagine the
     infrastructure of public education, in particular by stretching edtech
     products and services across existing schooling systems as a vital new
     substratum of pedagogy, management and curriculum provision. For
     example, Dan Cohen argues that various market reformers and edtech


58

        Commercialisation and privatisation in/of education in the context of Covid-19


companies that have promoted online learning are now capitalising
on the crisis and investment enthusiasm to push online education
ever further into post-pandemic public education.163 A ‘new education
infrastructure is emerging’, Cohen argues, supported by reformatory
actors that aim ‘to use edtech to create a privatised education system
that can unlock profits for corporations and investors and find any
avenue to cut costs to maximise gains’. Such reformatory objectives
appear to underline the involvement of the Gates Foundation in
‘reimagining’ education in New York. Discussions about creating a
new digital infrastructure for schools are also ongoing at such diverse
organisations as the public broadcaster the BBC, the OECD, and UNESCO,
in invesment organisations, as well as in the many national or regional
departments of education that have supported new infrastructural
arrangements for schools. What we can observe here is not necessarily
a coordinated commercial effort to re-infrastructure public education
through private sector technology, but a loosely aligned set of ad hoc
activities that, over coming months, may become increasingly influential
in setting agendas for technical change at regional, national or even
international scales.


5.         Pandemic profit-making
The global education industry has advanced the idea of education as
a sector for investment and profit making and management by private
organisations. In particular, commercial edtech businesses have profited
from venture capital investment and rapidly escalating customer demand
(Williamson, 2017). As previous research by Lingard and colleagues
(2017) found, many schools rely on commercial edtech products, as state
departments neither have the expertise or capacity to manage in-house
development of the services now required to administer and run schools.
Much research has reflected how the commercial edtech industry has
been able to make considerable inroads into ‘privatising’ schooling.
Yet, over the course of the Covid-19 pandemic we have seen the rapid
growth of new market opportunities alongside investor enthusiasm and
proposals for increased spending through ‘pay for results’, ‘impacting
investing’ or ‘social bond’ schemes. For example, exam proctoring and
AI-based home tutoring have suddenly emerged as key to the success of
online learning from home. These products have been developed, trialled
and were waiting for their opportunity to be taken up on a larger scale.
One way to exemplify this further is to imagine the changes that might
     163 Cohen, D. (2020, April 16). Who will control post-covid online k-12: the perils of rushing into a market-led future.
         Critical Geographies of Education. http://www.critgeoed.com/blog/who-will-control-the-future-of-online-k-12-the-
         perils-of-rushing-into-market-led-infrastructure


                                                                                                                                59

                 Education International



     occur to the shadow education industry moving forward. Traditionally,
     parents have enrolled their children in out-of-school tutoring centres or
     organised private sessions, often for a considerable cost (Bray & Lykins,
     2012). The shift towards an online subscription with a personalised AI
     tutor, is more cost effective, and a more convenient way to provide extra
     support for student learning.
     It is clear from our mapping exercise that the edtech industry is banking
     on future profitability. While many businesses are offering their products
     and services for free during the pandemic, their operating costs are
     actually increasing. As explained by Khan Academy CEO, they’ve seen
     usage of their platform increase three times the normal 18 million visits
     per month, and users are spending twice as long on the site. This means
     that Khan Academy’s server costs would jump from $7 million to $20
     million per year to meet the growing demand. The business plan adopted
     by the edtech industry is summarised as ‘support now, sell later’, where
     businesses are expanding their services now in the hope they might lock
     schools and parents into long term subscriptions once the pandemic
     ends.164 However, this plan is uncertain, as while usage of free edtech
     products and services has grown dramatically, there has been a decrease
     in the use of paid offerings. The long-term ‘cost’ of free access needs
     to be tracked into the future to understand whether schools were the
     short term beneficiaries of edtech social responsibility, or whether the
     edtech industry was able to capitalise on the dramatic growth of paid
     subscriptions.


     6.         Digital and data risks
     A range of potential risks associated with digital technologies and the
     collection of student data emerge from the proliferation of edtech during
     the pandemic.
     Expanding the role of AI in education. With schools closed, AI has
     been presented as an alternative mode of education – as an automated
     educator that can act in the absence of the classroom teacher. However,
     introducing AI into education raises a number of key issues. These
     include: the narrowing of education goals, privileging certain types of
     knowledge and information over others, such as subjects that can be
     easily tracked and translated into data; the use of AI for guiding students
     towards the skills valued by edtech producers risks framing education
     through market logics; and the automation of decision-making which

          164   Wan, T. (2020, April 7). Traffic is booming for online education providers. But so are costs. EdSurge. https://www.
                edsurge.com/news/2020-04-07-traffic-is-booming-for-online-education-providers-but-so-are-costs


60

     Commercialisation and privatisation in/of education in the context of Covid-19


could produce discriminatory outcomes as the result of biased training
data.165 Moreover, AI in education is framed by discourses of personalised
learning that are highly contested. Although personalised learning has
a long history in educational philosophy, its contemporary meaning is
inflected by particular understandings of learning as the individualised
pursuit of ‘mastery’ enacted primarily through adaptive software rather
than in interpersonal dialogue and relations with others.
Buggy software. Amplifying the use of new technologies in education
poses the risk that students and teachers may be exposed to ‘buggy’ or
faulty software. In one notable example during the Covid-19 crisis, an
online assessment application failed to upload examination responses
entered by students, forcing them to retake the assessment at a later
date.166
Data protection, privacy, consent and exploitation. The rush to embed
edtech in education also surfaces issue of data protection, privacy,
consent, and the exploitation of student data. A coalition of organisations
led by Privacy International produced an open letter to policy makers,
data protection authorities, and providers worldwide, regarding rapid
technology adoption for educational aims, which drew attention to the
risk of monitoring, profiling, data mining, marketing, or manipulation for
commercial exploitation.167 At the same time, the World Privacy Forum
issued a report finding that many schools routinely fail to obtain informed
consent when signing students on to edtech services, a situation
exacerbated by the rush to utilise edtech for remote teaching.168 Reports
in the US suggested that, at the outset of school closures, existing data
privacy laws were waived at the level of whole districts to ensure schools
could use digital learning platforms.169 We can see these waivers as
instances of ‘coronawashing’ principles of privacy and data security, with
potentially long-term consequences for how data protection and privacy
are enacted in educational institutions.




  165 Chamuah, A. & Ghildiyal, H. (2020, April 16). AI and education in India. Tandem Research.
      https://tandemresearch.org/publications/ai-and-education-in-india
  166 Wan, T. (2020, May 14). Online AP testing glitches force some students to retake exam. EdSurge.
      https://www.edsurge.com/news/2020-05-14-online-ap-testing-glitches-force-some-students-to-retake-exam
  167 Privacy International. (2020, April 24). Schools and Covid-19. PI. https://privacyinternational.org/news-
      analysis/3709/schools-and-covid-19
  168 Dixon, P. (2020, April 14). Without consaent: An ananlysis of student directory information practices in U.S. schools,
      and impacts on privacy. World Privacy Forum. https://www.worldprivacyforum.org/2020/04/without-consent/
  169 Lieberman, M. (2020, March 26). Massive shift to remote learning prompts big data privacy concerns. Education
      Week. https://www.edweek.org/ew/articles/2020/03/26/massive-shift-to-remote-learning-prompts-big.html


                                                                                                                               61

           Education International



     7.    Ownership and control
     Commercial activities in education during Covid-19 also raises issues over
     ownership and control. First is the issue of data ownership. Technology
     companies and education businesses that collect data from the activities
     of educators and students can be said to ‘own’ the data they collect.
     This gives them unprecedented advantage to leverage the data for the
     purposes of generating insights that can be used for product refinement,
     new product creation, and the generation of further commercial gain.
     The teachers and students that use these technologies can, in turn, be
     understood to be performing invisible and unrecognised labour for the
     owners of the platforms, infrastructures and services.
     The second issue is then that of curriculum control. Organisations as
     varied as Google, Pearson, Oak National Academy, ISTE and Yuanfudao
     have in many ways established control over what gets taught during
     school closures. This raises old questions about how content, knowledge
     and skills were selected for inclusion in these emergency Covid curricula.
     It also raises the question about whether such curricula might be
     continued into the future. Commercial organisations, and the multisector
     coalitions and partnerships that have supported their expansion in
     education during the pandemic, are driven by their own idiosyncratic
     visions of education and by their institutional values. The education
     company Pearson prioritises particular skills that it considers valuable.
     The OECD treats the purpose of education as the increase of ‘human
     capital’ for the economy. Amazon, Google and Microsoft, as well as
     tech philanthropies the Gates Foundation, Schmidt Futures and Chan
     Zuckerberg Initiative, all share the belief that ‘personalised’ learning –
     enacted through adaptive learning platforms that ‘tailor’ access to content
     in order to optimise the ‘mastery’ of the individual – is preferable to the
     idea of a collectively pursued curriculum. This particular configuration
     of personalised learning is the nexus point of both data ownership and
     curriculum control, as those organisations that have the capacity to
     process student data also have the capacity to control their access to
     curriculum content and knowledge via adaptive software.

     8.    Research priorities
     The key issues arising from the mapping of commercialisation and
     privatisation of education in the context of Covid-19 point to a number of
     urgent research priorities:
       • Studies of the extent to which schools maintain their use
            of education technologies employed during periods of

62

    Commercialisation and privatisation in/of education in the context of Covid-19


      lockdown, and how this affects key schooling practices
      and teachers’ work including curriculum delivery,
      pedagogy, assessment and learning management.
•     Sustained research on the promotion, roll-out and uptake
      of educational technologies and associated practices during
      the pandemic in low-income countries and international
      development contexts, including detailed focus on development
      agencies and multilateral organisation influence.
•     Ongoing analysis of country-specific policy evolution and
      mutation in relation to commercialisation, privatisation
      and education technology as nations revert to in-school
      education, including studies of key government priorities
      and private sector involvement in shaping policy agendas,
      and attention to cross-border ‘travelling policy’ dynamics.
•     Research on emerging (re)configurations of the global
      education industry in different local and geographical sites,
      tracing out new public-private partnerships, new sources
      of influence and expertise, and new priorities regarding
      education technology (e.g. edtech ‘evidence’ and ‘what
      works’ programs) in the context of diverse policy spaces.
•     Studies on global technology companies’ increasing involvement
      in public education (Microsoft, Google, Amazon) focusing
      on their competition for structural dominance of school
      infrastructure, data collection and processing practices.
•     Research on emerging priorities in education technology
      development, particularly AI and safeguarding and
      social-emotional learning technologies that have
      expanded in reach during the pandemic, and their
      impact on school practices over the longer term.
•     Detailed analysis of financial models and practices,
      particularly venture capital, philanthropy and impact
      investing, which have been developed and expanded to
      fund education technology development and dissemination
      during the crisis, and their long-term implications.
•     Research on the emerging phenomenon of private online home
      tutoring as a new instantiation of the ‘shadow education industry’,
      exploring parents’ motivations to maintain subscriptions to
      fee-paying edtech products and their producers’ strategies of
      marketing to and profiting from parent consumer markets.

                                                                                     63

           Education International



     9.    Recommendations for education unions
     While it is difficult to know the long-term effects of Covid-19 on education
     policy and practice, it seems likely that 2020 will be referred to as catalyst
     for ongoing change in schooling. Already, there have been numerous
     reports of the work intensification teachers have experienced in adapting
     learning to online instruction. Similarly, our mapping shows there has been
     a dramatic uptake in commercial resources by educators to help them
     achieve this continuity of learning. Previous research cautions us that
     the commodification of education can come at the expense of teacher
     autonomy (e.g. over what aspects of the curriculum are valued, taught
     and assessed), professionalisation (e.g. limited opportunities to enact
     professional judgement), and work conditions (e.g. work intensification,
     diminished wellbeing, devaluation of the profession, decreased salary and
     loss of jobs). Responding to these implications must sit within a context
     of ongoing debate concerning the appropriate intensity of edtech in
     schooling, the regulatory environment that surrounds the use of these
     products and services, the equity issues that influence the ability of all
     students to access these, and the enhancement (rather than diminishment)
     of teachers’ professional capacities. In many ways, the recommendations
     we would proffer to education unions are no different to the work they
     already collectively do to support the teaching profession in varied ways.
     We would summarise these into three broad categories – research,
     advocacy and promotion – each of which we detail further below.
     Research. Education unions have a key role to play in supporting
     education research agendas. Funding local, national, and in the case of
     Education International, global, research projects is a hugely beneficial
     way to generate evidence-informed knowledge about commercialisation
     and privatisation in schooling. However, it’s not the only way. There
     are opportunities for education unions to partner more closely with
     researchers and research institutions, and provide in-kind contributions
     to these partnerships. Education union officials have unique insight
     into the challenges faced by their teacher members, and can work
     productively with researchers to establish meaningful research agendas.
     Furthermore, they have the resources to best promote research to their
     teacher members and encourage their participation in relevant projects.
     From our experience, education unions are also skilled at disseminating
     research findings to broad publics through political, social and member
     related advocacy. We would encourage all education unions to develop
     research partnerships, set common agendas and work together to
     generate knowledge that can be used to advocate for policies and
     practices that will enhance the rights of teachers and students.

64

    Commercialisation and privatisation in/of education in the context of Covid-19


Advocacy. As we have outlined in this report, despite the dangers of
edtech, it has enabled schools and teachers to provide continuity of
learning to students that otherwise may have been lacking without the
influence of the private sector in education. However, we see the role
of education unions as being a critical voice of reason within this rapidly
evolving environment, with a key role to play in ensuring that issues are
challenged and debated, without allowing them to be uncritically adopted
into mainstream schooling. Education International’s mantra, ‘students
before profit’ is an example of the critical advocacy work that needs
to be carried out by education unions armed with research-informed
knowledge. This advocacy work might start with teachers in schools and
jurisdictional governments, but increasingly it also means working in
coalitions of public and private actors. There is a growing need to ensure
that commercial actors are increasingly accountable for the public that
they are servicing – largely on a for profit basis. We would suggest that all
education unions look for opportunities to be more involved in education
coalitions, from the local to the global level, so that they might pose
challenging questions, and demand considered action – as Education
International has already begun to do through its participation in the
UNESCO Global Education Coalition. While it is difficult to see a future
for education that doesn’t have elements of commercialisation and
privatisation, it is possible to imagine better regulation and oversight of
private interests.
Promotion. At the beginning of this report we mentioned it was
important not to adopt a dystopic view of the future of schooling from
this research. More productive would be to establish a shared vision
for the future of schooling. This vision might include what sort of
private sector influence is useful in schooling, what further regulations
are required, what student equity of opportunity looks like, and the
role of teachers. Education unions might then work with a range of
stakeholders to assist in the development of this vision. We would argue
that standing against commercialisation and privatisation in all its forms
is unproductive. Instead, having an understanding of what is acceptable,
and indeed, necessary, might assist education unions to promote a
shared vision that all education stakeholders can get behind.




                                                                                     65

           Education International




     Conclusion

     We began this report reflecting on Klein’s (2007) notion of ‘disaster
     capitalism’, and throughout we have explored a variety of ways in which
     commercial opportunities have been identified and sought in education
     by different actors and networks during the Covid-19 crisis. In many ways
     Klein’s conceptualisation is a useful way to understand commercialisation
     and privatisation of public education through edtech during the
     emergency of global school closures and home-based learning. From
     what we have observed, large edtech companies, edu-businesses and
     technology corporations are investing in taking new and existing products
     to scale during the pandemic in order to capitalise into the future. But
     we hope the report has also offered a nuanced perspective, identified
     some of the subtle ways in which commercialisation and privatisation are
     playing out, and acknowledged that without private sector involvement
     many millions of students worldwide may have lost access to education
     altogether during the pandemic.

     Furthermore, many of the organisations we have identified in the report
     are not themselves commercial actors. What we have observed is a
     huge effort to create multisector coalitions, public-private partnerships
     and networks in which commercial actors play a key part, and we have
     seen the development of a range of interdependencies between various
     organisational types, from multilateral policy influencers, wealthy tech
     philanthropies and government departments to global technology
     corporations, edu-businesses, venture capital investors, and public
     institutions. We believe we have begun documenting a particular
     instantiation of the global education industry and the dynamics of
     networked governance in education at a particularly complex point in
     time, prompting us to return to longstanding concerns about the role of
     transnational private authority in education systems:

        The shift in authority from the state to private actors might make
        sense on efficiency grounds, but also entails the undermining of
        democratic control of public education. Moreover, the professional
        autonomy and rights of teachers, as well as the local control of
        communities over their schools, may be undercut by the shift
        in authority to private, corporate, and global actors. Similarly,
        it is reasonable to question whether the shift in accountability

66

     Commercialisation and privatisation in/of education in the context of Covid-19


    structures away from democratic modes to corporate/consumer
    arrangements reshapes the orientation of education as a public
    good.170

We wonder whether we are seeing a particular evolutionary leap and
mutation in the global education industry and in the ways that the
private sector and public education intersect. It is unclear yet whether
the activities documented in this report will lead to lasting long term
changes, or whether on their return schools will abandon the new edtech
resources they adopted during the crisis to prioritise social and physical
proximity. Certainly, in the medium term period of hybrid schooling
models in many countries, we can expect edtech to continue playing a
major role in public education, and efforts to embed it for even longer
will requires sustained attention and analysis. The commercial activities
we have documented in this report indicate an emerging tension that
will be at the core of any debates about education after the pandemic
has passed: a tension over the very purposes of education, and of
what knowledge or skills should be taught in schools to achieve those
purposes. Will this continued shift in authority to private actors further
undermine democratic control of public education?




  170 Verger, A. (2016, March 14). The rise of the global education industry: some concepts, facts and figures.
      Education International. https://www.ei-ie.org/en/woe_homepage/woe_detail/4850/the-rise-of-the-global-
      education-industry-some-concepts-facts-and-figures#gsc.tab=0


                                                                                                                  67

         Education International




     References

       Au, W. & Lubienski, C. 2016. The role of the Gates Foundation and the philanthropic sector in
           shaping the emerging education market: Lessons from the US on privatisation of schools
           and education governance. In Verger, A., Lubienski, C. & Steiner-Khamsi, G. (eds). The Global
           Education Industry, 27-43. London: Routledge.

       Ball, S. J. (2012). Global education inc: New policy networks and the neo-liberal imaginary.
            Routledge.

       Ball, S. J., & Junemann, C. (2012). Networks, new governance and education. Policy Press.

       Ball, S. J., & Youdell, D. (2008). Hidden privatisation in public education. Brussels: Education
            International.

       Burch, P. (2009). Hidden markets: The new education privatisation. Routledge.

       Bulger, M., McCormick, P., & Pitcan, M. (2017). The legacy of in Bloom. Data &Society Research
           Institute. https://datasociety. net/pubs/ecl/InBloom_feb_2017. Pdf.

       Bray, M., & Lykins, C. (2012). Shadow education: Private supplementary tutoring and its
           implications for policy makers in Asia (No. 9). Asian Development Bank.

       Estrada-Jiménez, J., Parra-Arnau, J., Rodríguez-Hoyos, A., & Forné, J. (2017). Online advertising:
           Analysis of privacy threats and protection approaches. Computer Communications, 100,
           32-51.

       Fontdevila, C., & Verger, A. (2019). The political turn of corporate influence in education: A
           synthesis of main policy reform strategies. In Researching the global education Industry (pp.
           47-68). Palgrave Macmillan, Cham.

       Gunter, H. M., & Hall, D. (Eds.). (2017). Corporate elites and the reform of public education. Policy
          Press.

       Hogan, A., & Thompson, G. (2017). Commercialisation in education. In Oxford research
          encyclopedia of education. Oxford University Press.

       Junemann, C. & Olmedo, A. (2019). In sheep’s clothing: Philanthropy and the privatisation of the
           ‘democratic’ state. Brussels: Education International.

       Klein, N. (2007). The shock doctrine: The rise of disaster capitalism. Macmillan.

       Lindh, M. and Nolin, J. (2016). Information we collect: surveillance and privacy in the
           implementation of Google apps for education. European Educational Research Journal, 15
           (6), 644–63.

       Majeed, A., Baadel, S., & Haq, A. U. (2017, January). Global triumph or exploitation of security
          and privacy concerns in e-learning systems. In International Conference on Global Security,
          Safety, and Sustainability (pp. 351-363). Springer, Cham.

       Peck, J. & Theodore, N. (2015). Fast Policy: Experimental statecraft at the thresholds of
           neoliberalism. London: University of Minnesota Press.

68

Commercialisation and privatisation in/of education in the context of Covid-19


Reckhow, S. (2012). Follow the money: How foundation dollars change public school politics.
    Oxford University Press.

Reiser, D. 2018. Disruptive philanthropy: Chan-Zuckerberg, the limited liability company, and
    the millionaire next door. Florida Law Review, 70(5), 921-970.

Riep, C. B. (2019). Fixing contradictions of education commercialisation: Pearson plc and the
    construction of its efficacy brand. Critical Studies in Education, 60(4), 407-425.

Royal Society. (2017). Data management and use: Governance in the 21st century—A British
   Academy and Royal Society project.

Saltman, K. 2018. The Swindle of Innovative Education Finance. Minneapolis: University of
    Minnesota Press.

Santori, D., Ball, S.J. & Junemann, C. 2016. Financial markets and investment in education. In
    Verger, A., Lubienski, C. & Steiner-Khamsi, G. (eds). The Global Education Industry, 193-210.
    London: Routledge.

Sellar, S., & Hogan, A. (2019). Pearson 2025: Transforming teaching and privatising education
     data. Brussels: Education International.

Steiner-Khamsi, G., & Waldow, F. (Eds.). (2012). World yearbook of education 2012: Policy
    borrowing and lending in education. Routledge.

Verger, A., Fontdevila, C., & Zancajo, A. (2016). The privatisation of education: A political economy
    of global education reform. New York: Teachers College Press.

Verger, A., Lubienski, C., & Steiner-Khamsi, G. (Eds.). (2016). World yearbook of education 2016:
    The global education industry. London: Routledge.

West, D. M. (2012). Digital schools: How technology can transform education. Brookings
   Institution Press.

Williamson, B. (2017). Big data in education: The digital future of learning, policy and practice.
     London: Sage.

Williamson, B. (2019). New power networks in educational technology. Learning, Media and
     Technology, 44(4), 395-398.

Williamson, B. (2020). Making markets through digital platforms: Pearson, edu-business, and
     the (e)valuation of higher education. Critical Studies in Education. https://doi.org/10.1080/17
     508487.2020.1737556

Williamson, B., Eynon, R. & Potter, J. (2020). Pandemic politics, pedagogies and practices: digital
     technologies and distance education during the coronavirus emergency. Learning, Media
     and Technology, 45(2), 107-114.

Willis, J. E., Slade, S., & Prinsloo, P. (2016). Ethical oversight of student data in learning analytics:
     a typology derived from a cross-continental, cross-institutional perspective. Educational
     Technology Research and Development, 64(5), 881-901.

Wyatt-Smith, C., Lingard, B., & Heck, E. (2019). Digital learning assessments and big data:
   Implications for teacher professionalism. UNESCO Education Research and Foresight
   Working Papers. https://unesdoc.unesco.org/ark:/48223/pf0000370940


                                                                                                            69

     Education International




70

                                                                           This work is licensed under a
                                                                           Creative Commons Attribution-
                                                                           NonCommercial-ShareAlike 4.0
                                                                           International License.
                                                                           (CC BY-NC-SA 4.0)



                                                                   You are free to:
                                                                    Share — copy and redistribute the
                                                                      material in any medium or format
                                                                    Adapt — remix, transform, and build
                                                                      upon the material

                                                                   Under the following terms:

                                                                    Attribution — You must give
                                                                       appropriate credit, provide a link to
                                                                       the license, and indicate if changes
                                                                       were made. You may do so in any
                                                                       reasonable manner, but not in
                                                                       any way that suggests the licensor
                                                                       endorses you or your use.
                                                                    NonCommercial — You may not
                                                                      use the material for commercial
                                                                      purposes.
                                                                    ShareAlike — If you remix, transform,
                                                                      or build upon the material, you must
                                                                      distribute your contributions under
                                                                      the same license as the original.




The views, recommendations and conclusions in this study are those of the author/s, unless explicitly stated
otherwise, and are not necessarily endorsed by Education International. All reasonable precautions have
been taken to verify the information contained in this publication. However, the published material is being
distributed without warranty of any kind, either expressed or implied. Neither Education International nor
any person acting on its behalf may be held responsible for the use which may be made of the information
contained therein.

Education
International
Research




                                                            Head office
                                                            5 bd du Roi Albert II

     Commercialisation
                                                            1210 Brussels, Belgium
                                                            Tel +32-2 224 0611

     and privatisation
                                                            headoffice@ei-ie.org
                                                            www.ei-ie.org
     in/of education in                                     #unite4ed

     the context                                            Education International represents


     of Covid-19
                                                            organisations of teachers and other
                                                            education employees across the globe. It
                                                            is the world’s largest federation of unions
                                                            and associations, representing thirty million

     Ben Williamson                                         education employees in about four hundred
                                                            organisations in one hundred and seventy
     & Anna Hogan                                           countries and territories, across the globe.
                                                            Education International unites teachers and
     July 2020                                              education employees.




            This work is licensed under a Creative   Published by Education International - July 2020
            Commons Attribution-NonCommercial-
            ShareAlike 4.0 International License.    ISBN        978-92-95109-97-1 (PDF)
            (CC BY-NC-SA 4.0)                        Cover picture: Education International