KOLOKIUM
                                                                             Jurnal Pendidikan Luar Sekolah
HAYAT SCHOOL MANAGEMENT                                                      http://kolokium.ppj.unp.ac.id/
                                                                             Jurusan Pendidikan Luar Sekolah

IN FACILITATING STUDENTS’                                                    Fakultas Ilmu Pendidikan
                                                                             Universitas Negeri Padang
LIFE-LONG LEARNING NEEDS                                                     Sumatera Barat, Indonesia

                                                                             Volume 12, Nomor 2, Tahun 2024
                                                                             DOI: 10.24036/kolokium.v12i2.907

                                                                             Received 10 Oktober 2024
                                                                             Approved 12 November 2024
                                                                             Published 30 November 2024


Desika Putri Mardiani1,7, Wiryo Nuryono2, Citra Fitri Kholidya3, Windasari4, Mallevi
Agustin Ningrum5, Sherrin Nurlita Widya6
1,2,3,4,5,6 Manajemen, Fakultas Bisnis, Hukum dan Ilmu Sosial, Universitas Muhammadiyah Sidoarjo
7 desikamardiani@unesa.ac.id




ABSTRACT
The desire to learn is a human nature, moreover, the complexity of learning needs in society is getting
higher in this digital era which is aimed at meeting the needs of the time. Hayat School, a non-formal
education institution rooted in divine values, facilitated education programs for students and the
surrounding society. It starts from elementary school, society education, and vocational education that
is conducted to fulfill their learning needs. This research aims to analyze the management of Hayat
School in facilitating the life-long learning needs of Students and society and to describe the
dimension of the enablers and barriers in the management. The research method used a qualitative
approach with interviews, questionnaires, participation observation, and documentation as collection
data techniques. The result is that Hayat School continues to make improvements to the managers,
educators, and programs so they can manage creatively, some collaborations with local and
international partners, and also involves surrounding society to participate in conducting society
education comprehensively and make efforts in providing education programs for the community so
they can be empowered and independent. Thus, Hayat School has managed a learning program that
can meet the learning needs of students.

Keywords: Management, Hayat School, Life Long Learning Needs, Student, Society


INTRODUCTION
         This disruptive era is a phenomenon that illustrates the rapid shift in life systems due
to the unstoppable development of science and technology. Life in this era affects the need
for human learning which is increasingly complex because it adapts to the acceleration that is
rolling. Humans as social creatures who are easy to adjust to changes, will never be separated
from the desire to learn because learning is an natural human need that consciously or
unconsciously, must be fulfilled as a form of response to the stimulus received by the five
senses owned.
        Meanwhile, learning does not see the dimensions of space or time. Learning can
occur anytime and anywhere, throughout human life, so formal schools are no longer the
only place to increase the capacity, knowledge, and skills needed. As a form of adaptation
to the acceleration of changes that occur, non-formal education is present as a solution to
the need for learning, because the reach of non-formal education is not limited. The rapid
changes that occur should also be balanced with the quality of the organization of nonformal

268                                                                                     KOLOKIUM
                                                         Jurnal Pendidikan Luar Sekolah Volume 12 (2)
education that is qualified and able to keep up with the current changes. The quality
standards for organizing activities at non-formal education institutions must have work
procedures and governance as well as procedures that apply to be able to carry out their
education (Setiyadi, Segara, & Sinambela, 2020), Therefore, non-formal education is not only
an alternative education, but an awareness of learning that is inherent in every community.
         Hayat School as a form of educational institution that implements a non-formal
education unit, in the form of PKBM (Community Learning Activity Center), presents
solutions to lifelong learning needs based on future needs, namely the need for skills in
operating digital utilities, having social skills, entrepreneurial skills and still having morals taught by
religion. Hayat School declares itself as an educational institution that is rooted in divine
values, has a vision to be a solution and answer daily problems, and has an impact on
students and the environment.
         This goal is supported by the opinion of (Crockett, Jukes, & Churches, 2011), that
literacy skills alone are not enough to equip our next generation for the 21st century. For
learners to survive in the coming era driven by automation technology, abundance, and
access to global labormarkets, today's learners need to be trained to think independently and
think creatively as a key and main role. The set of skills needed in the 21st century includes
problem-solving, creativity, analytical thinking, cooperation and collaboration skills,
communication skills, and ethics and accountability.
         Implementing the concept of life-long learning which refers to the learning process that
occurs throughout a person's life from birth to the end of life, Hayat School is oriented
towards the knowledge, skills, and dispositions that are useful to retain, and why they should
be retained (Kwek et al dalam Chang & Kidman, 2022). In maintaining these references, it is
necessary to examine the combination of knowledge, skills, behaviors, and beliefs that will
be spun into a continuous and meaningful learning whole.
          In the Ministry of Education and Culture’s Strategic Plan 2015-2019 as stated in
(Mursalim, 2019), The government sets development priority agenda 8 (nawacita 8), which is
to revolutionize the nation's character, where education is not only interpreted as a means of
transferring knowledge and skills, but also as a lifelong learning process to shape good
character, develop individual potential and talents, strengthen intellectual power and mind,
instill an independent spirit and independent spirit. In line with this, Hayat School is managed
by various activity programs in order to deliver students to become the best version of
themselves. By cooperating with various other related institutions both at home and abroad,
Hayat School presents a non-formal education program that is solutive with dedicated
professional management, so that various kinds of achievements of students reflect the
the success of managing education at Hayat School.
         The problem formulation in this study was identified as follows : 1) as follows: 1)
How is the management of Hayat School in facilitating life long learning needs?; 2) How is the
implementation of the activity program at Hayat School?; 3)How are the supporting and
inhibiting dimensions in the process of implementing activities at Hayat School?
          Referring to the study of the problem formulation above, this research aims to: 1)
Explain the management of Hayat School in its efforts to facilitate the life long learning needs of
students; 2) Analyzing the program of activities held by Hayat School; 3) Describing the
supporting and inhibiting dimensions of the Hayat School institution in trying to provide life
long learning needs for students. This research tries to describe the management of a non-

D P Mardiani, W Nuryono, Citra F Kholidya, Windasari, M A Ningrum, SN Widya                    269
Hayat School Management in Facilitating Students’ Life-Long Learning Needs
formal education institution called Hayat School which has met the criteria of community
education consisting of learning citizens, learning resources, learning leaders (facilitators),
learning facilities, learning places, learning funds, learning yeast (stimulus), learning groups,
learning programs and learning outcomes.
         The management of Hayat School has been carried out by involving managers and the
community. This can be seen from the work program created by forming four divisions,
namely 1) inclusion and therapy division; 2) extracurricular division; 3) Kampung Kreasi; 4)
Hayat School Research Center Division. Each division has each excellent program whose
orientation is education for all. The purpose of each division reflects a strong lifelong
education ecosystem, which is to build an open educational ecosystem vibe, opening
opportunities for the community to explore the resources around them.
         In relation to the context of the state of the art, this research is very interesting to do
because it has a level of novelty in examining the provision of non-formal education services
that are in accordance with their nature as humans and God's creatures, visionary of future
needs, and strive to provide educational services that lead students to become the best
version of themselves. In addition, there are still not many educational institutions, especially
nonformal, that provide educational services starting from family education, to holistic
education that involves the community. So this research examines non-formal education
which is holistically able to facilitate lifelong education for the whole community.
         Through a variety of visionary activities, both at home and abroad, creating a non-
formal fun learning atmosphere, up-to-date, and still teaches noble morals according to
religious teachings based on the andragogy approach (Creswell, 2023).
         Life School Management is supported by research (Setiyadi et al., 2020) which
describes the procedures, work procedures and management of educational institutions
consisting of planning, implementation, work plans, supervision, leadership and management
information systems. Referring to PP no 4 of 2022, education management includes
standards for infrastructure, content and process, educational assessment, education
personnel, management and financing (Ahmad, 2022).


METHOD
         This research uses a descriptive qualitative method, which is research that displays
the data as it is without manipulation or other treatment processes to present a complete
picture of an event to expose and clarify the phenomena that occur by describing
the variables studied (Rusandi & Muhammad Rusli, 2021).
       The location of this research is on Jl. Cikoang No.48, Cigending, Kec. Ujung
Berung, Bandung City, West Java 40611. The subjects in this research are the founders,
managers, facilitators, and students at Hayat School.
        The main data collection technique used was in-depth interviews with research
subjects (founders, managers, facilitators) totaling 28 people, with details of 9 men, and 19
women, to explore data regarding the management of Hayat School starting from planning
to program evaluation (Creswell, 2023). Then interviews with students related to the process
of implementing the activity program implemented at Hayat School. Followed by
nonparticipatory observation to describe the types of activity programs that are carried out

270                                                                               KOLOKIUM
                                                   Jurnal Pendidikan Luar Sekolah Volume 12 (2)
along with the implementation process. Documentation study was continued to explore
information related to data supporting the management of Hayat School in facilitating the life
long learning needs of students.
        In analyzing the data, researchers used the braided method, namely through the
stages of collecting data, data reduction, data presentation, and verification which were
intertwined and carried out continuously in the data collection process (Sutopo, 2001 in
(Mardliyah, Yulianingsih, Surya, & Putri, 2021). and below is an illustration of data analysis
with an intertwined model:

                                          Figure 1
                                    Braid Analysis Model




          The figure above shows the stages in the data analysis stage by Miles and Huberman,
which when applied in this study are: 1) Data collection / data collection stage; 2) Data
reduction, namely the raw data from the research results are presented entirely to sort out
which ones are needed for research, along with that, the necessary data is also simplified; 3)
verification stage or conclusion drawing stage, namely researchers make conclusions based
on the data that has been obtained through the research process. If complementary data is
still needed, researchers can return to data collection and repeat the process as in the initial
stage, until the final conclusion is obtained, that way, the research results become sharper,
deeper and more reliable (Riyanto & Oktarianda, 2023)..


DISCUSSIONS
Hayat School Management
         Hayat School was founded by the owners named M. Syahril Iskandar and Sri Haryati
with a high commitment to finding the essence of education, rooted in religious and divine
values, so that it has an impact on the formation of students' identity with character. Hayat
School has a permit to stand as a non-formal institution in the form of a Community
Learning Activity Center (In Indonesia it is called PKBM) by implementing educational
management that meets the study of three levels of human behavior, namely individual
behavior, group behavior, and organizational behavior (Kisbiyanto, 2014). Hayat School
means school of life, which implies an educational ecosystem, freeing structured exploration
according to the vision and mission of the institution, as well as considering the talents and

D P Mardiani, W Nuryono, Citra F Kholidya, Windasari, M A Ningrum, SN Widya                   271
Hayat School Management in Facilitating Students’ Life-Long Learning Needs
interests of students and the uniqueness of each individual, to form superior graduates who
can take part in society by carrying noble values.
        With the slogan "Learning to Live Well", the researcher is interested in studying
further the implementation of activities at Hayat School. The slogan sounds like a simple
sentence, but it has deep meaning if it is interpreted in a life that continues to experience
endless development. Information from Mrs. Sri, founder and owner of the institution,
During the era of digitalization in all sectors, Hayat School seeks to place humans as
creatures that are irreplaceable with all the sophistication that exists, because of the presence
of heart and conscience, as well as reason so that they can lead civilization. That way,
humans are not oppressed, but instead can follow and control their role in the future.
          Efforts to realize Good Life Learning are reflected in the management of the
institution. Starting from planning to evaluating the activity program, followed by
infrastructure, then instructors (human resources). In an interview with the owner and
founder of Hayat School, Mrs. Sri Haryati, there are several divisions formed, namely 1)
inclusion and therapy division; 2) extracurricular division; 3) creation village division; 4)
Hayat School Research Center division. Each division is managed nicely by qualified human
resources, making the series of activities carried out very useful.
         Starting with the Inclusion and Therapy Division that facilitates and assists children
and adolescents with special needs to still be able to fulfill their role as part of society. Hayat
School aims to be a friendly institution for people with special needs by providing consulting
services for the growth and development of children with special needs, as well as early
detection of the growth and development of children with special needs. The special needs
that are the focus of services at Hayat School's inclusion and therapy division include
ADHD, autism, down syndrome, slow learner, and so on by applying the pull out class
method which is integrated in every learning process by providing additional learning classes
so that these special children will get more attention to their abilities and specificities
          In managing the inclusion and therapy division, various activities are implemented
that also adjust to the current moment, such as the Ramadhan project which is held during
the month of Ramadan, student camps, Cerdik (Stories from Inclusion), and many others. In
managing this division, Hayat School is serious about compiling the curriculum it uses, along
with the planning to evaluation that is carried out. Each division is made social media so that
it is easier for the public to obtain broad information about various kinds of things about
learning programs at Hayat School. For the inclusion and therapy division, the social media
provided is Instagram with the account @hayat_inklusitherapy and can be accessed at the
following link: https://www.instagram.com/hayat_inklusitherapy/#.

                                          Figure 2
                 The display of Hayat School’s in Inclusion Therapy Division
                                                Gambar 1.

272                                                                                 KOLOKIUM
                                                     Jurnal Pendidikan Luar Sekolah Volume 12 (2)
         The next work program is called the Extracurricular Division. This division focuses
on providing space for the interests and talents of students in accompanying their learning
process to fulfill the need for lifelong learning. This activity is actively carried out
every Saturday and Sunday and is divided into several groups or clubs, namely the Filmmaker
Club, Theater Club, Comic Club, Graphic Designer Club, Traditional Music Club,
Photography Club, and Journalism Club. By providing these extracurricular activities,
students are given ample opportunities to add skills that will be useful in the future. In
addition, extracurricular activities can improve the soft skills of teenagers in
controlling themselves and their emotions so that they are more directed. This is in line with
research from (Brown, Sellers, & Caines, 2023) explain that adolescents’ involvement in
extracurricular activities can increase high self-control, due to the variety of activities and also
the intensity of meaningful experiences.
          In addition, extracurricular activities encourage individuals' self-efficacy to be higher
and encourage leadership (Liu, Chen, Zhao, Wang, & Zhang, 2023). Self-efficacy is one's
belief in one's own ability and capability to achieve certain goals (Florina & Zagoto, 2019).
Keyakinan ini yang sangat berpengaruh terhadap pencapaian prestasi (Rustika, 2012). This
belief is very influential on achievement (Studi et al., 2012). Adolescents who have high self-
efficacy tend to be more willing to engage in leadership activities, and are more likely to
emerge as leaders.
         The third division at Hayat School is the Kampung Kreasi Division. Kampung
Kreasi is one of the laboratories and also a place to implement Hayat School's work program
which is located at Jl. Sasaklemah, Pasirwangi, Kec. Ujung Berung, Bandung City, West Java
40618. Kampung Kreasi is a manifestation of community-based education by maximizing
the resources available in the village. Various activities involve the entire Pasirwangi Village
community, starting from the type of activity, planning, implementation, to evaluation. This
point fulfills the indicators of community education, as well as an effort to empower the
community. Some of the types of activities that Hayat School assists are goat farming and
milking, Sekolah Ulin (play school), and others.
          The fourth division at Hayat School is the Research Center which focuses on
research. This research is certainly related to the development that will be carried out based
on the results of research conducted on various kinds of activity programs that have been
implemented. This division also functions as quality assurance, to keep the quality of
institutions good and make them better from time to time.
        The management system implemented at Hayat School prioritizes the quality of
superior human resource managers, diverse, up-to-date, and sensitive to the needs of the
community. This is what makes it grow bigger and develop rapidly.
Life-Long Learning Needs of Students
          Learning is a right and an obligation individually and collectively. Life-long learning
is not just a concept, but something that is inherent in human beings. As long as humans
live, learning will be carried out in various forms, according to individual and group needs. In
accordance with the objectives of the Institute, Hayat School as a the center of society
learning (PKBM) that concentrates, intensifies, and coordinates services for various learning
activities, community training, especially non-formal education programs and equality
according to the existence and needs of students.

D P Mardiani, W Nuryono, Citra F Kholidya, Windasari, M A Ningrum, SN Widya                    273
Hayat School Management in Facilitating Students’ Life-Long Learning Needs
         Sebagai sebuah hal yang tidak terpisahkan dari kehidupan, life long learning
menjadikan hidup lebih bermakna. Bersamaan dengan cepatnya laju perubahan Masyarakat,
teknologi yang tidak terputus untuk ditingkatkan, berbagai peristiwa di dunia, ilmu
pengetahuan yang tidak akan terhenti, menjadikan life long learning semakin nampak
eksistensinya (Brink, 2023). Ruang lingkup dalam penelitian ini mengkaji kebutuhan akan life
long learning para peserta didik, dengan memperhatikan rentang usia.
         Kwek,dkk dalam (Chang & Kidman, 2022) menyatakan bahwa pembelajaran
sepanjang hayat bukan hanya pembelajaran yang dikenyam mulai dari lahir hingga dewasa,
melainkan tentang sesuatu yang dipertahankan, dan mengapa pengetahuan, keterampilan dan
disposisi tentang sesuatu tersebut dipertahankan. Pembelajaran sepanjang hayat terjadi di
lingkungan informal, sekolah, dan juga di luar sekolah (Banks et al., 2011).
          In facilitating lifelong learning, the system designed at Hayat School is governed by
the provision of learning programs that are relevant to the needs of the target learners. Some
of the main aspects of the need for lifelong learning include: 1) academic skills; 2) digital
literacy; 3) critical thinking and problem solving; 4) creativity and innovation; 5)
communication skills; 6) adaptability and resilience; 7) cultural competence; 8)
selfmotivation; 9) ethical and social responsibility; 10) life and career skills: 1)
Academic skills include basic skills that will be needed on an ongoing basis, such
as the ability to read, write, calculate, interpret and analyze. These skills are certainly obtained
in the PAUD learning program to the pursuit of package A, B, C / equivalent and
homeschooling at Hayat School. 2) On the learning needs of digital literacy, computer
learning programs are provided for primary to secondary students so that they are
accustomed to living among technological sophistication, assignments for students have also
involved the use of the latest information technology skills. In addition, digital literacy is not
just about being app literate, but also being skilled in using digital tools, understanding
current issues spread in social media, and also the ability to control themselves in their use.
3) Critical thinking and problem solving aspects are applied in various learning activities,
namely with game strategies, case studies, mind mapping, and so on. 4) The aspect of
creativity and innovation is applied by training students to think creatively, have positive
initiatives and innovate in various fields of learning, then an art and craft program is
scheduled to explore making handicrafts. In addition, there is a creative entrepreneur school
to prepare young people to learn entrepreneurship since adolescence. 5) Communication
skills are trained to students (school age from elementary to high school) by implementing
the Cambridge curriculum for English learning, then implementing Thursday English Day.
In addition, communication skills are also provided using Bahasa Indonesia in each learning
agenda by practicing the courage to express opinions, public speaking such as giving
speeches, presenting work and assignments, lecturing, leading meetings, and others. 6)
Adaptability and resilience are given to students by implementing hiking and
nature exploration programs, Hayat Venture, scouting activities, and so on. These activities
are able to train adaptability and survive in the midst of the wild, stimulate motor and
sensory, and good energy circulation occurs. 7) Cultural competence, applied by Hayat
School by creating the Kampung Kreasi program, namely community-based education. The
activity is to maximize the resources available in the local village by increasing the potential
of the area, utilizing existing natural and human resources, holding a village farm program,
and so on. 8) Self-motivation is provided through various types of activity programs
including parenting, family outbound, student camp, socialization, taste flow, and family
moments as reflection and evaluation with parents. In this way, Hayat School involves all

274                                                                              KOLOKIUM
                                                  Jurnal Pendidikan Luar Sekolah Volume 12 (2)
aspects of the learning program to participate in building a good environment for lifelong
learning. 9) Ethical and social responsibility indicates significant steps in maintaining the
surrounding environment and utilizing resources, both human and natural, in a
proportionate and responsible manner. In fulfilling this responsibility, Hayat School
organizes several activities such as the Foundation Qurban during Eid al-Adha, community
service activities and jointly maintaining a clean and healthy environment. 10) Life and
career skills are carried out by holding internships for high school students, creativepreneur
as a preparation program to become a generation of young entrepreneurs, community
service both at home and abroad, leadership and talent Bootcamp, self-management and
career development, tallents mapping for high school students. Each experience is able to
improve the skills and quality of each learner to be able to build life skills and the process
towards a career.
         The presence of Hayat School creates a humanist school by implementing an
authentic curriculum that is tailored to each student's uniqueness and characteristics.
Through the creative arrangement of daily, semester, and annual activities, Hayat School
builds the basic, unique, and superior competencies of its students. According to Hayat
School, the civilization of life begins with Tawhidullah, five natural (fitrah) activities,
activation of SMA core values, and solid partnerships.
        Hayat School provides a complete program of activities, ranging from preschool-age
to adult communities. The pre-school program is called PAUD, primary
school at the level of pursuing package A, secondary school at the level of pursuing
package B and C, to adults in the community around Hayat School. At the secondary
school level, there are main programs: a) personalized curriculum; b) meet the pro; c)
Hay-Art Festival; d) Creativepreneur Camp; e) Hayatventure Camp; f) Hayat-style
Internship; g) coaching; h) National volunteering; i) public speaking; j) story telling
and content creation.
          While the excellent programs facilitated by Hayat School for high school
programs are self-management and career development, talents mapping, physical
exercise (swimming, archery, martial arts), aqil baligh (youth development), tahfidz
and tadabbur al qur'an, broadcasting class, survival camp, industry visits, Mojang
jajaka (femininity and masculinity classes), business laboratory, and meet the pro.
          In addition, the totality of Hayat school administrators in managing
institutions is also reflected in the enthusiasm of the founders and owners of the
Institute in creating an educational community by forming study groups for school
managers, both formal and non-formal. To be able to organize an educational
trustworthy institution, explore the real goals.
        All of these programs are Hayat School's efforts to become a center of
knowledge and skills for the entire community. Open in general both from
information on the type of activity program and the diversity of learning outcomes.
Hayat School is rich in ideas for maximizing human resources, namely students.
Through brilliant activities and under the new times.

D P Mardiani, W Nuryono, Citra F Kholidya, Windasari, M A Ningrum, SN Widya                     275
Hayat School Management in Facilitating Students’ Life-Long Learning Needs

                                           Figure 3
                               Kegiatan Literasi Anak Usia Dini




         To measure Hayat School's ability to facilitate the need for lifelong learning,
researchers used indicators of success. In line with (Hairani, 2018) which explains the
European Commission as a representative of 35 European countries that have
reviewed indicators of success for lifelong learning that play an important and
strategic role with the following objectives: 1) to describe the present situation; 2) to
quantify the aims that have been set; c) to provide continuous updates on progress
towards certain objectives or; 4) to provide insights into which factors might have
contributed to achieving results.
        Furthermore, the commission is broken down into 15 indicators listed in the
following table:
                                               Table 1.
               Indicators of success for lifelong education (European Commission)
Area A : Skills, competencies and attitudes        Area B : Acces and Paticipation
    1. Literacy                                         6. Access to Life-long Learning
    2. Numeracy                                         7. Participation in Lifelong Learning
    3. New Skills in the Learning Society
    4. Learning-to-learn Skills
    5. Active Citizenship Cultural and Social
         Skills
Area C: Resources fo Lifelong Learning             Area D: Strategies and System Development
    8. Investment in Lifelong Learning                  11. Strategies of Lifelong Learning
    9. Educators and Training                           12. Coherence of Supply
    10. ICT in learning                                 13. Counseling and Guidance
                                                        14. Accreditation and Certification
                                                        15. Quality Assurance

276                                                                                   KOLOKIUM
                                                       Jurnal Pendidikan Luar Sekolah Volume 12 (2)
                                           Table 2.
                   Analysis of Lifelong Education Indicators at Hayat School
No            Lifelong
             Education
                                           Description of Programs at Hayat School
             Indicators

Area A : Skills, competencies and attitudes
1.     Literacy                 Theseskills are implemented in educational programs ranging from
                                pre-school to high school levels. Literacy skills at Hayat School focus
                                not only on the ability to read the written words, but also the ability
                                to understand and train sensitivity to problems, situations, and
                                subsequent solutions.
2      Numeracy                 These skills are implemented in education programs
                                ranging from pre-school to high school
3.     New Skills in The The learning process is structured in a personalized
       Learning Society         curriculum, school of creative based on fitrah , Live in
                                Hayat, Seminars, parent camps, etc
4.     Learning      to-Learn The learning process in each activity program fosters new
       Skills                   knowledge and skills and develops existing skills
5.     Active      Citizenship Social interactions formed from various joint activities at Hayat
       Cultural and Social School influence the way they think and act
       Skill
Area B : Acces and Paticipation
6.     Access to Life-long It is very easy for the public to participate in the learning
       Learning                 programs that Hayat School has provided, namely by accessing
                                the website and social media. In addition, the owner often
                                creates forums for non-formal school founders to continue to
                                spread enthusiasm and focus on establishing learning programs
                                / educational institutions
7.     Participation         in Every activity involves students and the surrounding
       Lifelong Learning        community, according to the target of the activity program.
Area C: Resources for Lifelong Learning
8.     Investment            in The interest, consistency, and innovation of both
       Lifelong Learning        managers and learners that are carried out to enliven
                                activities are a form of long-term investment to form a
                                community. In addition, the managers' competence and the
                                learners' learning outcomes are useful provisions for other
                                subsequent abilities.
9.     Educators           and The total number of teachers and managers is 30 people. With
       Training                 high competence and fighting spirit, this number is
                                proportional to handle the various activities organized by Hayat
                                School.
10.    ICT in learning          Communication technology used in Hayat School
Area D: Strategies and System Development
11.    Strategies of Lifelong The strategies used include utilizing social media (Instagram:
       Learning                 hayat.sch.id;     website:      https://hayat.sch.id/),       effective
                                communication with all parties, to activity programs that adjust
                                to the needs of the Community.
12.    Coherence of Supply      Various kinds of activity programs that have been carried out
                                are carried out regularly, continuously, and consistently. There
                                are daily, weekly, monthly and annual activities that
                                characterize Hayat School.

D P Mardiani, W Nuryono, Citra F Kholidya, Windasari, M A Ningrum, SN Widya                   277
Hayat School Management in Facilitating Students’ Life-Long Learning Needs
13.   Counseling          and   Hayat School provides guidance and counseling rooms in every
      Guidance                  line of learning activity programs that function to assist with the
                                problems experienced. This is to minimize the disturbance
                                caused by the problem and also functions to provide direction
                                to students.
14.   Accreditation       and   Hayat School
      Certification             PKBM (Lembaga Hayat School) has been nationally
                                accredited with the title of
15.   Quality Assurance         Hayat School memiliki tim penjamin mutu yang terus melakukan
                                perbenahan pada internal Lembaga, sekaligus menjadi tim research
                                and development untuk upaya perbaikan secara berkala


         Various activity programs and also innovations in Hayat School have fulfilled
these fifteen indicators. This proves that Hayat School has been able to facilitate the
surrounding community members to provide education that is useful for them. Hayat School
embodies a form of non-formal and informal education as a planned joint effort so that
students and the community can develop religious spiritual strength, self-control, personality,
intelligence, noble character, and skills that students and society need (AF, Nurfadilah, &
Hilman, 2022).

                                           Figure 4
                                    Hydro Therapy Activities




           The various learning programs organized by Hayat School certainly do not
just appear without a background, but because of the needs of the community that
will have a good impact if facilitated. In line with the opinion (Burkett, 1960) that "in
practice, of course, programs would not be set up in advance but would emerge as
individually employed programs of adult education in a developing pattern of lifelong
learning. Such a program is never a "planned" program but always a "planning" program
adjusting to the dynamic needs of an individual in a dynamic culture.
Specific courses are listed only for illustration and are in no sense projections of
programs which might emerge in planning." In this way, lifelong education is present
as a solution to learning needs that adjust to changes that occur dynamically. In line with
that, Hayat school has successfully provided direction for learners to update, improve their
skills, knowledge and competencies throughout life to be able to adapt to changes (Nurhayati
& Lahagu, 2024).

278                                                                                 KOLOKIUM
                                                     Jurnal Pendidikan Luar Sekolah Volume 12 (2)

CONCLUSSION
           Hayat School is a non-formal education institution that focuses on creating
learning activities as a basic thing (fitrah) in life. With a varied program of activities and in
accordance with the needs of the community, Hayat School has fulfilled fifteen indicators of
successin meeting the needs of students' lifelong education, both in terms of current and
future skills.


REFERENCES
AF, M. A., Nurfadilah, K., & Hilman, C. (2022). Pendidikan Luar Sekolah dalam Kerangka
     Pendidikan Sepanjang Hayat. Jurnal Inovasi, Evaluasi Dan Pengembangan Pembelajaran
     (JIEPP), 2(2), 90–95. https://doi.org/10.54371/jiepp.v2i2.216
Ahmad, A. (2022). Standar Pengelolaan Program Pendidikan Nonformal Dari Perspektif
    Akreditasi. Sustainable Jurnal Kajian Mutu Pendidikan, 5(1), 42–49.
    https://doi.org/10.32923/kjmp.v5i1.2403
Banks, J. A., Au Kathryn H, Ball, A. F., Bell, P., Gordon, E. W., Gutierezz, K. D., … Zhou,
    M. (2011). Learning In and Out of School in Diverse Environments (Life-Long, Life -
    Wide, Life - Deep). Medical Teacher, 33(8), 686–687.
    https://doi.org/10.3109/0142159X.2011.600102
Brink, S. (2023). Long Life Learning. 63–78. https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-031-35335-2_4
Brown, W., Sellers, B. G., & Caines, M. (2023). Deciphering the Relationship Between
    Extracurricular Activities and Delinquency Among Teenage Youth. American Journal of
    Criminal Justice, 48(6), 1372–1393. https://doi.org/10.1007/s12103-023-09736-6
Chang, C. H., & Kidman, G. (2022). Life-long and life-wide education for our sustainable
    future. International Research in Geographical and Environmental Education, 31(2), 85–88.
    https://doi.org/10.1080/10382046.2022.2057895
Creswell, J. W. (2023). Library of Congress Cataloging in Publication Data. In Sage
     Publications. https://doi.org/10.7591/9781501721144-016
Crockett, L., Jukes, I., & Churches, A. (2011). Literacy Is NOT Enough: 21st Century Fluencies for
     the Digital Age. 232.
Florina, S., & Zagoto, L. (2019). Efikasi Diri dalam Proses Pembelajaran. Jurnal Review
      Pendidikan Dan Pengajaran, 2(2), 386–391.
Hairani, E. (2018). Pembelajaran Sepanjang Hayat Menuju Masyarakat Berpengetahuan.
     Jurnal Pemikiran Keislaman Dan Kemanusiaan, 2(1), 355–377.
Hayat School – Belajar Hidup Yang Baik. (n.d.).
Kisbiyanto. (2014). Manajemen Kebijakan Sumber Daya Manusia Pendidikan: Studi Kasus di
     STAIN Kudus. Edukasia : Jurnal Penelitian Pendidikan Islam, 9(1), 129–146.
Liu, Y., Chen, Y., Zhao, C., Wang, X., & Zhang, R. (2023). Every Little Makes a Mickle :
      the Role of Extracurricular Activity Event in Leadership Emergence. Current Psychology,
      42(31), 26888–26903.

D P Mardiani, W Nuryono, Citra F Kholidya, Windasari, M A Ningrum, SN Widya                    279
Hayat School Management in Facilitating Students’ Life-Long Learning Needs
Mardliyah, S., Yulianingsih, W., Surya, L., & Putri, R. (2021). Jurnal Obsesi : Jurnal Pendidikan
    Anak Usia Dini Sekolah Keluarga : Menciptakan Lingkungan Sosial untuk Membangun
    Empati dan Kreativitas Anak Usia Dini Abstrak. 5(1), 576–590.
    https://doi.org/10.31004/obsesi.v5i1.665
Mursalim. (2019). Kebijakan dan Strategi: Membangun Interkoneksi antara Pendidikan
    Formal, Non-Formal, dan Informal dalam Konteks Pendidikan Sepanjang Hayat di
    Indonesia. Rabit : Jurnal Teknologi Dan Sistem Informasi Univrab, 1(1), 2019.
Nurhayati, S., & Lahagu, Si. E. (2024). Pendidikan Sepanjang Hayat. Jambi.
Riyanto, Y., & Oktarianda, T. A. (2023). Metodologi Penelitian Kualitatif dan Kuantitatif. Surabaya:
     Unesa University Press.
Rusandi, & Muhammad Rusli. (2021). Merancang Penelitian Kualitatif Dasar/Deskriptif dan
     Studi Kasus. Al-Ubudiyah: Jurnal Pendidikan Dan Studi Islam, 2(1), 48–60.
     https://doi.org/10.55623/au.v2i1.18
Rustika, I. M. (2012). Efikasi Diri: Tinjauan Teori Albert Bandura. Buletin Psikologi, 20(1), 18–
     25.
Setiyadi, B., Segara, R. M., & Sinambela, R. H. (2020). Prosedur dan Tata Kerja Pendidikan
      Non Formal. Learning Community : Jurnal Pendidikan Luar Sekolah, 4(2), 12–19.
      https://doi.org/10.19184/JLC.V4I2.21288