Journal of Education and Development; Vol. 6, No. 3; July, 2022
                                                                             ISSN 2529-7996 E-ISSN 2591-7250
                                                                                          Published by July Press


       An Investigation About the Challenges of Adopting Performance
             Management in Educational Leadership in England
                                                 Zixuan Yang1
1
    University of Manchester, Manchester, UK
Correspondence: Zixuan Yang, University of Manchester, Manchester, UK.


Received: June 10, 2022                  Accepted: July 9, 2022                Online Published: July 12, 2022
doi:10.20849/jed.v6i3.1230                              URL: https://doi.org/10.20849/jed.v6i3.1230


Abstract
Since the Department for Education and Employment (DfEE) introduced the performance management system
in general education in September 2000, it has become an important component in education reform in England.
The goal of this study is to explore the challenges that teachers and principals may encounter in adopting
performance management in educational leadership in England. This study finds that performance management
provides a single, unfair mechanism for teacher evaluation, and within this framework, teachers’ personal
development is largely ignored. And for leaders, performance management results in a lack of leadership
responsibility. This study argues that performance management is not conducive to the development of schools
in England.
Keywords: educational leadership, performance management, England education, school principal
1. Introduction
In the 1980s, because the power of education management was excessively concentrated in the central and local
governments, England schools seriously lacked the freedom of running schools (Birol, 2009). The limited use of
funds and teacher training, which made it difficult to carry out their own construction and development. After
1988, the England government took some effective measures to expand the autonomy of schools, primarily, the
performance management, introducing competition mechanism and encouraging schools to join the market
(Birol, 2009).
Performance management was formally introduced in England education system in September 2000 (Jones,
2013), and can be broadly defined as a system that offers all kinds of evaluations to measure the extent to which
the organizational aims are achieved (Birol, 2009). However, it evolves into the over-emphasis of students’
academic performance in England schools in recent years and the endless competition between schools (Dean,
2002). It could be suggested that the introduction of the performance does not contribute to a significant
improvement to the school in England, by contrast, it is widely criticized as a rather problematic leadership way
(Bottery, 2000). In particular, performance management is described as overly emphasizing measurable
performance and ignoring values that should underpin the relationship between school leadership and school
staff (Tahira et al., 2013).
In response, this paper critically examines the challenges that the schoolteachers and leaders faced in
performance management in England schools. The overall structure of the study takes the form of three sections.
This paper begins with definitions and examples of performance management in England schools. Then the
paper critically evaluated the problems in performance management in England. Finally, this assignment gives
some recommendations and conclusions of these school challenges in educational leadership.
Furthermore, I am very interested in performance management, which is a product of neoliberalism. However,
compared with China, England is a fully capitalist country, and performance management has been adopted more
completely. There are also more relevant studies in England, so it is more appropriate to study performance
management in England than in China.
2. Defining Performance Management in School Leadership
Performance management is a teacher assessment and management system that uses the school as a unit and
incorporates teacher team management, evaluation, and professional development (Harry, 1999). It closely links
performance evaluation with personal training and human resources. Sander et al. (2000) propose that

                                                       67

http://jed.julypress.com               Journal of Education and Development                 Vol. 6, No. 3; July, 2022


performance management emphasizes teachers’ periodic evaluation results and ignores process and teacher
evaluation in performance management has overly relied on the school leaders’ subjective judgment. Besides,
according to Reeves (2002) that the characteristics of an organization that practices performance management
are linked to performance requirements to pay. It means performance management is also a standard to decide
the salary of teachers. Performance management affects not only organizational performance but also people’s
motivation (Harry, 1999). Likewise, Reeves (2002) also mention that performance management is a specific set
of activities executed by supervisors and pointed at impacting the practices. School performance management is
intimately associated with human resource development.
Specifically, practicing performance management in England school generally has three stages, including
planning, monitoring and review. Planning performance management is the first thing. Jones (2013) identified
that planning invites each teacher to discuss and agree with objectives with his /her team leader and then to
record these in an individual plan. It means that through the meeting, school leaders and teachers can determine a
new round of performance goals and future development opinions. Secondly, monitoring means the team leader
keeps progress under review throughout the cycle, taking any supportive action needed (Jones, 2013). In other
words, all schools lesson observations should be accordance with the regulations and then have a clear aim and
specific focus. The last stage of the whole performance management cycle is review. In particular, the yearly
evaluation will be integrated with setting goals for the next cycle of performance management. This annual
performance evaluation focuses on the previously set goals, discusses the teacher’s achievements and the
teacher’s next development needs (Dean, 2002).
3. Problems of Performance Management in School Leadership in England Schools
3.1 For Teachers
Tahira et al. (2013) point out that teacher plays a very important role in managing performance management in
England school. There are many responsibilities of teachers in performance management. Dean (2002) maintains
that teachers usually offer constructive feedback on performance and identify their professional areas for
development and improvement. For teachers, performance management focuses more on the effectiveness of
teaching, monitoring and evaluation to improve the quality of teaching (Cook, 2021). Therefore, they can benefit
students, teachers, other staff, and the school community. However, few writers have been drawn on any
systematic research into teachers’ real feelings and whether performance management is effective or not for
teachers in England Schools.
However, adopting performance management in schools tend to generate two issues for teachers. One is that
school is hard to ensure the equality of teacher evaluation by using performance management. The excessively
single evaluation model of performance management, which takes students’ academic performance as the only
evaluation criterion (Cardno and Middlewood, 2001). The model does not truly reflect the ability and
contribution of teachers. Some scholars argue that schools in England need a much more comprehensive and
detailed evaluation system and different kinds of teachers should have different standards to evaluate (Jones et
al., 2006). In general, currently, teachers in England are skeptical about whether performance can achieve the
goal of promoting teachers’ career development and students’ academic progress as this system ignores the
students’ real feedback and does not pay more attention to teachers’ performance and self-review. Additionally,
identified that students’ class performance is also needed to be considered an important factor in measuring
teachers’ abilities. Macfarlane (2015) stated that when using performance management, schools have much less
focus on students’ status during courses while student performativity does play as a mirror image of teacher
performativity.
According to Harry (1999), performance management included teachers and school leaders, but the main object
of performance management is teachers, so teachers’ attitude towards this system determines the effectiveness of
this system in England. However, an uncomprehensive evaluation system undermines the fairness of teacher
evaluation and further weakens teacher morale.
Another issue in performance management is that the development and goal of teachers are ignored by school
leaders. Locke (2015) found that in education specifically, ‘performance’ has come to form the basis of teacher
reviews. In England, a performance management system is the most prominently systematic evaluation of
teachers’ teaching achievements. According to the results of the performance evaluation, the school uses
suggestions for the reward and promotion of teachers to the school board (Cook, 2021). For unqualified teachers,
the school conducts another evaluation to decide whether to continue to employ them or not.
However, such a single indicator ignores the differences among individual teachers. Under the framework of
performance management, teachers are not regarded as a part of the whole organization with autonomy, but only

                                                       68

http://jed.julypress.com                Journal of Education and Development                 Vol. 6, No. 3; July, 2022


as machines to achieve teaching results. Motivating teachers who perform poorly only through punishment
mechanisms, without proper support, does not help teachers’ development and is not conducive to the progress
of the school. Jones et al. (2006) pointed that in performance management, poor performance teachers may have
low expectations of students, resulting in their poor relationship with students, poor relationship with colleagues
and losing motivation.
To conclude, school leaders should take account of teachers’ real achievements and set a goal to ensure they can
have a reason to work hard. If teachers have poor development and lack energy, the school will be increasingly
worse than before.
3.2 For School Leaders
Leadership is identified as important in performance management in school. Once the performance goal is set,
the leader’s job is to help the staff achieve the goal (Bottery, 2000). In the process of achieving the goals of the
faculty and staff, principals and other leaders should be good instructors, maintain timely and sincere
communication with the faculty and staff, then continuously guide the faculty and staff to improve performance.
Leadership is essential to any notion of development, growth, change or improvement (Cardno and Middlewood,
2001). The process of performance management is the process of management by school leaders in England.
Nevertheless, under the framework of performance management, principals are also unable to conduct leadership
practices well. First, too single evaluation ways can lead to a lack of responsibilities for leaders. Bottery (2000)
argued that in performance management, most of the school leaders fail to identify and analyze the specific
challenges and aspirations of the school. It means after implementing the performance management, school
headers did not target the school development and teachers’ expectation. Whilst school leaders use student exam
grades to be the only measure of teacher performance, even school development.
Second, performance management provokes or exacerbates the conflict between leaders and teachers, as the
process of evaluation in performance management is problematic. For instance, school leaders often do not
demonstrate respect and understanding of the teachers in the review stage of performance management. It will
decline the satisfaction degree of teachers and then exacerbate conflicts with school team leaders. The challenge
for team leaders is to achieve empathy without becoming so intimately involved that personal feelings mask or
distort the teacher’s view (Locke, 2015).
Cardno and Middlewood (2001) propose that since implementing the performance management, team leaders
need to be aware of the emotional reactions of their colleagues to being observed teaching and to the review
meeting. It means they also need to be good at reading other people’s emotional behavior. Cardno and
Middlewood (2001) maintain that performance management has strong emotional content. In other words, this
undoubtedly puts a lot of work on the principal and team leaders in a school. They should be aware of the
emotional reactions of teachers to be observed teaching and the review of the meeting. If school leaders do not
concern about the teachers, it will bring a negative impact on the school. This also hinders the development of
the school itself. They also pointed out that emotional fluctuations may occur among the whole teacher group
due to the resignation of one teacher. The result is in the spread of negative emotions in the unit which forms a
barrier for the healthy development of the unit (Cardno and Middlewood, 2001).
Besides, Tahira et al. (2013) pointed out that in the mechanism of performance management, the evaluation of
teachers is usually not completed by the principal alone and usually involves an evaluation team composed of
some middle and senior leaders, and this part of the leadership is likely to have the dual responsibilities of
teachers and leaders at the same time. Hence, more distinct management of teachers has led to an increase in
conflict between administrators and the management in school management.
Finally, the typical performance management behavior of linking performance to rewards and punishments also
challenges leaders to execute. Like Jones (2013) suggests that the school incentives are mainly realized in the
form of bonuses, but this single reward will often have a counterproductive effect. For example, some teachers
will explicitly refuse to work in schools and positions with few rewards. Cook (2021) also believes that in school
performance management, to use a single way of rewarding money, which is likely to lead to teachers gradually
losing the sense of achievement brought by work. It also greatly weakens the incentive value of the teachers’
work. In other words, once in the face of the temptation of the market economy, the teacher’s professional pride
will fall sharply which causes the teacher to work inertia. It could also lead to the teacher’s sudden departure
job-hopping phenomenon (Harry, 1999).
Next, in the practice of teacher performance evaluation, team leaders are often reluctant to provide individual
teachers with performance evaluation feedback in the England schools. School leaders give performance reports

                                                        69

http://jed.julypress.com               Journal of Education and Development                 Vol. 6, No. 3; July, 2022


that are either poorly applied or irrelevant to other systems (Reeves, 2002). This will make the assessment a
mere formality, and in the long run, lead to teachers’ distrust and indifference to the assessment. They do not
know which of their behaviors are expected by the school or do not conform to the organizational goals of the
school, even do not know how to improve. Such assessment is only the form and process of words to make
teachers fear assessment (Jones, et al., 2006), and ultimately leads to teachers’ performance worse than before.
4. Recommendations for School Leaders
The above discussion revealed that adopted performance management in England schools tends to be
problematic for both school leaders and teachers. Hence, for school leaders, it is necessary to develop a set of
leadership and management mechanisms that are more conducive to the schools (Reeves, 2002). Primarily, a
comprehensive evaluation system for teachers is on the top concern. To be specific, there are many factors that
shall be considered in the teaching evaluation system, for example, the class performance of students, the
feedback of students, the degree of teacher’s own progress. Besides, individual differences among teachers
should also be factored into the evaluation process.
Furthermore, the process and mechanism of evaluation and feedback need to be clear and be open to teachers. In
performance management, the results of assessments are often seen as having little contribution promoting
teacher and school development and realizing achievement, as the actual bearer of the assessment results, the
teacher, cannot identify what shall be improved from the assessment results (Reeves, 2002). Therefore, in
addition to making the evaluation mechanism open to the evaluators, school leaders also need to pay attention to
the communication and feedback with teachers after evaluation (Bottery, 2000), helping teachers understand
where career activities fall short and where they can improve. In addition, providing encouragement and
psychological support to underperforming teachers after the assessment can also help to strengthen teachers’
sense of belonging (Dean, 2002). In other words, providing both kinds of supports can help develop good
relationships between leaders and teachers.
Finally, attaching importance to the training and development of teachers and focus on personal professional
vision and development of teachers. One of the main criticisms of performance management is that it ignores the
development of the teacher, which not only leads to a loss of professional enthusiasm for the teacher but also is
not conducive to the progress of the school. For the specific practice to facilitate teachers’ professional
development, besides, Birol (2009) suggested that it is necessary for leaders to set an appropriate and
professional framework for guiding the development of teachers. The framework can be negotiated and settled
with leaders, experts, and teachers themselves and could include regular training for professional skills, feedback
from leaders, students and colleagues or seminars among teachers for experience sharing and reflection. Setting
facilitating teachers’ professional development into the formal agenda of school improvement can not only
promote the teachers’ professional skills but also enhance collective cohesion which can improve teachers’ sense
of belonging and avoid job burnout (Sander et al., 2000).
5. Conclusion
In general, performance management in England schools, as many previous studies indicated, is problematic for
both school leaders and teachers. First, for teachers, performance management influences the equity of teachers’
evaluation. In other words, various factors cannot be considered under performance management and the
mechanism is subjective and largely rely on the leaders’ perspective. Specifically, the problem of performance
management for teachers is that the evaluation index is single, which cannot truly reflect the ability of teachers.
Besides, the career development of teachers has been largely ignored under performance management.
uncomprehensive and untransparent evaluation mechanisms and neglect of teachers’ personal development can
lead to a lack of teachers’ sense of belonging and enthusiasm for their profession. More importantly, it will
undermine the relationship between teachers and leaders in the school.
Secondly, as performance management overemphasizes students’ academic achievement, it is likely that school
leaders attach no importance to anything other than grades, such as teacher development, school values, etc. In
other words, performance management may lead to a lack of leadership accountability for school leaders.
Besides, practicing performance management is also challenging for school leaders. For instance, increasing the
conflict between leaders and teachers, and leaders are more likely to feel much more stressed than before. Hence,
it not only reduces leaders’ efficiency but also declines teachers’ satisfaction.
Hence, in order to promote school improvement and provide an equal and effective evaluation system, it is
necessary for school leaders in England to develop a better leadership style. Specifically, adopting a
comprehensive teacher evaluation system that concerns various factors is urgent. Besides, making the process
and mechanism of evaluation and feedback clear and open to teachers. Finally, setting facilitating teachers’

                                                        70

http://jed.julypress.com                 Journal of Education and Development                    Vol. 6, No. 3; July, 2022


professional development into the formal agenda of school improvement is also critical.
References
Birol, C. (2009). A comparative analysis of teachers’ perceptions of emotional intelligence and performance
     management in the secondary schools of the TRNC. Procedia, Social and Behavioural Sciences, 1(1),
     2600-2605.
Bottery, M. (2000). Education policy and ethics. New York: Continuum.
Cardno, C. E. M., & Middlewood, D. (2001). Managing teacher appraisal and performance: a comparative
    approach. London: RoutledgeFalmer.
Cook, W. (2021). Does funding targeted at improving the management of schools increase school performance
    over the long term?. Economics Letters, 204, 920-989.
Dean, J. (2002). Implementing performance management: a handbook for schools. London: RoutledgeFalmer.
Harry, T. (1999). Performance management: The new realities. School Leadership & Management, 19(1),
    138-152.
Jones, J. (2013). Performance management for school improvement: a practical guide for secondary schools.
    London: Routledge.
Jones, J., Jenkin, M., & Lord, S. (2006). Developing effective teacher performance. London: Paul Chapman.
Locke, K. (2015). Performativity, Performance and Education. Educational Philosophy and Theory, 47(3),
    247-259.
Macfarlane, B. (2015). Student performativity in higher education: converting learning as a private space into a
    public performance. Higher Education Research and Development, 34(2), 338-350.
Reeves, J. (2002). Performance management in education: improving practice. London: Paul Chapman.
Sander, P., Stevenson, K., King, M., & Coates, D. (2000). University students’ expectations of teaching. Studies
    in Higher Education, 25(3), 309-323.
Tahira, Z. M., Hassana, N. A., & Othmana, N. (2013). Performance measurement for extracurricular
     management at secondary school level. Procedia, Social and Behavioural Sciences, 81, 438-442.



Copyrights
Copyright for this article is retained by the author(s), with first publication rights granted to the journal.
This is an open-access article distributed under the terms and conditions of the Creative Commons Attribution
license (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/).




                                                           71