education policy analysis
archives
A peer-reviewed, independent,
open access, multilingual journal




                                                                                       Arizona State University

             Volume 28 Number 143            September 28, 2020              ISSN 1068-2341



      Principal Evaluation in the United States: A National
            Review of State Statutes and Regulations
                                             Sarah R. Nielsen
                                                    &
                                             Alyson L. Lavigne
                                            Utah State University
                                                United States

Citation: Nielsen, S. R., & Lavigne, A. L. (2020). Principal evaluation in the United States: A
national review of state statutes and regulations. Education Policy Analysis Archives, 28(143).
https://doi.org/10.14507/epaa.28.5097

Abstract: The growing recognition of how much principals matter for student learning and how they
make a difference has fueled the need to ensure that effective principals are leading every school. One
way to achieve this is through principal evaluation, which has experienced significant changes in the
last decade. We conducted a national exploratory study (50 states) to document the trends in and
provide an illustration of the current situation of states’ principal evaluation policies and practices.
Using literature-based themes, our analysis of state statutes and regulations revealed that a majority of
states have policies requiring at least one literature-based element. Only four (8%) states had statutes
and/or regulations regarding all elements of principal evaluation that have been noted in the
literature. Student achievement measures were the most common component—required in 66% of
states. In addition, most states required principal evaluators to be trained and principals to be
evaluated annually. We propose that future research focuses on the validity and reliability of measures
and models used for principal evaluation—two aspects rarely addressed in principal evaluation
policies—to ensure principal performance is meeting the needs of students, teachers, and schools.
Keywords: principal evaluation; administrator evaluation; educational policy; supervision
Journal website: http://epaa.asu.edu/ojs/                           Manuscript received: 10/16/2019
Facebook: /EPAAA                                                       Revisions received: 3/3/2020
Twitter: @epaa_aape                                                             Accepted: 3/4/2020

Principal Evaluation in the United States                                                      2


Evaluación principal en los Estados Unidos: Una revisión nacional de los estatutos y
regulaciones estatales
Resumen: El creciente reconocimiento de cuánto importan los directores para el aprendizaje de los
estudiantes y cómo marcan la diferencia ha alimentado la necesidad de garantizar que los directores
eficaces dirijan todas las escuelas. Una forma de lograrlo es a través de la evaluación principal, que ha
experimentado cambios importantes en la última década. Realizamos un estudio exploratorio
nacional (50 estados) para documentar las tendencias y proporcionar una ilustración de la situación
actual de las principales políticas y prácticas de evaluación de los estados. Usando temas basados en
la literatura, nuestro análisis de los estatutos y regulaciones estatales reveló que la mayoría de los
estados tienen políticas que requieren al menos un elemento basado en la literatura. Solo cuatro (8%)
estados tenían estatutos y / o regulaciones con respecto a todos los elementos de la evaluación
principal que se han señalado en la literatura. Las medidas de rendimiento estudiantil fueron el
componente más común, requerido en el 66% de los estados. Además, la mayoría de los estados
exigían que los evaluadores principales fueran capacitados y que los directores debían ser evaluados
anualmente. Proponemos que la investigación futura se concentre en la validez y confiabilidad de las
medidas y modelos usados para la evaluación del director — dos aspectos que rara vez se abordan
en las políticas de evaluación del director — para asegurar que el desempeño del director satisfaga
las necesidades de los estudiantes, maestros y escuelas.
Palabras clave: evaluación principal; evaluación del administrador; política educativa; supervision

Avaliação principal nos Estados Unidos: Uma revisão nacional dos estatutos e
regulamentos estaduais
Resumo: O crescente reconhecimento de quanto os diretores são importantes para o aprendizado
dos alunos e como eles fazem a diferença alimentou a necessidade de garantir que diretores eficazes
conduzam todas as escolas. Uma maneira de conseguir isso é por meio da avaliação principal, que
passou por mudanças significativas na última década. Conduzimos um estudo exploratório nacional
(50 estados) para documentar as tendências e fornecer uma ilustração da situação atual das principais
políticas e práticas de avaliação dos estados. Usando temas baseados na literatura, nossa análise dos
estatutos e regulamentos estaduais revelou que a maioria dos estados tem políticas que exigem pelo
menos um elemento baseado na literatura. Apenas quatro (8%) estados tinham estatutos e / ou
regulamentos relativos a todos os elementos de avaliação principal que foram observados na
literatura. As medidas de aproveitamento dos alunos foram o componente mais comum - exigido em
66% dos estados. Além disso, a maioria dos estados exigia que os avaliadores principais fossem
treinados, e que os diretores fossem avaliados anualmente. Propomos que pesquisas futuras se
concentrem na validade e confiabilidade das medidas e modelos usados para a avaliação dos
diretores - dois aspectos raramente abordados nas políticas de avaliação dos diretores - para garantir
que o desempenho dos diretores atenda às necessidades dos alunos, professores e escolas.
Palavras-chave: avaliação principal; avaliação do administrador; política educacional; supervisão

Education Policy Analysis Archives Vol. 28 No. 143                                                    3


                                                Introduction
         Research demonstrates that principals hold an essential position within schools (Babo &
Ramaswami, 2011; Fullan, 2014; Leithwood et al., 2004; Wallace Foundation, 2013). Their
responsibilities span all facets of the school, from student achievement to lunch rooms and teacher
effectiveness to building maintenance (Ch et al., 2017). Ingrained in every fiber of the school,
principals can have great impact on school outcomes, results, and reputation (Garza et al., 2014;
Leithwood et al., 2004) when they attract, retain, and support effective teachers and create working
conditions that foster teacher success (Boyd et al., 2011; Ladd, 2009; see Marzano et al., 2005, for a
comprehensive review). As such, principals have been identified in research as second only to
teachers in terms of the in-school variables that matter most for student learning (Leithwood et al.,
2004). Effective principals are especially important in schools that have been identified as struggling,
such as turnaround schools (Leithwood et al., 2004).
         The growing awareness of how much principals matter underscores the importance of
having qualified and effective principals in each school. One way that districts and states ensure
good principals are in the schools is through principal evaluation: “Principal evaluation has been
variously described as (a) holding principals accountable for the performance of students and
faculty, as well as their own performance, (b) determining the effectiveness of principal practice, or
(c) distinguishing between effective and ineffective principals” (Amsterdam et al., 2003, p. 222).
Principal evaluation has also been identified as a tool for professional growth, especially when it
includes effective feedback, facilitates adult and group learning, and emphasizes continuous
improvement (Micheaux & Parvin, 2018). Thus, the purpose of principal evaluation has been
described as both summative and formative in nature (Pashiardis & Brauckmann, 2008).
         With the above considerations in mind, we conduct an exploratory study to examine what
evaluation policies states have put in place to hold principals accountable and determine their
effectiveness (Amsterdam et al., 2003). We first provide a brief history of principal evaluation in the
United States including a review of principal evaluation items (hereafter referred to as principal
evaluation elements) in empirical studies. We collected state statutory and regulatory policies
regarding principal or administrative evaluations from state legislatures and state school boards. We
examined these policies to determine whether the identified principal evaluation elements from the
literature were included and to what degree. The results of this analysis are given, followed by a
discussion of our findings that focuses on the implications of the absence or presence of various
principal evaluation elements for principals, school districts, and policymakers.

               Principal Evaluation in the United States: A Brief History
         In the United States, principal accountability has received significant attention in recent years
as educator evaluation has dominated the last decade of education reform, particularly through the
Race to the Top (RTTT) initiative which was launched in 2009 1. From a policy perspective, the
evaluation of principals, who are the second most important in-school factor in student achievement
relative to and have leadership over teachers, have therefore been perceived as one lever for school
improvement in its historical and dominant purpose of driving personnel decisions such as tenure,
placement, promotion, compensation, and dismissal, but also for continuous improvement of

1 While RTTT was broadly focused on innovation, it did prompt sweeping changes to teacher evaluation.

Only 18 states were awarded RTTT dollars, however, nearly all states submitted applications and made
significant changes to their teacher evaluation systems, with the most salient change being the addition of
student achievement as a significant measure (Howell, 2015; National Council on Teacher Quality, 2017).

Principal Evaluation in the United States                                                     4


principal practice (National Conference of State Legislatures [NCLS], 2013). Broadly, RTTT
encouraged evaluations that were based, in significant part, on student achievement. Principal
evaluation, thus, was likely a function of the ripple effect of holding teachers accountable for student
learning and new statistical procedures that purported to isolate the value that an individual teacher
adds to their students’ learning (Lavigne & Good, 2015). Furthermore, the push for more rigorous
principal evaluations occurred in conjunction with findings from research which suggested that
principal evaluations were loosely or not at all aligned to standards and evidence (Goldring et al.,
2009), such as the Professional Standards for Educational Leaders by the National Policy Board of
Educational Administration (2020), and professional development or school improvement goals
(Portin et al., 2006). Research also suggested that principals perceived their evaluations as
perfunctory (Portin et al., 2006), inconsistent (Thomas et al., 2000), and not psychometrically
rigorous (Condon & Clifford, 2010; Goldring et al., 2009; Heck & Marcoulides, 1996).
        Realizing this challenge as an opportunity, in 2009 the Joint Committee on Standards for
Educational Evaluation released their Personnel Evaluation Standards to support schools in the
broad task of assessing personnel (Gullickson & Howard, 2009). Then in 2010, the National
Comprehensive Center for Teacher Quality (NCCTQ, 2010) released a report on evaluating school
principals and recommended the following strategies: 1) establish a clear set of expectations and
goals for the assessments (e.g., what, who, how, frequency), 2) use valid and reliable measures that
help principals improve, 3) link assessments to research-based standards, and 4) use multiple forms
of assessment to gather a holistic view of principal performance. In 2012, a call to action for a new
framework for principal evaluation was provided in a joint-commissioned report released by the
Principal Evaluation Committee of the National Association for Elementary School Principals
(NAESP) and the National Association for Secondary School Principals (NASSP). Recognizing the
challenged state of principal evaluations, the Committee presented a framework which outlined six
domains of principal leadership for evaluation: professional growth and learning, student growth and
achievement, school planning and progress, school culture, professional qualities and instructional
leadership, and stakeholder support and engagement (NAESP & NASSP, 2012). In the same year,
the American Institutes for Research released a report synthesizing research on principal effects,
specifically for informing the design of principal evaluation systems (Clifford et al., 2012). The
report highlighted two emerging perspectives typically present in United States principal evaluation
policy—one of a focus on practice (what do principals do) and one focused on impact (what outcomes
do principals achieve). By 2014, 36 states had adopted laws requiring principals to receive regular
evaluations of their performance (Superville, 2014). However, with notable increases in expectations
for principals, specifically, in instructional and equity-oriented leadership (Farley et al., 2019),
attention to the role expectations of principals as well as the evaluation of such expectations has
continued in the United States and across the globe (e.g., Díaz-Delgado & Garcia-Martinez, 2019;
Fuller et al., 2015; Goldring et al., 2015; Lambert & Bouchamma, 2019; Larochelle-Audetet al., 2019;
Liu et al., 2017; Rivero et al., 2019; Williams, 2015).
Current Policy Climate
          Today, in order for states to receive federal funding under the Every Student Succeeds Act
(ESSA) of 2015, indicators of principal effectiveness must be submitted as part of the application
process (ESSA, 2018). In particular, the ESSA contains various provisions that provide greater
flexibility and funding as it pertains to high-quality principals. For example, under Title II, Part A
(supporting effective instruction), approximately $2.3 billion/year has been allocated to states to
improve the quality of teachers and school leaders, with 3% that can be allocated specifically for the
principal pipeline (e.g., recruitment, retention, professional development). Under Title II, Part B,
nearly $489 million a year has been authorized for use for human-capital management systems,

Education Policy Analysis Archives Vol. 28 No. 143                                                    5


including performance incentives (e.g., bonuses) for principals based on student achievement
outcomes. In addition, criteria used by states to measure principal effectiveness must be made public
and be evidence-based. This demonstrates effort towards ensuring that principals are being
evaluated (according to the National Center for Education Statistics [2019], 79% of traditional
public school principals and 69% of charter school principals reported having been evaluated within
the last year) and that the evaluations have consequences (such as remediation programs or
dismissal).
         In short, today’s principal evaluation systems are an extension of the last two decades of
educational reform in the United States that are characterized by increased accountability and
external pressures for and oversight of principals (West et al., 2010). As such, principal evaluation is
heavily controversial. On the one hand, there has been a significant push to hold principals
accountable for student learning. However, others have warned policymakers to put principal effects
in perspective. For instance, Williams (2015) notes that:
         Although it is true that principals and teachers are responsible with what happens in schools
         and classrooms, they alone are not solely responsible for how much and at what rate a
         student learns...As research has shown, the isolated effects of the principal are difficult to
         ascertain; therefore, it is a stretch to place “blame” on the principals for students’ lack of
         achievement. (p. 224)

Apart from the research-based recommendations (e.g., based on research on principal effects) from
various organizations (Clifford et al., 2012; NAESP & NASSP, 2012; NCCTQ, 2010), little research
exists on current principal evaluation models in practice and the validity and reliability of those
evaluations (Amsterdam et al., 2003; Anderson & Turnball, 2016; Babo & Ramaswami, 2011; Babo
& Villaverde, 2013; Clifford & Ross, 2012). Like others have noted (Catano & Stronge, 2007) this
body of literature continues to be particularly sparse in light of the considerable expansion of
research on teacher evaluation (see Lavigne & Good, 2019) 2.
          Comprehensive reviews of principal evaluation were conducted in 2009, 2015, and in 2019,
and although useful, illustrates the need for continued or different review approaches. In Goldring
and colleagues’ 2009 comprehensive examination of how states evaluate principals, the authors
found that the evaluation of principals lacked “justification and documentation in terms of the
utility, psychometric properties, and accuracy of the instruments” at the district level (Goldring et al.,
2009, p. 19).
          Since then, Fuller et al. (2015) examined survey data from the Center on Great Teachers and
Leaders. This analysis was based on state personnel surveys, used survey data from 2011 to examine
35 state policies, including DC, a follow-up survey in 2012 which included five additional states. The
remaining 11 states’ data were obtained “through extensive Internet searches for original source
materials on state principal evaluation efforts located on SEA website and secondary information
from other websites identified through Google searches” (p. 168). This 50-state document review
examined the purpose of evaluation and the use of the results. Additionally, it examined measures
included within the evaluation, such as student growth, and evaluation system quality insurances.

2 The vast literature on teacher evaluation covers the following aspects: models, measures, methodological

properties (e.g., American Statistical Association [ASA], 2014, Grossman et al., 2014; Hill, Kapitula, &
Umland, 2011; Polikoff & Porter, 2014; Van der Lans et al., 2016), and processes (e.g., Moss & Brookhart,
2015), instability of teacher effectiveness (e.g., Good & Lavigne, 2015), principal and teacher perceptions and
practices (e.g., Derrington & Campbell, 2017; Flores & Derrington, 2017; Goldring et al., 2015; Kraft &
Gilmour, 2016; Lavigne & Chamberlain, 2017; Lavigne & Olson, 2019), as well as unintended consequences
(e.g., Ford et al., 2018; Lavigne, 2014).

Principal Evaluation in the United States                                                          6


         In 2019, NCTQ published a report examining the changes in principal evaluation policies
between 2015 and 2019 (Ross & Walsh, 2019). Specifically, it compared the number of states with
principal evaluation policies regarding measures of state growth, principal observations or site visits,
annual evaluations, and survey data, as well as requiring improvement plans for underperforming
principals. Since Goldring et al.’s (2009) and Fuller et al. (2015) data collection, many laws have
changed on a national level, including the implementation of ESSA. While the NCTQ report (Ross
& Walsh, 2019) helps us understand the national scope and trends regarding the abovementioned
evaluation elements, our study extends and provides additional details regarding individual state
requirements, in addition to a few evaluation elements we discovered in our review of the literature.
         To drive our exploratory study, we wondered: what elements of principal evaluation have
been identified in empirical literature as potentially important elements? Have states incorporated these
elements into their state policies? It is significant to note there was a wide variety in the number and
detail of requirements in state statutes and regulations across the nation. While we do not submit
that more or fewer requirements are appropriate or claim which requirements are more or less
appropriate, these findings note that the field has not come to a consensus as to what a principal
should and should not be held responsible for. This research will allow researchers, policymakers,
and educators a glimpse of principal evaluation requirements across the United States as they
endeavor to improve their practices, determine appropriate and effective principal evaluation
practices, and continue to research the impact of principals on schools.
Background
         To begin the search for literature, Education Source and ERIC search engines were utilized
to find peer-reviewed, empirical literature. Keywords used in searching for empirical articles
included evaluation and various arrangements of the following terms: instructional leader, principal,
school, and school leader, and school manager. Articles not directly linked to principal evaluation
(such as teacher evaluation) were eliminated. The result consisted of 28 articles. Despite the scarcity
of peer-reviewed, empirical literature found in our search, there were a few common themes found
regarding practices for principal evaluation. These themes include: student achievement, personal
goals, input from multiple sources, and the timeliness of the evaluations.
Student Achievement
        Although primarily through indirect pathways, research has found principal actions explain
approximately a quarter of the variance in student achievement outcomes (Hattie, 2009 [Cohen’s d =
.32]; Leithwood et al., 2004). Thus, student achievement has become an increased focus within
principal evaluation. One study discovered just over five years ago that some states required a
percentage of principal evaluation scores to be attributed to student test scores, such as 20% in
Delaware and 50% in Ohio (Superville, 2014). This finding was similar to the Wallace Foundation’s
Principal Pipeline Initiative (PPI) (Anderson & Turnball, 2016) where, in 2015, five of the six 3
participating districts weighted student growth as 40% or more on the principal’s evaluation, in
alignment with their state’s requirements. However, in some cases the percentage of principal’s
evaluation attributed to student growth varied widely. This is demonstrated in Gwinnett County,



3 The six participating districts were: Charlotte-Mecklenburg Schools (North Carolina), Denver Public

Schools (Colorado), Gwinnett County Public Schools (Georgia), Hillsborough County Public Schools
(Florida), New York City Department of Education (New York), and Prince George’s County Public Schools
(Maryland).

Education Policy Analysis Archives Vol. 28 No. 143                                                   7


Georgia where student growth accounted for 70% of a principal’s evaluation in 2015 4 as opposed to
40% which was assigned to student growth in all other participating districts. Student growth,
however, does not just pertain to student growth on state standardized tests in the literature. It can
also include local assessments, growth of the lowest-performing students on standardized tests,
and/or growth on school-level student learning objectives (Anderson & Turnball, 2016).
        Despite its use in practice5, the inclusion of student achievement data in principal evaluations
is not without its challenges. For example, a study found student achievement outcomes are most
heavily predicted by income and education levels of the community, meaning that evaluation
matrices dependent upon student test scores are “fatally flawed” (Tienken et al., 2017, p. 11). In
addition, some studies have had difficulty linking student achievement to the direct and indirect
influence of the principal (Fuller & Hollingworth, 2014; Leithwood et al. , 2010; Williams et al.,
2008). As a result, principal evaluations rarely correspond with achievement data (McMahon et al.,
2014). Despite the lack of corroborating research, student achievement continues to be used as a
part of principal evaluations in order to align with the National Association of Secondary School
Principals and the National Association of Elementary School Principals’ frameworks of leadership
responsibility (Clifford & Ross, 2013).
Multi-sourced Evaluation
         Research has shown expanded expectations for school leaders have had a ripple effect on
evaluation and has led to the inclusion of non-academic measures such as chronic absenteeism and
discipline and suspension rates under ESSA (Kostyo et al., 2018). Likewise, several researchers have
suggested that principal evaluation take into account information from several sources to provide a
holistic measurement of effectiveness, rather than relying solely on the superintendent’s view or
student achievement (Clifford & Ross, 2011). Multiple forms or sources of evaluation are needed to
create a robust evaluation, according to researchers, because the principal effects are complex and
indirect (Sanders et al., 2012). Additionally, Fuller and Hollingworth (2014) examined ten strategies
that focused principal evaluation on student test scores. They concluded that using student test
scores as the only means to measure principal effectiveness was too simplistic. Instead, student
achievement data might be part of multiple datapoints used in principal evaluation, such as part of a
portfolio, which may also include artifacts evidencing principal effectiveness (Babo & Villaverde,
2013). For example, portfolios might include: principal observations, school improvement plans,
school board meeting agenda, minutes, and presentations, department, faculty, and staff meeting
agendas and minutes, school newsletters, information about or evidence of community partnerships,
crisis and emergency plans, school audits, school website, and/or communication logs (NCLS,
2013).



4 Notably, whereas teacher evaluation models have changed over the course of educator evaluation reform to

place less weight on student achievement growth and relative to observational data, some principal evaluation
models demonstrate an opposite trend—with equal, and in some cases more weight attributed to student
growth relative to supervisors’ ratings and other measures of professional practice such as: teacher and parent
ratings and human resource management (Anderson & Turnball, 2016).
5
  Although our identification of themes emerged from the literature, however, examples from practice of the
use of student achievement to hold schools (principals) and districts accountable can be found around the
nation. Notably, in Tennessee, which is known for its use of value-added measures, has both an indicator for
growth (as measured by value-added) and a second for achievement (where either absolute performance or
achievement proficiency targets is chosen) with slightly greater weight for each at the elementary and primary
as opposed to the secondary level (Tennessee Department of Education, 2019).

Principal Evaluation in the United States                                                                 8


        In addition to having multiple sources of data for evaluation purposes, research shows
evaluations should be created with input and feedback from multiple individuals, such as
stakeholders (Goldring et al., 2015). Goldring et al. (2015) explored how principals reacted to
feedback from multiple sources, particularly feedback from teachers. They found that while teacher
feedback did not guarantee improved performance, it did lead to potential improvement in the
performance of the principal. Taken together, this abovementioned literature suggests that principal
evaluation should include data from multiple individuals and data sources6.
Goal Setting
         In creating goals to be included in future evaluations, Hvidston, Range, and McKim (2015)
found that principals have an opportunity to continue to focus on school goals while keeping
aligned with district and state goals and mandates. In order to create good goals, research shows self-
reflection may be a useful tool. In Hvidston et al.’s study, principals reported that evaluations were
more valuable to them when they were able to self-reflect. Reflecting on the feedback the principals
received after meeting with the superintendent regarding their evaluations was also considered
helpful according to the principals.
         Research also identifies goal setting as related to learner-centered leadership (Sun & Youngs,
2009). For example, in a quantitative study of leadership in 13 Michigan school districts (n = 19
principal evaluators, n = 138 principals), Sun and Youngs found that instructional-leadership
focused principal evaluation models included a focus on school goal setting, and this, in turn directly
supported principals’ effects on teaching and learning. In addition, individual goals led to a greater
commitment to and a greater likelihood of achieving the goal, according to one study (Sinnema &
Robinson, 2012). This finding was particularly interesting, as principals were sometimes asked to
create school-level goals in place of, or in addition to, individual-level goals (Anderson & Turnball,
2016). While more likely to set a teaching and learning goal than any other kind, principals were
more likely to set vague performance-type goals, leading to vague achievement evaluations (Sinnema
& Robinson, 2012). One way principals can improve their goals is by creating them in conjunction
with and receiving feedback on their goals from trained evaluators and/or supervisors to increase
the extent to which goals are specific and have designated measurable outcomes (citation or reword).
Trained Supervisors
        If principals are to become better through the feedback on their evaluations, the individual
providing the feedback must be trained to give it (Clifford & Ross, 2011). Principals have noted in
multiple studies that feedback needs to be given from superintendents or supervisors who are
trained to do so in order to receive helpful, individual, and specific feedback (Hvidston et al., 2015;
McMahon et al., 2014). There is evidence showing evaluating principals is difficult (Zepeda et al.,
2014). In a qualitative study, a superintendent noted the tensions around balancing what should and
should not be included in principal evaluation and discrepancies in data used within evaluations
(Zepeda et al., 2014). While no assumption was made by the authors that this superintendent was or
was not given training on carrying out principal evaluations, it is logical to assume that lack of

6 In understanding multiple sources of data as applied to practice, PPI districts utilized as little as three data

sources (student growth (measured in two ways) and supervisor ratings), to as many as seven. In Denver
Public Schools, the principal evaluation consisted of: supervisor observations/ratings, teacher
perception/satisfaction survey, human resource management data (hiring, retaining, supporting, removing
teachers), teacher observation completion rates, parent satisfaction survey, and growth on state standardized
achievement test (Anderson & Turnball, 2016).

Education Policy Analysis Archives Vol. 28 No. 143                                            9


training increases superintendents’ tensions regarding how to evaluate principals and, if an
evaluation system is already in place, how to rate and rank principal effectiveness within the
evaluation.
         However, research shows principals desire honest and open communication in relation to
their evaluations from supervisors in the form of positive reinforcement and constructive criticism
on areas for improvement (Hvidston et al., 2018). This study concluded such reinforcement and
criticism requires that the superintendent is “prepared and knowledgeable” (p. 220). Additional
research concluded, some districts work with principal supervisors to establish calibration so that
supervisors are consistently rating principals across a district, engage principal supervisors in
evaluation simulations, such as rating videos and providing feedback, and provide ongoing support
to help supervisors better distinguish between artifacts and evidence, and rating categories such as
effective, highly effective, and needs improvement (Anderson & Turnball, 2016).
Timeliness and Frequency
          While a trained supervisor or evaluator is imperative to improved performance, it will not
be helpful to principals hoping to improve if the evaluations and formative feedback are given
during the summer or after the principal has been moved to a different school. Feedback must be
timely (NCLS, 2013). Notably, a study showed some principals did not receive feedback from their
evaluations until three to six months later (Hvidston et al., 2015). This could mean principals are not
receiving feedback from mid-school year evaluations until the school year has ended. In addition,
research shows more consistent observations and opportunities for feedback are desired by
principals. They want to be observed more and get more feedback to know they are “on the right
track” (Hvidston et al., 2018, p. 221). Unfortunately, research shows principals rarely receive regular
feedback, leaving them without much direction. For example, as part of a larger study, Sun et al.
(2012) sampled 88 Michigan principals and found that 40% had been evaluated once every three
years, 26.25% had been evaluated once a year, and 6% had never been evaluated. Furthermore, as
supervision and evaluation serve distinctively different purposes, but are intricately intertwined, the
ability for evaluation to drive school improvement is diminished when supervisors are not frequently
providing feedback informed by the evaluation rubric (Anderson & Turnball, 2016). In essence, end-
of-year feedback does little to nothing in helping a school leader make improvements throughout
the year.
         In sum, extant literature points to the inclusion of student achievement, personal goals, and
multiple measures in principal evaluations. These evaluations should be conducted in a timely
manner, with frequent observations and feedback from supervisors who are trained to provide
effective and knowledgeable feedback. We use these themes to inform the current study.

                                                Methodology
        Our descriptive 50-state policy review consisted of the following steps: 1) examine literature
for themes surrounding principal evaluation, and specifically what should or should not be included
in the evaluation, 2) identify themes that emerged from the literature, 3) locate statutes and
regulations from each state, 4) use themes from the literature to guide data collection efforts and
analysis in each state’s statutes and regulations (is it included or is it not and in how much detail).
        Given the relatively limited empirical literature on principal evaluation, we intentionally
chose to employ a descriptive and exploratory methodology to establish a better understanding of
the state of principal evaluation and to “uncover patterns and inform and improve decision-making”
(Loeb et al., 2017, p. 3). Thus, our full analysis is guided by the following research questions:
        1. What elements are present in the principal evaluation policies in the United States?

Principal Evaluation in the United States                                                      10


         2. Do states’ principal evaluation policies identify particular stakeholder groups?
Procedures
          To determine which elements are present in state statute and regulation, each of them first
had to be acquired. State government and board of education websites of all 50 states were accessed
by the first author between June, July, and August 2019 and the latest available statutes and
regulations were downloaded. State representatives were contacted on multiple occasions if
documentation of statutes and regulations were unavailable to determine their presence or absence.
Statutes and regulations without mention of principal evaluations were discarded. Between the board
regulations, educational codes (which are created in many states by state educational boards and are
hereafter included as board regulations), and legislative statutes, all 50 states had some form of
statute or regulation policy regarding principal evaluations from which we could collect data. While
it is difficult to ascertain the number of documents that were accessed as part of the entire review of
state statutes and regulations for reasons such as broken links, incorrect documentation, and
differing state-to-state formatting of these policies, we estimate about 40 state regulations and 30
state statutes included principal evaluation policies and were included in this analysis. State statutes
and board regulations were then analyzed to determine what each state required regarding principal
evaluation in regards to student achievement (growth and raw scores), goal setting (individual
and/or with supervisor), stakeholders (e.g., parents, students, teachers, staff), measures used (input
sources such as supervisor and teachers, student assessments, weighting), and feedback (from
trained individuals, timeliness). This information was then recorded (see Appendix 1). The second
author checked and verified sources when sources were ambiguous, unclear, or were unable to be
located.
          To verify the accuracy of data collection, the second author used a random number
generator to check 10% of the sample, or in this case the population (n = 5), for reliability (Kaid &
Wadsworth, 1989). Reliability on the selected sub-sample—Alabama , Arkansas, Idaho, Illinois, and
Michigan—was 100% on all variables. Inter-rater reliability exceeded recommendations for inter-
coder agreement—a minimum of 85% (Miles, Huberman, & Saldaña, 2013) for this randomly
selected, initial sub-set. Therefore, the inter-rater reliability check was determined complete.

                                               Findings

RQ 1. What elements are present in the principal evaluation policies in the United States?
        Of the 50 states, only four (8%) – Connecticut, New Jersey, Pennsylvania, and West Virginia
– had statutes and/or regulations regarding all elements noted in the literature review. A full list of
states and evaluation policy elements regarding goal setting, stakeholder input, student achievement,
other sources of data, and weighting are given in Appendix 1 and evaluator training and feedback
elements are displayed in Appendix 2, but a synopsis of each is provided here.
        Seventeen states (34%) mentioned—either required or suggested the optional inclusion of—
goal setting in their policies regarding principal evaluations. We defined collaborative goal setting as
creating goals in conjunction with or under the approval of a supervisor. Thirteen states (26%)
required collaborative goal setting (see Figure 1). Some policies, such as Delaware, require goal
setting conferences multiple times per year (Del. Code tit. 14, §108). Other states, such as Louisiana,
maintain that goals used for evaluation are based only on “student learning targets” (La. Code tit. 28
§301). West Virginia regulation states, “The school leader and the evaluator with mutually establish
annual written goals for the administrator’s performance evaluation on or before November 1” (W.
Va. Code, 126§142). The remaining four states (8%) - Colorado, Iowa, Pennsylvania, and South

Education Policy Analysis Archives Vol. 28 No. 143                                           11


Dakota - required principals to create and achieve goals, but were not required to collaborate in the
creation process.

Figure 1
States that Include Collaborative Goal Setting in Principal Evaluation Policies




Note: Shaded states require collaborative goal setting.

        Student achievement was described in many different ways across policies, including
growth, achievement, learning, performance, and student data. Overall, 33 states (66%) required
some type of student achievement data to be used in principal evaluations while Alaska, California,
and Ohio (6% of states) mentioned achievement to be an optional measure. Growth data was
required by 25 (50%) states (see Figure 2) and 18 (36%) states required other forms of student
achievement data. Indiana required student achievement and/or growth data (Ind. Admin. Code,
511 §10, 2016). Arizona, Florida, Louisiana, Michigan, Pennsylvania, and Texas included value-
added models to assess student achievement as part of their requirements or optional principal
evaluation elements. Of the 36 (72%) states that mentioned student achievement data in their
policies on principal evaluation. States described student achievement data in a variety of ways.
Connecticut requires “multiple student learning indicators” (Connecticut State Department of
Education, 2017) to be used, including graduation rates and other “indicators… relevant to the
student population” (Connecticut State Department of Education 2017, Section 3). Pennsylvania
requires the use of district and national standardized tests in their evaluations, but also requires the
use of student projects and portfolios (Pa. Code, 022 §19.2,2013). A total of 12 (24%) states required
both growth scores and other student achievement data to be used in principal evaluations.

Principal Evaluation in the United States                                                   12


Figure 2
States that Require Student Achievement Growth in Principal Evaluation Policies




Note: Shaded states require student achievement growth.

         Stakeholder input was required by 17 (34%) states. Three additional states gave stakeholder
input as optional to use in evaluations. Stakeholders particularly mentioned included teachers,
community members, peers, supervisors, among other groups. Further information regarding
stakeholders mentioned within the policies is given in the findings of research question 2.
         Beyond the elements listed above, many states required multi-sourced principal evaluations.
Of these, the most common included observations and standards. Seventeen (34%) states required
observation(s) or some form of site visit(s). The frequency and number of observations differed
from state to state. For example, Utah requires “multiple supervisor observations at appropriate
intervals” (Utah Admin. Code, R277-533, 2018) while other states, such as West Virginia only
mention observation by noting that evaluators should use “the online observation form” (W. Va.
Code, 126 §142) leaving it unclear if principals are to be observed.
         Standards of conduct, ethics, job descriptions, leadership, performance, and/or similar
criteria were required by 19 (38%) states. In Illinois, this included not only aligning the evaluation
“with research-based standards” (ILCS 105 §24A, 2019), but also “consider[ing] the principal’s
specific duties, responsibilities, management, and competence as a principal” (ILCS 105 §24A,
2019). Wyoming’s requirements are an example of how some states give more latitude to the
individual districts regarding use of standards (Wyo. Admin. Rules 29 §3). The evaluation system is
to be based on either the Wyoming standards for districts and leaders or “standards prescribed by
the board of trustees, so long as standard 1 of the Wyoming standards for district and school
leaders… is included in the board’s standard” (Wyo, Admin. Rules 29 §3).

Education Policy Analysis Archives Vol. 28 No. 143                                          13


         Additional requirements included the administrator’s “effectiveness in addressing school
safety and enforcing student discipline” (Va. Code 15 §22.1), efficiency and ability (HI Rev. Stat.
§302A), and an “assessment of the educator’s effectiveness in supporting every student in meeting
rigorous learning goals through the performance of the educator’s duties” (Mont. Admin. Rules
§10.55.701). Overall, 41 (82%) states have requirements for multiple sources of data (including goal
setting, stakeholder input, and student achievement).
         The weighting, or a range of weights, for elements of principal evaluations on the state level
was prescribed by 19 (38%) states (see Figure 3). As with the other elements, weightings differed
across states. Arizona requires “quantitative data on student academic progress [to account] for
between 33% and 50% of the evaluation outcomes” (ARS §15-203), but does not give weightings
for any other elements of the evaluation. Colorado’s weighting of 50% principal professional
practice items and 50% student learning typifies several states (1 CCR 301-87-5.01). One of the
more complex and variable weighting systems comes from New Jersey, where the evaluation must
include 10-40% growth, 10-20% teacher growth, and 10-40% administrator goal, but principal
practices must comprise less than 50% (NJAC 6A §10).

Figure 3
States that Prescribe Weights for Principal Evaluation Measures




Note: Shaded states prescribe evaluation measure weights.

       Training for evaluators in connection with principal evaluations were mentioned in 31
(62%) state policies. See Figure 4. Oklahoma statute states:
       All individual designated by the school district board of education to conduct personnel
       evaluations shall be required to participate in training conducted by the State Department of
       Education or training provided by the school district using guidelines and materials

Principal Evaluation in the United States                                                     14


         developed by the State Department of Education prior to conducting evaluations. (70 OK
         Stat § 70-6-101.31).

The state regulation expounds on this, requiring the training to include the states effectiveness
evaluation framework (OAC 210 §20). Many states have similar requirements. However, other states
have far more policy regarding evaluators. New York has a subpart of their statute going into detail
about evaluator training, including how to use the evaluation assessments, what research-based
observation should look like, and “considerations in evaluating teachers and principals of English
language learners and students with disabilities” (NY CRR tit. 8 § 30).

Figure 4
States that Require that Principal Evaluators be Trained




Note: Shaded states require principal evaluators to be trained.

         Feedback, meaning timeliness of feedback after evaluation and frequency of evaluations,
was discussed in 43 (86%) state policies. Fifteen states described how timely the feedback was to be
given to principals. The timeliness ranged from specific dates to within a set number of days of the
evaluation, such as within 10 days of the evaluation (Fla. Rule 6A, 2018; Ga. Code 160 §5) or before
September 15 (4 AAC 19.055), to as soon as possible (NMAC 6 §69). Likewise, there was a wide
range in the required frequency of evaluations. While 27 (54%) states required annual evaluations of
all principals, the frequency varied based on licensure or experience in 10 (20%) states. For example,
Washington requires annual evaluations for the first three years and then a comprehensive
evaluation every six years thereafter with focused evaluations taking place annually between
comprehensive evaluations (RCW 28A §405). Kansas does biannual evaluations for the first two
years, annual for the third and fourth, and then every three years thereafter (Kan. Stat. tit. 281 §72).
Cyclical variations were used in Oregon and Rhode Island.

Education Policy Analysis Archives Vol. 28 No. 143                                        15


RQ 2. Do states’ principal evaluation policies identify particular stakeholder groups?
        Nineteen (38%) states require or give the option for stakeholders to be used in principal
evaluations (See Figure 5). Within these 19 states, 16 (32%) gave required stakeholders to be
included and 5 (10%) gave optional stakeholder suggestions. Teachers and staff were most likely to
be mentioned, with eight (16%) states requiring their input while Colorado and Idaho list them as
optional data sources. Parents or guardians were required by Alaska, Rhode Island, Utah, and West
Virginia and optional for Colorado, Florida, Idaho, North Carolina, and Pennsyvlania. Other groups
mentioned, as required or optional, included, students, administrators/peers, and community
members. Supervisors were specifically mentioned by Colorado, New Jersey, North Carolina, and
Rhode Island. Connecticut and Oklahoma specifically required stakeholder input, but did not
elaborate as to who those stakeholders were.

Figure 5
States with Required or Optional Stakeholder Input Policies




Note: Shaded states have optional or required stakeholder input policies.

         While many states did not expand upon how stakeholder groups should or could provide
their input, Colorado gave many examples. Colorado suggests the use of “school newsletters,…
evidence of community partnerships, parent engagement and participation rates, ‘360 degree’ survey
tools designed to solicit feedback from multiple stakeholder perspectives,… [and] teacher retention
data” (1 CCR 301) as ways to obtain and measure teacher, student, parent/guardian, and/or other
administrators’ input. The next section will discuss implication of these findings and their
limitations.

Principal Evaluation in the United States                                                       16


                                              Discussion
         The purpose of this exploratory study was to examine what evaluation elements were
included in state statutes and regulations, across the United States. South Carolina’s General
Assembly asserts “that the leadership of the principal is key to the success of a school, and support
for ongoing, integrated professional development is integral to better schools and to the
improvement of the actual work of teachers and school staff” (SCCL 24 §59). As school success is
dependent upon the leadership of the principal (Hattie, 2009), evaluations of principals are essential
to determine whether the principal is indeed a positive influence on the school. Although limited,
current literature has focused on goal setting (Anderson & Turnball, 2016; Hvidston et al., 2015;
Sinnema & Robinson, 2012, Sun & Youngs, 2009), multi-sourced evaluations, including stakeholder
input (Clifford & Ross, 2011; Fuller & Hollingworth, 2014; Goldring et al., 2015), student
achievement (Anderson & Turnball, 2016; Fuller & Hollingworth, 2014; Leithwood et al., 2010;
McMahon et al., 2014; Williams et al., 2008), and evaluator training and feedback (Anderson &
Turnball, 2016; Hvidston et al., 2015; Hvidston et al., 2018; McMahon et al., 2014; Sun et al., 2012;
Zepeda et al., 2014) as elements of principal evaluations.
         In short, using literature-based themes, our analysis of state statutes and regulations revealed
that a majority of states required at least one literature-based element. Only four (8%) states had
statutes and/or regulations regarding all elements of principal evaluation that have been noted in the
literature. Although the most controversial, student achievement measures were the most common
component and were required in 66% of states. In addition, most states required principal evaluators
to be trained, and that principals were to be evaluated annually.
Limitations
        First, it should be noted that this analysis, as well as state educators and lawmakers, was
limited by the lack of research on principal evaluation. This limitation is important to keep in mind,
for as we can report our findings from within state policies, we are unable to comment as to the
effectiveness or validity of any measures required or suggested for principal evaluations within state
statutes and regulations, an issue that was noted a decade ago by Goldring et al. (2009) and that
continues to be problematic in principal evaluation.
        Further, we did not examine principal evaluation in practice nor the evaluation models or
rubrics that were either recommended or prescribed by states. Therefore, we are unable to comment
on how or to what extent statutes and regulations impacted actual practice. However, the literature
on educational policy demonstrates that policies are often modified to fit local context. Honig and
Hatch (2004) describe this as “crafting coherence” as districts make sense between internal goals and
external demands. Thus, we would anticipate variation and deviance from statutes regulations,
especially across districts. It is possible, like in the case of standards-based reform (see Coburn et al.,
2016, for a review of this literature), that policy has relatively superficial or limited impact on
practice, rendering it important to extend this work to the study of “why” not just the “what” and
“how” of principal evaluation, taking into consideration important variables like capacity (Honig,
2003) or network strength (Daly & Finnegan, 2011).
Implications
        Yet even with these limitations in mind, we provided important foundational work to guide
subsequent research. Relative to the 36 states that had adopted laws requiring principals to receive
regular evaluations of their performance by 2014 (Superville, 2014), our search of state statutes and
regulations indicated that as of 2019 all 50 states did have policies regarding principal evaluations,
though they vary greatly in their requirements and details. It is unsurprising that all states have some

Education Policy Analysis Archives Vol. 28 No. 143                                              17


form of policy regarding principal evaluation, as ESSA funds require principal effectiveness
indicators to be created (Elementary and Secondary Education Act of 1965, 2018). Beyond some
emerging consensus among states in possible measures of principal effectiveness, the weights
applied to and importance placed upon such measures varied widely and there appears to be little
progress on this, at least within the last three years (Anderson & Turnball, 2016) or even within the
last decade (Goldring et al., 2009). Hence, a principal engaging in a set of practices and achieving a
given set of outcomes may be designated as effective in one state, but ineffective in another. This
inconsistency across states is concerning as it suggests the possibility of a gap between law-makers’
and researchers’ understanding of expectations for principals and the influence principals have in
improving student outcomes and teacher effectiveness. This deficiency leads to confusion regarding
the roles and responsibilities of the school principal. Our calls for greater transparency align with
those by Goldring et al. (2009) from nearly a decade ago for better documentation of psychometric
properties of instruments utilized by districts to evaluate principals.
         Sinnema and Robinson (2012) suggested that goal setting is an important part of principal
evaluation because “goals set a work and development agenda for the subsequent year” (p. 137).
Furthermore, districts’ focus on principals’ enactment of ambitious learning goals in principal
evaluation is related to principals’ learner-centered leadership (Sun & Youngs, 2009). One promising
finding is that 17 (34%) states require goal setting in their principal evaluations. However, if setting
goals is important for school improvement, it is likely that principals are setting goals even if it is not
part of their evaluations. While adding goal-setting as a required evaluation element in policy may
not change the practices of principals already setting goals, it is worth considering if more states
should have similar policies, particularly regarding collaborative goal making.
         While the use and weight of student achievement data in evaluating principals will likely
continue to be debated, most states have policies in place requiring the use of such data. Beyond
standardized test scores, many policies were unclear as to what type of student achievement data was
to be used. For instance, Wisconsin statute stated “student performance” (Wis. Statute 115 §415)
while Pennsylvania regulations require more than testing data to be used in their evaluations
(Pennsylvania Code, 022 § 19.2., 2013). The use of non-standardized testing student achievement
data, such as suspension rates or absenteeism is one way to include multiple measurements for
principal evaluations (Kostyo et al., 2018; Sanders et al., 2012). However, without clarity as to what
these performance measures are, we are unable to determine whether inclusion in these evaluations
is valid. In addition, lack of clarity as to what measures are used may lead to differing interpretations
among district, meaning a principal under one district’s evaluation measures may be labeled as
‘proficient’, while under another district’s measures is labeled ‘needs improvement’.
         Growth scores from standardized tests were the most common source of student
achievement data. This may contribute to greater reliability in measurements of principal evaluations,
particularly when there is high principal retention at the same school. However, it seems unlikely
that growth scores would be a valid evaluation element when principals change schools often. In
2016-2017, the national average of tenure of principals in their school was four years and nearly 35%
of principals have been at their school for two years or less. Annually, nearly 18% principals leave
their school from one year to the next, and in high poverty schools this percentage is even higher—
21% (Levin & Bradley, 2019). Yet, the effects of principals’ improvement efforts are not
recognizable in student achievement outcomes for 5 to 7 years (Borman et al., 2003; Fullan, 2001;
Gross et al., 2009). Taken together, these findings suggested that despite the wide use of student
achievement data by states, it is unlikely that principals are actually being held accountable for results
that can be attributed to their own leadership actions and initiatives. Thus, the use of student
achievement data in principal evaluations continues to be problematic and warrants additional study.

Principal Evaluation in the United States                                                            18


Furthermore, it may be particularly problematic in settings that experience higher levels of turnover,
such as schools that serve a larger proportion of minoritized students (Gates et al., 2006) 7. Future
research would help shed light on these issues, particularly: what measures of student achievement
data are actually used in principal evaluation.
         In addition, extraneous variables may have great influence, on both growth and student
achievement scores, such as teacher attrition, community tragedies, and even fire alarms going off
during testing. Perhaps it is because of the unknown reliability of holding principals directly
responsible for student achievement, including growth scores, that all states requiring the use of
growth scores also required at least one other assessment measure to be used, with the exception of
Michigan.
         It was interesting to find that all 19 states that had a weighting scale also required student
achievement measures in their evaluations. We wonder if this was done either to ensure student
achievement measures were used - and not eliminated - from principal evaluations, or to ensure
student achievement measures were not the only source of information to be used on evaluations.
Further research could show whether these options were the case or if other reasoning was behind
these weighting decisions.
         Many states require principals to be evaluated annually. Of the states where evaluation cycles
are determined based on experience or certification (18%), Arkansas is the only state to not require
evaluation of the principal for the first three years. This is interesting, particularly in comparison to
Kansas and North Dakota which require biannual evaluations for the first two and three years,
respectively. It would interesting to know if this has to do with tenure or licensure processes, the
type of evaluation done in each state, or, in the case of Kansas and North Dakota, to ensure
beginning principals have access to additional assistance through more frequent evaluations. Future
research might explore to what extent states encourage or consider development supervision and
evaluation practices and processes (see Glickman et al., 2017, for a developmental approach to
teacher supervision), honoring what we know about career stages of the principalship (Day &
Bakioğlu, 1996; Oplatka, 2012) and the time is takes to acquire results from school improvement
efforts, as noted earlier.
         In addition, it was interesting to note that Washington only evaluates their principals
comprehensively every six years while using shorter or focused evaluations annually to assess
performance in “one of the eight criteria selected for a performance rating plus professional growth
activities specifically linked to the selected criteria” (RCW 295 §303). This greatly differs from the 27
states that only state principals are to be evaluated annually. More research could shed light on
which of these practices produces better results, including student achievement results, teacher
retention, goal achievement, and financially.
         In examining our overall analysis, we have many questions and thoughts regarding future
research. Future research could explore how states developed their principal evaluation policies and
how these policies were enacted in practice, following in the footsteps of the more robust literature
on teacher evaluation. We wonder, therefore, in the absence of more research on principal
evaluation how states arrived at: 1) the chosen measures included in their principal evaluation
models, and 2) the weights, if they have been assigned, to such measures—a worthy topic for future
research. In cases where policymakers do point to research, we wonder if they are using such
findings in appropriate ways to inform policy (Lubienski et al., 2016). In alignment with extant

7 In noting this research, we are not making the claim that school leaders in schools that serve minoritized

youth should not be held accountable for student learning and that their colleagues in comparison schools
should, but that evaluation procedures using student achievement data may not be equally valid across
disparate school contexts.

Education Policy Analysis Archives Vol. 28 No. 143                                           19


literature (Hvidston et al., 2015, 2018; McMahon et al., 2014), we also wonder: How were
superintendents trained to evaluate principals and what was the rigor of such trainings (e.g., required
a passing score on a test, multiple trainings throughout the year, interrater reliability establishment
and attention to coder drift)? How prepared are superintendents to evaluate principals? What is the
effectiveness of the feedback they provide to principals? What are the effects of principal evaluation
systems on principals’ growth and development, practices, and effectiveness? Notably, many of
these questions were raised nearly a decade ago (see Clifford & Ross, 2011), but significant gaps in
research remain.
         We also wonder what principals’ experiences of the evaluations are in each state. Pashiardis
and Brauckmann (2008) point to large gaps between stated and perceived purposes of principal
evaluation. We wonder, then: do principals’ daily experiences align with their evaluation measures?
Does this alignment include professional development opportunities catered to the evaluative
feedback they were given (McMahon et al., 2014)? Additionally, it would be interesting to note if
principals’ engagement in the development of the evaluation system shaped their perceptions of the
system’s effectiveness.
         Principals struggle to find enough time to accommodate the existing and the increasing
expectations placed upon them (Lavigne & Good, 2019). Evaluations are one tool to help principals
prioritize these demands. It allows districts to communicate what responsibilities of the principal
they deem most important. The purpose of this exploratory study was to examine what evaluation
elements were included in state statutes and regulations, across the United States. Ultimately, the
great variation we observed in some aspects of principal evaluation across the states underscores the
need for more and better research to inform principal evaluation policy and practice in ways that
helps supervisors effectively assess and improve principal effectiveness in the United States, and
perhaps even across the globe.

Principal Evaluation in the United States                                                               20


                                                     Appendix
                                               Evaluation Measures
                         Goal Setting                             Student Assessments
                                                 Stakeholder
                                                                                Scores      Other Sources      Weighting
     State        Individual   Collaborative        Input        Growth
                                                                               (general)
   Alabama
                                                  students,
                                                   parents,
                                                 community
    Alaska                                        members,                      optional      observation
                                                  teachers,
                                                    other
                                                administrators

                                                                               academic
   Arizona                                                                     progress,                         Yes
                                                                              value-added
                                                                                             observation,
                                                                                               artifacts,
   Arkansas
                                                                                            standards, and
                                                                                              other data
  California                                                     optional                    options given
                                                 supervisor
                                                   required,
                                                   teachers,                                state standards
                                                  students,                                     strongly
                                                   parents/                                   encouraged;
  Colorado           Yes                                           Yes            Yes                            Yes
                                                  guardians,                                Others sources
                                                  and other                                     strongly
                                                    admin                                     encouraged
                                                   strongly
                                                 encouraged

                                                                                                 teacher
                                                                                             effectiveness
                                                                                multiple       outcomes,
 Connecticut                        Yes          stakeholders    Optional       learning     observations,       Yes
                                                                               indicators    self- collected
                                                                                               evidence,
                                                                                               standards
  Delaware                          Yes                            Yes                                           Yes
                                                                             performance
                                                                                 from
                                                  optional:
    Florida                                                        Yes         multiple        optional          Yes
                                                   parents
                                                                               sources,
                                                                             value added
                                                                                            multiple sources
   Georgia                                                         Yes                      required but not     Yes
                                                                                              enumerated

Education Policy Analysis Archives Vol. 28 No. 143                                                         21


                                                                                             efficiency, ability,
   Hawaii                                                                                     and other such
                                                                                                   criteria
                                                optional:
                                                parents/
    Idaho                                      guardians,        Yes                             standards
                                                teachers,
                                                students

                                                                                             job requirements
                                                                                                (i.e. duties,
   Illinois                                                      Yes                                                Yes
                                                                                               management),
                                                                                                 standards

                                                                             achievement
                                                                               optional,
   Indiana                                                    Optional           other         observations         Yes
                                                                             assessments
                                                                               required
                                                                                                 standards,
    Iowa            Yes                                                                         documents,
                                                                                                  artifacts

                                                                                                efficiency,
                                                                                                 personal
                                                                             performance         qualities,
   Kansas                                     community
                                                                              and results      deportment,
                                                                                              ability, results,
                                                                                             and performance

                                                                                              standards, self-
                                               teachers,
                                                                                              reflection, site
                                               students,
  Kentucky                        Yes                            Yes                               visits,
                                                 peers,
                                                                                               performance
                                              supervisors
                                                                                                  criteria
                                                                                 other
                                                                                             job descriptions,
  Louisiana                       Yes                            Yes         student data,                          Yes
                                                                                               observations
                                                                             value-added
                                                                                                 standards,
                                                                                                  multiple
    Maine                                        peer            Yes
                                                                                                 measures
                                                                                                 (unlisted)
                                                                                                standards,
  Maryland                                                       Yes                                                Yes
                                                                                               observations
                                                                             learning and      observations,
Massachusetts                     Yes            staff           Yes
                                                                             achievement     relevant evidence
  Michigan                                                       Yes         value-added
                                                                                                 standards,
                                                                              multiple
                                                                                               observations,
                                                                Yes,         measures of
  Minnesota                                                                                       previous          Yes
                                                            longitudinally    student
                                                                                                evaluations
                                                                              progress
                                                                                                   surveys

Principal Evaluation in the United States                                                        22


                                                                        school
  Mississippi                                  staff                                  observations
                                                                       outcomes
   Missouri
                                                                                         standards,
                                                                                      assessment of
                                                                                      effectiveness,
   Montana                                                                          skill sets, support
                                                                                      of students in
                                                                                    meeting learning
                                                                                            goals

                                                                                      Several types
                                                                                        including
  Nebraska
                                                                                    professional and
                                                                                    personal conduct

                                                                                      observations,
                                                                                    involvement and
                                                                                    engagement with
                                                                                        parents and
                                                                                    student families,
                                                                                       instructional
   Nevada                                                    Yes      performance                         Yes
                                                                                        leadership,
                                                                                        support of
                                                                                         learning,
                                                                                     effectiveness of
                                                                                          school
                                                                                        community

   New
 Hampshire
                                                                                        standards
                                                                                     required; other
 New Jersey                         Yes     supervisor       Yes                                          Yes
                                                                                         sources
                                                                                        suggested
                                             school                                  competencies
 New Mexico
                                            employees                                and indicators
                                                                        multiple
  New York                                                   Yes      measures in     observations        Yes
                                                                      performance

                                            supervisor                              teacher retention,
                                             required;                               teacher support,
    North                                    optional:                                  and school
                                    Yes
   Carolina                                   parents,                                climate, other
                                             students,                                    artifacts
                                            community                                    suggested
North Dakota
   Ohio                                                    Optional                   options given
 Oklahoma                           Yes     stakeholders                                standards
                                                                       multiple     options given but
   Oregon                                                    Yes
                                                                       measures       not required

Education Policy Analysis Archives Vol. 28 No. 143                                                   23


                                                optional:               performance         standards,
                                             family, parent,            (not limited        additional
Pennsylvania        Yes                                                                                       yes
                                               school and                to testing),   options given but
                                               community                value-added       not required

                                               students,
                                                                                          observations,
                                              parents and
                                                                                        demonstration of
Rhode Island                      Yes          guardians,      Yes
                                                                                          professional
                                              colleagues,
                                                                                         responsibilities
                                              supervisors
South Carolina                                                                               standards
                                                                                          demonstrate
                                                                                             ability to
                                                                                          communicate
                                                                                        with staff, review
South Dakota        Yes                                                                   research and
                                                                                                data,
                                                                                          management
                                                                                        skills, and school
                                                                                               safety
                                                                        achievement,      observation,
  Tennessee                                                    Yes                                            Yes
                                                                        value-added         surveys
    Texas                         Yes                          Yes                         standards          Yes
                                               students,
                                                                                         observations,
                                                parents,
                                                                                            optional
    Utah                                       teachers,       Yes
                                                                                        contributions by
                                                support
                                                                                            evaluee
                                             professionals
                                                                                          observations,
  Vermont                         Yes                          Yes
                                                                                            artifacts
                                                                                        standards, skills
                                                                           student      and knowledge,
   Virginia
                                                                           learning      school safety,
                                                                                           discipline
                                                                                        job description,
                                                                          multiple
 Washington                                  building staff    Yes                      and much more
                                                                          measures
                                                                                            criteria
                                               teachers,
                                                                                           standards,
                                               students,
                                                                                          observations,
West Virginia                     Yes           parents,       Yes      achievement                           Yes
                                                                                          professional
                                                service
                                                                                            conduct
                                               personnel
                                                                                            educator
                                                                                            practice,
  Wisconsin                                                             performance                           Yes
                                                                                           standards,
                                                                                          observations
                                                                                        goal setting, self-
                                                                                        analysis, info and
  Wyoming                         Yes                          Yes
                                                                                          data analysis,
                                                                                         state standards
Note: Blank squares represent missing or unfound information in state statutes and regulations.

Principal Evaluation in the United States                                                           24


                                                    Appendix 2
                                    Feedback in Principal Evaluation
                     Trained
State               Evaluator                 Timeliness                           Frequency
Alabama                                                                             Annually
Alaska                 Yes                   September 15                           Annually
Arizona                Yes
Arkansas                                                                 Not required first three years
                                                                    Annually first two years, then governing
California                                                                     board's discretion
Colorado               Yes
Connecticut            Yes              As soon as practical       annually - pre, mid, and end year reviews
Delaware               Yes                                        Annually - goal-setting, mid, and summative
Florida                Yes                  Within 10 days                          Annually
Georgia                Yes                  Within 10 days                Annually - pre, mid, & sum
Hawaii                                                                              Annually
Idaho                  Yes                                                          Annually
Illinois                                                                            Annually
Indiana                Yes                   Within 7 days                          Annually
Iowa                   Yes                                                          Annually
                                                                 Biannually first two years, annually third and
Kansas
                                                                 fourth year, every three years after fourth year
Kentucky               Yes                  Within one week                         Annually
Louisiana              Yes                                                          Annually
Maine                  Yes                                                   Once every three years
Maryland               Yes                                                          Annually
Massachusetts          Yes                                                          Annually
Michigan               Yes                      Timely                              Annually
Minnesota              Yes                                                          Annually
Mississippi                                                                         Annually
Missouri
Montana                                                           Annually if nontenured, regularly if tenured
Nebraska               Yes                     Promptly

Education Policy Analysis Archives Vol. 28 No. 143                                                  25


Nevada                                                                     Annually if probationary
New
Hampshire
New Jersey            Yes          Within 15 teaching days            Twice/year or three if not tenured
New Mexico            Yes             As soon as possible                          Annually
New York              Yes           As soon as practicable                         Annually
North
                      Yes                                                   Annually - mid & sum
Carolina
                                  On or before December or
North Dakota                                                    Biannually first three years, annually afterward
                                            April 15
                                  End of contract year or 60
Ohio                                                                               Annually
                                  days before end of contract
Oklahoma              Yes                                                          Annually
Oregon                                                                           Regular cycle
Pennsylvania
Rhode Island          Yes                                                      Cyclical process
South Carolina                                                                Every three years
                                                                 Annually for first four years and biannually
South Dakota
                                                                                   afterward
Tennessee             Yes                                                          Annually
Texas                 Yes                                       Annually - pre, mid, and end year conference
Utah                  Yes                                                          Annually
Vermont               Yes
Virginia                                                                      Every three years
                                                                Annually for first three years, comprehensive
Washington            Yes
                                                                           every six years thereafter
West Virginia         Yes             On or before July 1                          Annually
Wisconsin
                                 Determined by the board of
Wyoming               Yes                                                          Annually
                                            trustees
Note: Blank squares represent missing or unfound information in state statutes and regulations

Principal Evaluation in the United States                                                           26


                                               References

1 CCR 301
4 AAC 19.055
70 OK Stat § 70-6-101.31 (2018).
American Statistical Association. (2014). ASA statement on using value-added models for educational
        assessment. http://www.amstat.org/ASA/Science-Policy-and-Advocacy/home.aspx
Amsterdam, C. E., Johnson, R. L., Monrad, D. M., & Tonnsen, S. L. (2003). A collaborative
        approach to the development and validation of a principal evaluation system: A case study.
        Journal of Personnel Evaluation in Education, 17(3), 221–242. http://doi.org/10.1007/s11092-
        005-2981-y
Anderson, L. M., & Turnball, B. J. (2016). Evaluating and supporting principals. (PR-2105). Policy
        Studies Associates. Wallace Foundation. Retrieved from
        https://www.wallacefoundation.org/knowledge-center/Documents/Building-a-Stronger-
        Principalship-Vol-4-Evaluating-and-Supporting-Principals.pdf
ARS §15-203 (2018).
Babo, G., & Ramaswami, S. (2011). Principal evaluation and the application of the ISLLC 2008
        standards' 'functions' by school superintendents: A national study. International Studies in
        Educational Administration, 39, 77–90.
Babo, G., & Villaverde, C. (2013). Principal evaluation using a comprehensive portfolio
        development approach to facilitate professional growth and renewal. International Studies in
        Educational Administration, 41, 93–102.
Berliner, D. C. (2008). Research policy, and practice: The great disconnect. In S. D. Lapan & M. T.
        Quartaroli (Eds.), Research essentials: An introduction to designs and practices (pp. 295–326). Jossey-
        Bass.
Berliner, D. C., & Biddle, B. (1996). The manufactured crisis: Myths, frauds, and the attack on America’s
        public schools. Basic Books. http://doi.org/10.2307/358281
Borman, G. D., Hewes, G. M., Overman, L. T., & Brown, S. (2003). Comprehensive school reform
        and achievement: A meta-analysis. Review of Educational Research, 73(2), 125–230.
        https://doi.org/10.3102/00346543073002125
Boyd, D., Grossman, P., Ing, M., Lankford, H., Loeb, S., & Wyckoff, J. (2011). The influence of
        school administration on teacher retention decisions. American Educational Research Journal,
        48(2), 303–333. https://doi.org/10.3102/0002831210380788
Catano, N., & Stronge, J. H. (2007). What do we expect of school principals? Congruence between
        principal evaluation and performance standards. International Journal of Leadership in Education:
        Theory and Practice, 10(4), 379–399. https://doi.org/10.1080/13603120701381782
Ch, A. H., Ahmad, S., Malik, M., & Batool, A. (2017). Principals' leadership styles and teachers' job
        satisfaction: A correlation study at secondary level. Bulletin of Education and Research, 39(3), 45–
        56. http://doi.org/10.1037/e572162012-001
Clifford, M., Behrstock-Sherratt, E., & Fetters, J. (2012). The ripple effect: A synthesis of research on
        principal influence to inform performance evaluation design. American Institutes for Research.
        https://www.air.org/sites/default/files/downloads/report/1707_The_Ripple_Effect_d8_O
        nline_0.pdf
Clifford, M., & Ross, S. (2011). Designing principal evaluation systems: Research to guide decision-
        making, an executive summary of current research. Retrieved from
        https://www.naesp.org/sites/default/files/PrincipalEvaluation_ExecutiveSummary.pdf
Clifford, M., & Ross, S. (2012). The future of principal evaluation. Principal, 91(5), 16–19.

Education Policy Analysis Archives Vol. 28 No. 143                                              27


Clifford, M., & Ross, S. (2013). A new look at principal evaluation. Principal Leadership, 13(7), 51–52.
Coburn, C. E., Hill, H. C., & Spillane, J. P. (2016). Alignment and accountability in policy design and
        implementation: The Common Core State Standards and implementation research.
        Educational Researcher, 45(4), 243–251. https://doi.org/10.3102/0013189X16651080
Connecticut State Department of Education (2017, October). Connecticut Guidelines for Educator
        Evaluation. https://portal.ct.gov/-/media/SDE/Evaluation-and-
        Support/Guidelines_for_Educator_Evaluation_2017.pdf?la=en
Cuban, L. (2013). Inside the black box of classroom practice: Change without reform in American education.
        Harvard Education Press.
Daly, A. J., & Finnigan, K. S. (2011). The ebb and flow of social network ties between district
        leaders under high-stakes accountability. American Educational Research Journal, 48(1), 39–79.
        https://doi.org/10.3102/0002831210368990
Day, C., & Bakioğlu, A. (1996). Development and disenchantment in the professional lives of
        headteachers. In I. Goodson & A. Hargreaves (Eds.), Teachers’ professional lives (pp. 123–139).
        The Falmer Press.
Del. Code tit. 14, §108
Derrington, M. L., & Campbell, J. W. (2017). Teacher evaluation policy tools: Principals’ selective
        use in instructional leadership. Leadership and Policy in Schools.
        https://doi.org/10.1080/15700763.2017.1326143
Diaz-Delgado, M. A., & Garcia-Martinez, I. (2019). Estándares para la dirección escolar en España y
        México: Un estudio comparativo. Archivos Analíticos de Políticas Educativas, 27(113).
        https://doi.org/10.14507/epaa.27.4565
Every Student Succeeds Act (July 31, 2018).
        https://legcounsel.house.gov/Comps/Elementary%20And%20Secondary%20Education%2
        0Act%20Of%201965.pdf
Farley, A.N., Childs, J., & Johnson, O.A. (2019). Preparing leaders for wicked problems? How the
        revised PSEL and NELP standards address equity and justice. Education Policy Analysis
        Archives, 27(115). https://doi.org/10.14507/epaa.27.4229
Fla. Rule 6A (2018).
Flores, M. A., & Derrington, M. L. (2017). School principals’ views of teacher evaluation policy:
        Lessons learned from two empirical studies. International Journal of Leadership in Education,
        20(4), 416–431. https://doi.org/10.1080/13603124.2015.1094144
Ford, T. G., Urick, A., & Wilson, A. (2018). Exploring the effect of supportive teacher evaluation
        experiences on U.S. teachers’ job satisfaction. Education Policy Analysis Archives, 26(59).
        http://doi.org/10.14507/epaa.26.3559
Fullan, M. (2001). Leading in a culture of change. Jossey-Bass.
Fullan, M. (2014). The principal: Three keys to maximizing impact. Jossey-Bass.
Fuller, E. J., & Hollingworth, L. (2014). A bridge too far? Challenges in evaluating principal
        effectiveness. Educational Administration Quarterly, 50(3), 466–499.
        https://doi.org/10.1177/0013161X13506595
Fuller, E. J., Hollingworth, L., & Lui, J. (2015). Evaluating state principal evaluation plans across the
        United States. Journal of Research on Leadership Education, 10(3), 164–192.
        https://doi.org/10.1177/1942775115614291
Ga. Code 160 §5
Garza, E., Drysdale, L., Gurr, D., Jacobson, S., & Merchant, B. (2014). Leadership for school
        success: Lessons from effective principals. International Journal of Educational Management, 28(7),
        798–811. https://doi.org/10.1108/IJEM-08-2013-0125

Principal Evaluation in the United States                                                     28


Gates, S. M., Ringel, J. S., Santibañez, L., Gaurino, S., Ghosh-Dastidar, B., & Brown, A. (2006).
        Mobility and turnover among school principals. Economics of Education Review, 25, 289–302.
        https://doi.org/10.1016/j.econedurev.2005.01.008
Glickman, C. D., Gordon, S. P., & Ross-Gordon, J. M. (2017). SuperVision and instructional leadership:
        A developmental approach (10th ed.). Pearson.
Goldring, E., Cravens, X. C., Murphy, J., Porter, A. C., Elliott, S. N., & Carson, B. (2009). The
        evaluation of principals: What and how do states and urban districts assess leadership? The
        Elementary School Journal, 110(1), 19–39. https://doi.org/10.1086/598841
Goldring, E. B., Grissom, J. A., Rubin, M., Neumerski, C. M., Cannata, M., Drake, T., &
        Schuermann, P. (2015). Make room value added: Principals’ human capital decisions and the
        emergence of teacher observation data. Educational Researcher, 44(2), 96–104.
        https://doi.org/10.3102/0013189X15575031
Goldring, E. B., Mavrogordato, M., & Haynes, K. T. (2015). Multisource principal evaluation data:
        Principals’ orientations and reactions to teacher feedback regarding their leadership
        effectiveness. Educational Administration Quarterly, 51(4), 572–599.
        https://doi.org/10.1177/0013161X14556152
Good, T. L., & Lavigne, A. L. (2015). Issues of teacher performance stability are not new:
        Limitations and possibilities [Peer commentary on the paper, “The stability of teacher
        performance and effectiveness: Implications of policies concerning teacher evaluation” by
        G. B. Morgan, K. J. Hodge, T. M. Trepinksi, & L. W. Anderson]. Education Policy Analysis
        Archives, 23(2). http://dx.doi.org/10.14507/epaa.v22n95.2014
Gross, B., Booker, T. K., & Goldhaber, D. (2009). Boosting student achievement: The effect of
        comprehensive school reform on student achievement. Educational Evaluation and Policy
        Analysis, 31(2), 111–126. https://doi.org/10.3102/0162373709333886
Grossman, P., Cohen, J., Ronfeldt, M., & Brown, L. (2014). The test matters: The relationship
        between classroom observation scores and teacher value-added on multiple types of
        assessment. Educational Researcher, 43(6), 293–303.
        https://doi.org/10.3102/0013189X14544542
Gullickson, A.R., & Howard, B.B. (2009). The Personnel Evaluation Standards: How to assess systems for
        evaluating educators (2nd ed.). Corwin Press.
Harrison, W. C., & Peterson, K. D. (1986). Pitfalls in the evaluation of principals. Urban Review,
        18(4), 221–235. https://doi.org/10.1007/BF01112130
Hattie, J. A. C. (2009). Visible learning: A synthesis of over 800 meta-analyses related to achievement.
        Routledge.
HI Rev. Stat. §302A
Hill, H. C., Kapitula, L., & Umland, K. (2011). A validity argument approach to evaluating teacher
        value-added scores. American Educational Research Journal, 48(3), 794–831.
        https://doi.org/10.3102/0002831210387916
Honig, M. I. (2003). Building policy from practice: District central office administrators’ roles and
        capacity for implementing collaborative education policy. Educational Administration Quarterly,
        39(3), 292–338. https://doi.org/10.1177/0013161X03253414
Honig, M. I., & Hatch, T. C. (2004). Crafting coherence: How schools strategically manage m
        multiple, external demands. Educational Researcher, 33(8), 16–
        30. https://doi.org/10.3102/0013189X033008016
Howell, W. G. (2015). Results of President Obama’s Race to the Top. Education Next, 15(4), 58-66.
        https://www.educationnext.org/results-president-obama-race-to-the-top-reform/
Hvidston, D. J., McKim, C. A., & Holmes, W. T. (2018). What are principals’ perceptions?

Education Policy Analysis Archives Vol. 28 No. 143                                                 29


        Recommendations for improving the supervision and evaluation of principals. NASSP
        Bulletin, 102(3), 214–227.
Hvidston, D. J., Range, B. G., & McKim, C. A. (2015). Principals’ perceptions regarding their
        supervision and evaluation. AASA Journal of Scholarship & Practice, 12(3), 20–33.
ILCS 105 §24A (2019).
Ind. Admin. Code, 511 §10 (2016).
Kaid, L. L., & Johnson, A. J. (1989). Content analysis. In P. Emmert & L. L. Barker (Eds.),
        Measurement of Communication Behavior (pp. 197–217). Longman.
Kan. Stat. tit. 281 §72
Kennedy, M. (2005). Inside teaching: How classroom life undermines reform. Harvard University Press.
        https://doi.org/10.4159/9780674039513
Kostyo, S., Cardichon, J., & Darling-Hammond, L. (2018). Making ESSA’s equity promise real: State
        strategies to close the opportunity gap. Learning Policy Institute.
        https://learningpolicyinstitute.org/
Kraft, M. A., & Gilmour, A. F. (2016). Can principals promote teacher development as evaluators?
        A case study of principals’ views and experiences. Educational Administration Quarterly, 52(5),
        711–753. https://doi.org/10.1177/0013161X16653445
La. Code tit. 28 §301
Ladd, H. (2009). Teachers’ perceptions of their working conditions: How predictive of policy-relevant outcomes
        (National Center for Analysis of Longitudinal Data in Education Research Working Paper
        No. 33). CALDER. www.caldercenter.org/upload/Working-paper-33_FINAL.pdf
Lambert, M., & Bouchamma, Y. (2019). The development of competencies required for school
        principals in Quebec: Adequacy between competency standard and practice. Education Policy
        Analysis Archives, 27(116). https://doi.org/10.14507/epaa.27.4211
Larochelle-Audet, J., Magnan, M.O., Potvin, M., & Doré, E. (2019). Comparative and critical
        analysis of competency standards for school principals: Towards an inclusive and equity
        perspective in Québec. Education Policy Analysis Archives, 27(112).
        https://doi.org/10.14507/epaa.27.4217
Lavigne, A. L. (2014). Exploring the implications of high-stakes teacher evaluation on schools,
        teachers, and students. Teachers College Record, 116(1), 1–21.
        https://www.tcrecord.org/Content.asp?ContentId=17294
Lavigne, A. L., & Chamberlain, R. (2017). Teacher evaluation in Illinois: School leaders’ perceptions
        and practices. Educational Assessment, Evaluation and Accountability, 29(2), 179– 209.
        https://doi.org/10.1007/s11092-016-9250-0
Lavigne, A. L., & Good, T. L. (2019). Enhancing teacher education, development, and evaluation: Lessons
        learned from educational reform. Routledge. https://doi.org/10.4324/9781315630892
Lavigne, A. L., & Good, T. L. (2015). Improving teaching through observation and feedback: Going beyond state
        and federal mandates. Routledge. https://doi.org/10.4324/9781315777030
Lavigne, A. L., & Olson, A. M. (2019). Teacher evaluation through the eyes of the principal: How
        individual and school contexts shape perceptions of practice. Leadership & Policy in Schools.
        Advance online publication. https://doi.org/10.1080/15700763.2019.1637899
Leithwood, K., Louis, K. S., Anderson, S., & Whalstrom, K. (2004). Review of research: How leadership
        influences student learning. Wallace Foundation.
Leithwood, K., Patten, S., & Jantzi, D. (2010). Testing a conception of how school leadership
        influences student learning. Educational Administration Quarterly, 46(5), 671–706.
        https://doi.org/10.1177/0013161X10377347
Levin, S., & Bradley, K. (2019). Understanding and addressing principal turnover: A review of the research.
        National Association of Secondary School Principals.

Principal Evaluation in the United States                                                               30


Liu, S., Xu, X., Grant, L., Strong, J., & Feng, Z. (2017). Professional standards and performance
         evaluation for principals in China: A policy analysis of the development of principal
         standards. Educational Management Administration and Leadership, 45(2), 238–259.
         https://doi.org/10.1177/1741143215587304
Loeb, S., Dynarski, S., McFarland, D., Morris, P., Reardon, S., & Reber, S. (2017). Descriptive analysis
         in education: A guide for researchers. (NCEE 2017–4023). U.S. Department of Education,
         Institute of Education Sciences, National Center for Education Evaluation and Regional
         Assistance. https://files.eric.ed.gov/fulltext/ED573325.pdf
Lubienski, C., DeBray, E., & Scott, J. (2016, May 26). The push and pull of research: Lessons from a multi-
         site study of research use in educational policy. http://wtgrantfoundation.org/push-pull-research-
         lessons-multi-site-study-research-use-education-policy
Makel, M. C., & Plucker, J. A. (Eds.). (2017). Toward a more perfect psychology: Improving trust, accuracy, and
         transparency in research. American Psychological Association.
         https://doi.org/10.1037/0000033-000
Marzano, R. J., Waters, T., & McNulty, B. A. (2005). School leadership that works: From research to results.
         ASCD.
McMahon, M., Peters, M. L., & Schumacher, G. (2014). The principal evaluation process and its
         relationship to student achievement. AASA Journal of Scholarship & Practice, 11(3), 34–48.
Micheaux, D. J., & Parvin, J. L. (2018). Principal evaluation as a tool for growth: How to help
         principals lead and learn. Learning Professional, 39(2), 52–55.
Miles, M. B., Huberman, A. M., & Saldaña, J. (2014). Qualitative data analysis: A methods sourcebook (3rd
         ed.). Sage.
Mont. Admin. Rules §10.55.701
Moss, C. M., & Brookhart, S. M. (2015). Formative classroom walkthroughs: How principals and teachers
         collaborate to raise student achievement. ASCD.
National Association of Elementary School Principals & National Association of Secondary School
         Principals. (2012). Rethinking principal evaluation: A new paradigm informed by research and practice.
         NAESP & NASSP.
         https://www.naesp.org/sites/default/files/PrincipalEvaluationReport.pdf
National Center for Education Statistics. (2019). Characteristics of public and private elementary and
         secondary school principals in the United States: Results from the 2017-2018 national teacher and principal
         survey: First look. (Eds., S. Taie & R. Goldring).
         https://nces.ed.gov/pubs2019/2019141_RNTPS1L.pdf
National Conference of State Legislators. (2013). Evaluating school principals: A legislative
         approach. https://www.ncsl.org/documents/educ/SchoolPrincipals.pdf
National Council on Teacher Quality. (2017). Running in place: How new teacher evaluations fail to live up to
         the promises. https://www.nctq.org/publications/Running-in-Place:-How-New-Teacher-
         Evaluations-Fail-to-Live-Up-to-Promises
National Policy Board of Educational Administration. (2020). Professional standards for educational
         leaders. https://ccsso.org/resource-library/professional-standards-educational-leaders
NJAC 6A §10
NMAC 6 §69
NY CRR tit. 8 § 30
OAC 210 §20
Oplatka, I. (2001). Types of difficulties in the induction stage: Retrospective voices of women
         principals. Planning and Changing, 31(1/2), 1–12.

Education Policy Analysis Archives Vol. 28 No. 143                                               31


Pashiardis, P., &Brauckmann, S. (2008). Evaluation of school principals. In G. Crow, J. Lumby, & P.
         Pashiardis (Eds.), International handbook on the preparation and development of school leaders (pp.
         263–279). Routledge.
Payne, C. M. (2008). So much reform, so little change: The persistence of failure in urban schools. Harvard
         Education Press.
Pa. Code, 022 §19 (2013).
Polikoff, M. S., & Porter, A. C. (2014). Instructional alignment as a measure of teaching quality.
         Educational Evaluation and Policy Analysis. https://doi.org/10.3102/0162373714531851
RCW 295 §303
Rist, R. (1994). Influencing the policy process with qualitative research. In N. K. Denzin & Y. S.
         Lincoln (Eds.), Handbook of qualitative research (pp. 545–557). Sage.
Rivero, R., de M., Yañez, T., & Hurtado, C. (2019). Preparación para ejercer un liderazgo efectivo en
         Chile: Estudio de opinión a directores a partir del Marco para la Buena Dirección. Archivos
         Analíticos de Políticas Educativas, 27(117). https://doi.org/10.14507/epaa.27.4391
Ross, E., & Walsh, K. (2019). State of the states 2019: Teacher and principal evaluation policy. National
         Council on Teacher Quality.
Sanders, N., Kearney, K., & Vince, S. (2012). Using multiple forms of data in principal evaluations: An
         overview with examples. WestEd.
SCCL 24 §59
Sinnema, C. J., & Robinson, V. M. (2012). Goal setting in principal evaluation: Goal quality and
         predictors of achievement. Leadership and Policy in Schools, 11, 135–167.
Sun, M., Youngs, P., Yang, H., Chu, H., & Zhao, Q. (2012). Association of district principal
         evaluation with learning-centered leadership practice: Evidence from Michigan and Beijing.
         Educational Assessment, Evaluation and Accountability, 24, 189–213.
         https://doi.org/10.1007/s11092-012-9145-7
Superville, D. R. (2014, May 20). States forge ahead on principal evaluation. Education Week.
         https://www.edweek.org/ew/articles/2014/05/21/32principals_ep.h33.html
Tennessee Department of Education. (2019). 2019 school accountability protocol user guide.
         https://www.tn.gov/content/dam/tn/education/accountability/acct/
         acct_protocol_user_guide.pdf
Thomas, D. W., Holdaway, E. A., & Ward, K. L. (2000). Policies and practices involved in the
         evaluation of school principals. Journal of Personnel Evaluation in Education, 14(3), 215–240.
         https://doi.org/10.1023/A:1008167130999
Tienken, C. H., Colella, A., Angelillo, C., Fox, M., McCahill, K. R., & Wolfe, A. (2017). Predicting
         middle level state standardized test results using family and community demographic data.
         Research in Middle Level Education, 40(1), 1–13.
         https://doi.org/10.1080/19404476.2016.1252304
Utah Admin. Code, R277-533 (2018).
Va. Code 15 §22.1
Van der Lans, R. M., van de Grift, W. J. C. M., van Veen, K., & Fokkens-Bruinsma, M. (2016). Once
         is not enough: Establishing reliability criteria for feedback and evaluation decisions based on
         classroom observations. Studies in Educational Evaluation, 50, 88–95.
         https://doi.org/10.1016/j.stueduc.2016.08.001
Wallace Foundation. (2013). The school principal as leader: Guiding schools to better teaching and learning.
         https://www.wallacefoundation.org/knowledge-center/Documents/The-School-Principal-
         as-Leader-Guiding-Schools-to-Better-Teaching-and-Learning-2nd-Ed.pdf
Weimer, D. L., & Vining, A. R. (2011). Policy analysis: Concepts and practice ( 6th ed.). Routledge.

Principal Evaluation in the United States                                                     32


West, D. H., Peck, C., & Reitzug, U. C. (2010). Limited control and relentless accountability:
        Examining historical changes in urban school principal pressure. Journal of School Leadership,
        20, 238–266. https://doi.org/10.1177/105268461002000206
W. Va. Code R., 126§142
Wyo. Admin. Rules 29 §3
Williams, S. M. (2015). The future of principal preparation and principal evaluation: Reflections of
        the current policy context for school leaders. Journal of Research on Leadership Education.
        https://doi.org/10.1177/1942775115621159
Williams, E., Persaud, G., & Turners, T. (2008). Planning for principal evaluation: Effects on school
        climate and achievement. Educational Planning, 17(3), 1–11.
Wis. Statute 115 §415
Zepeda, S. J., Lanoue, P. D., Price, N. F., & Jimenez, A. M. (2014). Principal evaluation – linking
        individual and building-level progress: Making the connections and embracing the tensions.
        School Leadership & Management, 34(4), 324–351.
        https://doi.org/10.1080/13632434.2014.928681


                                            About the Authors
Sarah R. Nielsen
Graduate Student, Utah State University
sarah.nielsen@usu.edu
ORCID: https://orcid.org/0000-0002-7478-7200
Sarah Nielsen is a doctoral student studying Instructional Leadership at Utah State University. She
has done research on social studies teachers and is interested in the effects of educational policies on
leadership and schools.

Alyson L. Lavigne
Assistant Professor, Utah State University
alyson.lavigne@usu.edu
ORCID: https://orcid.org/0000-0002-2763-4551
Alyson Lavigne is an Assistant Professor of Instructional Leadership at Utah State University.
Using her training as an educational psychologist and classroom researcher, her work explores
teacher supervision, evaluation, and retention, and student, teacher, and leader dynamics and
practices, particularly in schools that serve linguistically and culturally diverse learners.

Education Policy Analysis Archives Vol. 28 No. 143                                         33



                   education policy analysis archives
             Volume 28 Number 143            September 28, 2020           ISSN 1068-2341




                    Readers are free to copy, display, distribute, and adapt this article, as long as
the work is attributed to the author(s) and Education Policy Analysis Archives, the changes
are identified, and the same license applies to the derivative work. More details of this Creative
Commons license are available at https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-sa/4.0/. EPAA is
published by the Mary Lou Fulton Institute and Graduate School of Education at Arizona State
University Articles are indexed in CIRC (Clasificación Integrada de Revistas Científicas, Spain),
DIALNET (Spain), Directory of Open Access Journals, EBSCO Education Research Complete,
ERIC, Education Full Text (H.W. Wilson), QUALIS A1 (Brazil), SCImago Journal Rank, SCOPUS,
SOCOLAR (China).
Please send errata notes to Audrey Amrein-Beardsley at audrey.beardsley@asu.edu

Join EPAA’s Facebook community at https://www.facebook.com/EPAAAAPE and Twitter
feed @epaa_aape.

Principal Evaluation in the United States                                                                 34


                                     education policy analysis archives
                                              editorial board
                         Lead Editor: Audrey Amrein-Beardsley (Arizona State University)
                        Editor Consultor: Gustavo E. Fischman (Arizona State University)
 Associate Editors: Melanie Bertrand, David Carlson, Lauren Harris, Danah Henriksen, Eugene Judson, Mirka
          Koro-Ljungberg, Daniel Liou, Scott Marley, Molly Ott, Iveta Silova (Arizona State University)

Madelaine Adelman Arizona State         Amy Garrett Dikkers University       Gloria M. Rodriguez
University                              of North Carolina, Wilmington        University of California, Davis
Cristina Alfaro                         Gene V Glass                         R. Anthony Rolle
San Diego State University              Arizona State University             University of Houston
Gary Anderson                           Ronald Glass University of           A. G. Rud
New York University                     California, Santa Cruz               Washington State University

Michael W. Apple                        Jacob P. K. Gross                    Patricia Sánchez University of
University of Wisconsin, Madison        University of Louisville             University of Texas, San Antonio
Jeff Bale University of Toronto,        Eric M. Haas WestEd                  Janelle Scott University of
Canada                                                                       California, Berkeley
Aaron Benavot SUNY Albany               Julian Vasquez Heilig California     Jack Schneider University of
                                        State University, Sacramento         Massachusetts Lowell
David C. Berliner                       Kimberly Kappler Hewitt              Noah Sobe Loyola University
Arizona State University                University of North Carolina
Henry Braun Boston College              Greensboro
Casey Cobb                              Aimee Howley Ohio University         Nelly P. Stromquist
University of Connecticut                                                    University of Maryland
Arnold Danzig                           Steve Klees University of Maryland   Benjamin Superfine
San Jose State University               Jaekyung Lee SUNY Buffalo            University of Illinois, Chicago
Linda Darling-Hammond                   Jessica Nina Lester                  Adai Tefera
Stanford University                     Indiana University                   Virginia Commonwealth University
Elizabeth H. DeBray                     Amanda E. Lewis University of        A. Chris Torres
University of Georgia                   Illinois, Chicago                    Michigan State University
David E. DeMatthews                     Chad R. Lochmiller Indiana           Tina Trujillo
University of Texas at Austin           University                           University of California, Berkeley
Chad d'Entremont Rennie Center          Christopher Lubienski Indiana        Federico R. Waitoller
for Education Research & Policy         University                           University of Illinois, Chicago
John Diamond                            Sarah Lubienski Indiana University   Larisa Warhol
University of Wisconsin, Madison                                             University of Connecticut
Matthew Di Carlo                        William J. Mathis                    John Weathers University of
Albert Shanker Institute                University of Colorado, Boulder      Colorado, Colorado Springs
Sherman Dorn                            Michele S. Moses                     Kevin Welner
Arizona State University                University of Colorado, Boulder      University of Colorado, Boulder
Michael J. Dumas                        Julianne Moss                        Terrence G. Wiley
University of California, Berkeley      Deakin University, Australia         Center for Applied Linguistics
Kathy Escamilla                         Sharon Nichols                       John Willinsky
University of Colorado, Boulder         University of Texas, San Antonio     Stanford University
Yariv Feniger Ben-Gurion                Eric Parsons                         Jennifer R. Wolgemuth
University of the Negev                 University of Missouri-Columbia      University of South Florida
Melissa Lynn Freeman                    Amanda U. Potterton                  Kyo Yamashiro
Adams State College                     University of Kentucky               Claremont Graduate University
Rachael Gabriel                         Susan L. Robertson                   Miri Yemini
University of Connecticut               Bristol University                   Tel Aviv University, Israel

Education Policy Analysis Archives Vol. 28 No. 143                                                      35


                                arquivos analíticos de políticas educativas
                                           conselho editorial
                        Editor Consultor: Gustavo E. Fischman (Arizona State University)
   Editoras Coordenadores: Marcia Pletsch, Sandra Regina Sales (Universidade Federal Rural do Rio de Janeiro)
     Editores Associadas: Andréa Barbosa Gouveia (Universidade Federal do Paraná), Kaizo Iwakami Beltrao
  (EBAPE/FGVl), Sheizi Calheira de Freitas (Federal University of Bahia), Maria Margarida Machado (Federal
 University of Goiás / Universidade Federal de Goiás), Gilberto José Miranda, (Universidade Federal de Uberlândia)

Almerindo Afonso                        Alexandre Fernandez Vaz                 José Augusto Pacheco
Universidade do Minho                   Universidade Federal de Santa           Universidade do Minho, Portugal
Portugal                                Catarina, Brasil

Rosanna Maria Barros Sá                 Regina Célia Linhares Hostins           Jane Paiva
Universidade do Algarve                 Universidade do Vale do Itajaí,         Universidade do Estado do Rio de
Portugal                                Brasil                                  Janeiro, Brasil

Maria Helena Bonilla                    Alfredo Macedo Gomes                    Paulo Alberto Santos Vieira
Universidade Federal da Bahia           Universidade Federal de Pernambuco      Universidade do Estado de Mato
Brasil                                  Brasil                                  Grosso, Brasil

Rosa Maria Bueno Fischer                Jefferson Mainardes                     Fabiany de Cássia Tavares Silva
Universidade Federal do Rio Grande      Universidade Estadual de Ponta          Universidade Federal do Mato
do Sul, Brasil                          Grossa, Brasil                          Grosso do Sul, Brasil

Alice Casimiro Lopes                    Jader Janer Moreira Lopes               António Teodoro
Universidade do Estado do Rio de        Universidade Federal Fluminense e       Universidade Lusófona
Janeiro, Brasil                         Universidade Federal de Juiz de Fora,   Portugal
                                        Brasil
Suzana Feldens Schwertner                Debora Nunes                           Lílian do Valle
Centro Universitário Univates            Universidade Federal do Rio Grande     Universidade do Estado do Rio de
Brasil                                  do Norte, Brasil                        Janeiro, Brasil

Geovana Mendonça Lunardi                Alda Junqueira Marin                    Alfredo Veiga-Neto
Mendes Universidade do Estado de         Pontifícia Universidade Católica de     Universidade Federal do Rio Grande
Santa Catarina                          São Paulo, Brasil                       do Sul, Brasil

Flávia Miller Naethe Motta              Dalila Andrade Oliveira
Universidade Federal Rural do Rio de    Universidade Federal de Minas
Janeiro, Brasil                         Gerais, Brasil

Principal Evaluation in the United States                                                                      36


                               archivos analíticos de políticas educativas
                                           consejo editorial
                          Editor Consultor: Gustavo E. Fischman (Arizona State University)
       Coordinador (Español / Latinoamérica): Ignacio Barrenechea, Axel Rivas (Universidad de San Andrés
 Editor Coordinador (Español / Norteamérica): Armando Alcántara Santuario (Universidad Nacional Autónoma de
                                                     México)
                  Editor Coordinador (Español / España): Antonio Luzon (Universidad de Granada)
Editores Asociados: Felicitas Acosta (Universidad Nacional de General Sarmiento), Jason Beech ( Universidad de San
   Andrés), Angelica Buendia, (Metropolitan Autonomous University), Alejandra Falabella (Universidad Alberto
 Hurtado, Chile), Veronica Gottau (Universidad Torcuato Di Tella), Carolina Guzmán-Valenzuela (Universidade de
                     Chile), Cesar Lorenzo Rodriguez Uribe (Universidad Marista de Guadalajara
María Teresa Martín Palomo (University of Almería), María Fernández Mellizo-Soto (Universidad Complutense de
Madrid), Tiburcio Moreno (Autonomous Metropolitan University-Cuajimalpa Unit), José Luis Ramírez, (Universidad
                   de Sonora), Maria Veronica Santelices (Pontificia Universidad Católica de Chile)

  Claudio Almonacid                         Ana María García de Fanelli             Miriam Rodríguez Vargas
  Universidad Metropolitana de              Centro de Estudios de Estado y          Universidad Autónoma de
  Ciencias de la Educación, Chile           Sociedad (CEDES) CONICET,               Tamaulipas, México
                                            Argentina
  Miguel Ángel Arias Ortega                 Juan Carlos González Faraco             José Gregorio Rodríguez
  Universidad Autónoma de la                Universidad de Huelva, España           Universidad Nacional de Colombia,
  Ciudad de México                                                                  Colombia
  Xavier Besalú Costa                       María Clemente Linuesa                  Mario Rueda Beltrán Instituto de
  Universitat de Girona, España             Universidad de Salamanca, España        Investigaciones sobre la Universidad
                                                                                    y la Educación, UNAM, México
  Xavier Bonal Sarro Universidad            Jaume Martínez Bonafé                   José Luis San Fabián Maroto
  Autónoma de Barcelona, España              Universitat de València, España        Universidad de Oviedo,
                                                                                    España

  Antonio Bolívar Boitia                    Alejandro Márquez Jiménez               Jurjo Torres Santomé, Universidad
  Universidad de Granada, España            Instituto de Investigaciones sobre la   de la Coruña, España
                                            Universidad y la Educación,
                                            UNAM, México
  José Joaquín Brunner Universidad          María Guadalupe Olivier Tellez,         Yengny Marisol Silva Laya
  Diego Portales, Chile                     Universidad Pedagógica Nacional,        Universidad Iberoamericana,
                                            México                                  México
  Damián Canales Sánchez                    Miguel Pereyra Universidad de           Ernesto Treviño Ronzón
  Instituto Nacional para la                Granada, España                         Universidad Veracruzana, México
  Evaluación de la Educación,
  México

  Gabriela de la Cruz Flores                Mónica Pini Universidad Nacional        Ernesto Treviño Villarreal
  Universidad Nacional Autónoma de          de San Martín, Argentina                Universidad Diego Portales
  México                                                                            Santiago, Chile
  Marco Antonio Delgado Fuentes             Omar Orlando Pulido Chaves              Antoni Verger Planells
  Universidad Iberoamericana,               Instituto para la Investigación         Universidad Autónoma de
  México                                    Educativa y el Desarrollo               Barcelona, España
                                            Pedagógico (IDEP)
  Inés Dussel, DIE-CINVESTAV,               José Ignacio Rivas Flores               Catalina Wainerman
  México                                    Universidad de Málaga, España           Universidad de San Andrés,
                                                                                    Argentina
  Pedro Flores Crespo Universidad                                                   Juan Carlos Yáñez Velazco
  Iberoamericana, México                                                            Universidad de Colima, México