Article

THE EFFECT OF                                                            JURNAL KEPEMIMPINAN PENDIDIKAN
                                                                                          2021, Vol. 4(2)PAGE 566-574
SCHOOL MANAGEMENT                                                                                      ©Author, 2021
AND STUDENT                                                                                         p-ISSN 2086-2881
                                                                                                     e-ISSN 2598-621X
LEARNING CULTURE
ON STUDENT LEARNING
EFFECTIVENESS


Delpi LIMBONG1, Ihsana El KHULUQO2, ISTARYATININGTIAS3
SDN Jatipulo 06 Pagi¹, Muhammadiyah University of Prof. DR. HAMKA2,3
delpianur88@gmail.com1, Ihsana_khuluqo@uhamka.ac.id2, iis_ningtias@uhamka.ac.id3


                                                   ABSTRACT


The effectiveness of student learning in schools is the main responsibility of a leader, where leaders help teachers
to do better. Performance appraisals are conducted to tell teachers what management expects to build a better
understanding of each other. Assessment must recognize achievement and make plans to improve Student
Learning Effectiveness. Research objectives: 1) To find out how much influence school management has on
student learning effectiveness. 2) To find out how much influence the Student Learning Culture has on the
Effectiveness of Student Learning. 3) To find out how much influence School Management and Student Learning
Culture collectively have on Student Learning Effectiveness. This research is a case study research with a survey
approach. The sample amounted to 61 people with Use a simple random sample method to determine the sample
size. Data is collected through questionnaires and interviews, and data analysis techniques use multiple regression
techniques. Conclusion: 1) School management has a positive impact on improving student learning efficiency.
2) Student learning culture has a positive impact on improving student learning efficiency. 3) Have a positive
impact on school management and Student Learning Culture together to increase the effectiveness of student
learning.

Keywords: School Management, Learning Culture and Student Learning Effectiveness


INTRODUCTION
       Education is one of the means to improve the quality of human resources (HR), where basically
education has a role in increasing basic human abilities to be able to utilize, develop, and master science
and technology. Quality human resources are very important, in carrying out sustainable development.
Therefore, the expansion and equitable distribution of learning opportunities is one of the main priorities
in development, both educational facilities and infrastructure.
       The mandate to carry out various educations needed to fulfill independence and liberate the life
of the nation is stated in the fourth paragraph of the Preamble to the 1945 Constitution, namely: "to
educate the life of the nation, and in Article 31 of the 1945 Constitution, that: (1) Every citizens have
the right to receive teaching, (2) The government seeks to organize a national teaching system regulated
by law (UU). The definition of "teaching" in Article 31 of the 1945 Constitution is identical to the
definition of education as it is known today. The term "teaching" in the past was also attached to the
name of the Department of Teaching which is now the Ministry of National Education. Changes in the
important nature of the HR function and the HR department. These changes require HR to continuously
improve their commitment, skills, knowledge and high abilities. The existence of school management



                                                                 Jurnal Kepemimpinan Pendidikan | 566

is very necessary in every school in In order to achieve the set goals. As we all know, achieving the
goals of this school is what every school wants. But on the other hand, if teachers perform poorly, it is
of course difficult to achieve good and satisfactory results.. The low performance of the teacher is more
unfavorable if the teacher experiences difficulties at work and tends to give up rather than overcoming
these difficulties.
       School culture demonstrates the values, beliefs and principles that underlie a school management
system as well as management practices and behaviors that reinforce and reinforce these basic
principles. The existence of a good school culture will facilitate the achievement of good student
achievement.
       From this description, it can provide an understanding that the school's organizational culture
will be able to explain how schools function, such as whether the school's internal mechanisms occur,
because school members enter schools with the cultural provisions they have, some of which are
positive, namely those that support quality improvement. learning. However, there is something
negative, namely that it hinders efforts to improve the quality of learning.
       This is in accordance with the results of research conducted by (Guruh Rafsanjani and Sulasno,
2017) A positive culture that is less supportive has resulted in delays or delays in the implementation
of school policies, meaning that organizational culture with all its problems can interfere or affect the
effectiveness of school policies. The results show that from the results of correlation analysis and
regression equation, the correlation value r=0.627 of organizational culture (X) to school policy (Y)
effectiveness, that is, organizational culture (X) school policy effectiveness (Y) is very strong. And the
nature of the relationship is positive (+), which means that the better the organizational culture, the
higher the effectiveness of school policies. The value of the determinant coefficient is 39%. Thus, it can
be seen that the level of influence of organizational culture on the effectiveness of school policies is
39%.
       To create a quality education, it must be supported by the effectiveness of student learning. In
increasing the effectiveness of student learning, there are several things that can influence it, including
the learning methods used, and the quality of teachers in delivering teaching. This is based on the results
of the research
       According to the author’s preliminary observation in July 2020, in the context of preventing the
Covid-19 pandemic, the teaching activities will be adjusted to the PSBB (large-scale social restriction)
implemented in DKI Jakarta to achieve the learning effect of SDN. Jatipulo 06 am , the method applied
learning method is teaching method and program learning method, Because the study time is limited,
although there are a lot of materials to be taught, and the educational institutions that open elementary
schools have fewer teachers and a large number of students. Programmed learning methods use
specially prepared teaching materials. The teaching content in it must be broken down into small steps,
sequenced carefully, directed to reduce errors, and followed by immediate feedback.
       Starting from the description above, a research will be conducted on "The Influence of School
Management and Student Learning Culture on the Effectiveness of Student Learning at SDN Jatipulo
06 Pagi

METHOD
A. Research Approach and Method
          The approach used in this research is a quantitative approach by using descriptive methods
   as well as explanatory methods.
          Quantitative approach is an approach in research that uses numbers. The description method
   is a research method that aims to provide an overview of the phenomena and symptoms of the
   variables of the object being studied, while the explanatory method is a study that aims to explain
   the relationship or influence of a variable on other variables and to test research hypotheses.

B.   Conceptual Definition
     1. School Management Concept
         School Management is a systematic, systemic and comprehensive collaborative process in
         order to realize national education goals in accordance with the skills, attitudes and



567 | L I M B O N G , K H U L U Q O , I S T A R Y A T I N I N G T I A S

          appreciation possessed by teachers to be able to carry out learning tasks. The most important
          thing in school management is the management of the components of the school itself.
     2.   School Culture Concept
          Learning culture comes from the concept of culture, strictly speaking, culture is defined as the
          overall knowledge of humans as social beings that are used to understand and interpret their
          environmental experiences and become the basic framework for creating and encouraging the
          realization of behavior.
     3.   The Concept of Learning Effectiveness
          The effectiveness of student learning is the ability of students to choose the right learning
          objectives or the right equipment to achieve the learning objectives that have been set.
     4.   Variable Operationalization
          Research variables are everything that will be the object of research observation that has a
          variety of values. Variables are generally Divided into 2 (two), namely: (a) the dependent
          variable (endogenous), which is the main variable in an observation, and (b) the independent
          variable (exogenous), which is the variable that can affect the change of the dependent
          variable. The research variables used in this study are:
           a. Independent Variable, this variable is a variable that affects the dependent variable. In
               this case school management and school culture.
           b. The dependent variable is the dependent variable and is affected by the independent
               variable. At this case Learning Effectiveness.

C.   Type of Research
            This study uses descriptive and verification methods, the research is limited to efforts to
     reveal a problem and the situation as it is (fuctual). Furthermore, descriptive research intends to
     make a description of situations or events so that it can be concluded that the descriptive research
     method is an attempt to describe the ongoing situation at that time based on facts obtained from
     direct respondents, but this research may not involve everyone. in an organization / institution.
     Therefore, the respondents who were involved in writing were only grade IV, V and VI students
     at SDN Jatipulo 06 Pagi.

D. Data Sources and Respondents
         The source of the data was obtained from the research location, namely SDN Jatipulo 06
   Pagi, while the nature of the data collected was primary and secondary data. Secondary data is data
   received directly from the source, while primary data is data from students in grades IV, V and
   VISDN Jatipulo 06 Pagi. The primary data extracted in this study came from respondents who
   were active students at SDN Jatipulo 06 Pagi

E.   Population and Sample
     1. Population
                Population is a generalized area composed of objects/subjects with a certain number
         and characteristics, which are used by researchers to conduct research and then draw
         conclusions (all research objects). So the population is not only people, but also objects and
         other natural objects.
                The population is not only the number of research objects/subjects, but also all the
         characteristics/properties of the subject or objects. The population is not only the number of
         research objects/objects, but also all the characteristics/attributes possessed by the objects or
         objects. The population of this study is 103 students grades IV, V and VI.




                                                            Jurnal Kepemimpinan Pendidikan | 568

                                                  Table 3.2
                                              Total Research Population
                                  No. Jumlah Siswa               Jumlah
                                   1.       Kelas IV                33
                                   2.        Kelas V                35
                                   3.       Kelas VI                35
                                         Jumlah                    103
                                Source: Jatipulo Elementary School Adm Section 6 am

     2.   Sampling Technique
                  To obtain data sourced from respondents, a sample is drawn from a population. The
          definition of population According to (Sugiyono, 2010), the population is: "a generalized area
          composed of objects/themes with certain qualities and characteristics, determined by
          researchers to study and draw conclusions". The definition of a sample is: "a part of the
          population and characteristics".
                  In determining the size of the sample to be taken in order to obtain representative data,
          there are actually no strict rules about the number of samples required for a study from the
          available population. There is also no clear definition of what is meant by large and small
          samples. Sanfod Labovitz and Robert Hagedom (2006:58) stated, that: "Representativeness
          more or less depends on the level of accuracy carried out in determining the population, the
          adequacy of the sample and the heterogeneity of the population".
                  Based on this opinion, the authors took a sample of 103 students at SDN 06 Jatipulo
          this morning. However, due to the current COVID-19 pandemic and limited research time.
          Researchers only get a sample of 61 students. Or about 59.2% of SDN 06 Jatipulo Pagi fourth,
          fifth, and sixth grade students.
                  Thus the number of samples has met the criteria conveyed by Sugiyono (2010: 17),
          "Part of the number and characteristics possessed by the population".

F.   Validity and Reliability Test
            A scientific research must use a valid and reliable measuring instrument, with the following
     quality measures:
     1. Validity Test
                 Validity is related to the degree of accuracy and accuracy of the measuring instrument
          in carrying out its size function (Saifuddin Azwar, 2003). In this study, the authors use item
          validity to determine the extent to which the existing items cover all the factors to be
          measured. Furthermore, the validity of these factors is intended to analyze the relationship
          between factors in each variable.
                 In this study, the measurement of validity used the Pearson Product Moment
          Correlation calculation using computer assistance, namely the SPSS Version 15 program. The
          Pearson Product Moment Correlation formula is as follows:
                               n( XY )  ( X )( Y )
          rxy 
                  [n( X )  ( X ) 2 ] [(n( Y 2 )  ( Y ) 2 ]
                           2


          Where :
          n     : Number of subjects
          X     : Score each item
          Y     : Total score
          (X)2 : Square of total item score
          X2 : Sum of squares of item scores
          Y2 : Sum of squares of total score
          (X)2 : The square of the total score



569 | L I M B O N G , K H U L U Q O , I S T A R Y A T I N I N G T I A S

         rx,y    :   Correlation coefficient

    2.   Reliability Test
                To measure the reliability of the research instrument, the Alpha Cronbach formula was
         used (Saifuddin Azwar, 2003). Calculation of Cronbach's Alpha was carried out using the help
         of a computer, namely the SPSS version 25.00 program. The formula for Cronbach's Alpha is
         as follows:
                (n)(S 2   Si )
                               2
          
                   (n  1) S 2
         Where :
          : coefficient alpha
         n : Number of items in the scale
         S2 : Total variance of test scores
         Si2 : Variance of each scale item

G. Data Analysis Method
          The data obtained from the results of this study were analyzed using descriptive statistical
   analysis and inferential statistical analysis. Descriptive statistical analysis was used to determine
   the condition of each variable based on the scores obtained, while inferential statistical analysis
   was needed for hypothesis testing and generalization of the study. Data analysis methods used
   include (Sugiyono, 2001):
   1. Simple and multiple linear regression
        a. Simple linear regression
                   Simple linear regression is based on a functional or causal relationship of one
             independent variable with one dependent variable. The general equation for simple linear
             regression is:
             Y = a + bX
             Where :
             Y         = Subject in the predicted dependent variable.
             a         = Price of Y if X = 0 (constant price).
             b         = Number of direction or regression coefficient, which shows the number of
                          increase in or a decrease in the dependent variable based on the variable
                          independent. If b (+) then it increases, and if (-) it decreases.

                       The formula used to find the value of a (constant) and value (regression
                coefficient) is as follows:
                     n( XY )  ( X )( Y )
                b
                       n(  X 2 )  (  X ) 2
                a  Y  bX

                Where:
                a = Constant Value
                Y = Average variable Y
                 X = Average variable X

                       So the value of b is a function of the correlation coefficient. If the correlation
                coefficient is high, then the value of b is also large; conversely if the correlation
                coefficient is low, the price of b is also low (small). In addition, if the correlation
                coefficient is negative, then the price of b is also negative; and conversely the correlation
                coefficient is positive, then the price of b is also positive.

         b.     Multiple linear regression



                                                              Jurnal Kepemimpinan Pendidikan | 570

                     If simple linear regression is based on a functional or causal relationship of one
               independent variable with one dependent variable, then multiple linear regression is
               based on a functional or causal relationship of two or more independent variables with
               one dependent variable. The general equation for multiple linear regression is:
               Y = a + b1 X1 + b2X2
               To find the values for a, b1, and b2, the following formula can be used..

               an             +    b1X1          +   b2X2 = Y
               aX1           +    b1X12         +   b2X1X2       = X1Y
               aX2           +    b1X1X2        +   b2X22 = X2Y

     2.   Calculation of the coefficient of determination
                To measure how much influence or contribution the independent variables have on the
          dependent variable, the coefficient of determination (R2) is used. This coefficient shows the
          proportion of total variability in the dependent variable described by the regression model.
          The value of R² is in the interval 0 < R2 <1. Therefore, the better the estimation model in
          describing the data, the closer the R value is to the value 1 (one). The value of R2 can be
          obtained by the formula:
          R2 = (r)2 x 100%
          Where:
          R2 = Coefficient of determination
          r = Correlation coefficient

     3.   Hypothesis Testing with t-test and F-test
                 Hypothesis testing with t-test is used to determine whether the independent variable is
          significant or not on the dependent variable individually for each variable. The formula used
          to determine the value of t-count is as follows:
                       r n2
          t hitung 
                        1 r2

                 After obtaining the t-count value through the above formula, then to interpret the results
          the following provisions apply:
          If t-count > t-table Ho is rejected
          If t-count < t-table Ho is accepted
                 To find out the t-table, the n-2 provision is used at the level of significance ( ) of 5%
          (error rate 5% or 0.05) or confidence level of 95% or 0.95. So if the error rate of a variable is
          more than 5%, it means that the variable is not significant.
                 Hypothesis testing with F-test is used to test the relationship between two independent
          variables together with the dependent variable. The formula is as follows:
                               R2 / k
          Fhitung 
                       (1  R 2 ) /( n  k  1)
          Where :
          R2 = coefficient of determination
          K = number of independent variables
          n = number of samples
          F-count > F-table, it means Ho is rejected, Ha is accepted.


FINDINGS AND DISCUSSION




571 | L I M B O N G , K H U L U Q O , I S T A R Y A T I N I N G T I A S

       Referring to the results of the analysis of the influence of school management and student learning
culture on the effectiveness of student learning at SDN Jatipulo 06 Pagi, it is necessary to discuss the
existence of each variable as follows:

1.   The Effect of School Management on the Effectiveness of Student Learning at SDN Setia Asih 05
            Based on the calculation, the t-count value of the school management variable (X1) is 2.483,
     while the t-table with 60 degrees of freedom on (0.025) is 2.000. Thus, tcount (2,483) > ttable
     (2,000), so it is clear that Ho is rejected and Ha is accepted. This shows that school management
     has a positive and significant influence on the effectiveness of student learning at SDN Jatipulo 06
     Pagi in Jakarta.
            The results of distributing questionnaires for school management variable data show that the
     lowest score is 30 and the highest score is 69. Thus, the lowest and highest scores are obtained,
     then the range of scores is 39 (69 – 30). These numbers after being analyzed resulted in: a) Average
     score (Mean) = 55.7213; b) The mean (median) = 56.4000; c) Mode (Mode) = 60.00; d) Variance
     (Variance) = 61.104; e) Standard deviation (Standard Deviation) = 7,81693.
            Although the results of hypothesis testing have proven that there is a positive and significant
     effect of school management on student learning effectiveness at SDN Jatipulo 06 Pagi, the effect
     has not shown optimal numbers. This shows that the school management at SDN Jatipulo 06 Pagi
     has not shown a very good school management attitude in serving students.

2.   The influence of student learning culture on the effectiveness of student learning at SDN Jatipulo
     06 Pagi in Jakarta.
            Based on the calculation, the tcount value of the student learning culture variable (X2) is
     3,422, while the ttable with 60 degrees of freedom at (0.025) is 2,000. Thus, tcount (3.422) > ttable
     (2,000), so it is clear that Ho is rejected and Ha is accepted. This shows that student learning culture
     has a positive and significant influence on the effectiveness of student learning at SDN Jatipulo 06
     Pagi in Jakarta.
            The results of distributing questionnaires for student learning culture variable data show that
     the lowest score is 32 and the highest score is 71. Thus, the lowest and highest scores are obtained,
     then the range of scores is 39 (71 – 32). These numbers after being analyzed resulted in: a) Average
     score (Mean) = 58.5902; b) Middle value (Median) = 59.0000; c) Mode (Mode) = 55.00; d)
     Variance (Variance) = 54,646; e) Standard deviation (Standard Deviation) = 7.39229.
            The results of hypothesis testing have proven that there is a positive and significant influence
     of student learning culture on student learning effectiveness at SDN Jatipulo 06 Pagi, and the effect
     shows an optimal number. This shows that the culture of student learning in motivating students
     in learning to be more active in learning is good.

3.   The influence of school management and student learning culture together on the effectiveness of
     student learning at SDN Setia Asih 05
            With the help of computer processing based on SPSS calculations obtained Fcount of
     15,621. Meanwhile, the critical value of Ftable with degrees of freedom in the numerator 2 and the
     denominator 58 at (0.05) is 3.14. Thus Fcount (15.621) > Ftable (3.15), so it is clear that Ho is
     rejected and Ha is accepted. This shows that together school management and student learning
     culture can increase the effectiveness of student learning at SDN Jatipulo 06 Pagi in Jakarta.
            Based on the data obtained from the results of distributing questionnaires on the dependent
     variable, namely the effectiveness of student learning (Y), it shows that the final result has the


                                                             Jurnal Kepemimpinan Pendidikan | 572

     lowest score of 34 and the highest score of 72. Thus, the range of scores is 38 (72 - 34). After
     further analysis, these figures resulted in: a) Average score (Mean) = 57.9016; b) The mean
     (median) = 58.6667; c) Mode (Mode) = 64.00; d) Variance (Variance) = 61.523; e) Standard
     deviation (Standard Deviation) = 7,84369.
            The results of hypothesis testing have proven that there is a positive and significant influence
     of school management and student learning culture on the effectiveness of student learning at SDN
     Jatipulo 06 Pagi, and the effect shows an optimal number. This shows that school management and
     student learning culture in improving student learning effectiveness are good, but innovative steps
     still need to be taken in order to increase student learning effectiveness in addition to school
     management and student learning culture itself, for example improving teacher performance by
     motivating teachers in teaching and providing guidance to students as well as implementing
     education and training on effective teaching for teachers according to subjects.

CONCLUSIONS

    In connection with the discussion of the research results as in the previous chapter IV, the following
authors will present the conclusions of the research carried out, namely as follows:
1. From hypothesis testing, it is obtained that the tcount value of the School Management variable
    (X1) is greater than ttable, so it is clear that Ho is rejected and Ha is accepted. This shows that
    school management has a positive and significant influence on the effectiveness of student learning
    at SDN Jatipulo 06 Pagi.
2. Based on the calculation results, the tcount value of the student learning culture variable (X2) is
    greater than ttable so it is clear that Ho is rejected and Ha is accepted. This shows that the student's
    learning culture has a positive and significant influence on the effectiveness of student learning at
    SDN Jatipulo 06 Pagi.
3. With the help of computer processing based on SPSS calculations, Fcount is greater than Ftable so
    that it is clear that Ho is rejected and Ha is accepted. This shows that together school management
    and student learning culture can increase the effectiveness of student learning at SDN Jatipulo 06
    Pagi.

REFERENCES

Bambang Kusriyanto, 2002, Meningkatkan Produktivitas Pegawai, Penerbit : CV.Titian Ilmu,
      Yogyakarta.
Depdiknas, 2003, Manajemen Peningkatan Mutu Berbasis Sekolah; Buku 1 Konsep dan Pelaksanaan.
      Jakarta : Direktorat SLTP Dirjen Dikdasmen.
Depdiknas, 2007, Manajemen Peningkatan Mutu Berbasis Sekolah; Buku 1 Konsep dan Pelaksanaan.
      Jakarta : Direktorat SLTP Dirjen Dikdasmen.
Edgar H Schein, 2000, Organizational Culture & Leadership, MIT Sloan Management Review,
      (http://www.tnellen.com/ted/tc/schein.html).
Gaffar, 2000, Melawan Stigma melalui pendidikan alternative, CV, Masagung, Jakarta.
Gitosudarmo, 2004, Indriyo, I Nyoman Sudita, Perilaku Keorganisasian, Penerbit BPFE, Yogyakarta.
Hughes Owen E., 2001, Public Management and Administration : An Introduction, St. Martin’s Press,
      New York.
Handoko T. Hani, 2003, Manajemen Sumber Daya Manusia, BPFE, Yogyakarta
J. Supranto, 2003, Metode Riset, Jakarta : Penerbit Rineka Cipta.
Martani Huseini, 2000, Teori Organisasi, Suatu Pendekatan Makro, Pusat Antar Universitas Ilmu-ilmu
      Sosial Universitas Indonesia, Jakarta.
Michael E. McGill, 2000, Pengembangan Organisasi, terjemahan Prihawantoro, Jakarta : Salemba
      Empat.


573 | L I M B O N G , K H U L U Q O , I S T A R Y A T I N I N G T I A S

Poerwadarminta, 2002, WJS, Kamus Umum Bahasa Indonesia, Pusat Pembinaan dan Pengembangan
       Bahasa, Balai Pustaka, Jakarta.
Pariata Westra, 2005, Ensiklopedi Administrasi, Pustaka Binaman Pressindo, Jakarta
Prayudi, 2002, Manajemen Sumber Daya Manusia Perusahaan, PT. Remaja Rosdakarya Bandung.
Rohiman Notowidagdo, 2004, Ilmu Budaya Dasar, Rajawali Pers, Jakarta.
Sarwono, Sarlito Wirawan, 2003, Psikologi Organisasi, Balai Pustaka, Jakarta.
Sergiovanni, Thomas J., 2005, Educational Governance and Administration, New Jersey: Prentice Hall
       Inc.
Siagian, Sondang P., 2002, Manajemen Sumber Daya Manusia, Penerbit Gunung Agung, Jakarta
Singarimbun, dan Sofyan Effendy, 2003, Metode Penelitian Survey, Jakarta : LP3ES.
Sudarwan Danim, 2006, Visi Baru Manajemen Sekolah, Cetakan Pertama, PT. Bumi Aksara, Jakarta.
Sugiyono, 2001, Metode Penelitian Administrasi, Bandung : Edisi ke 14, Penerbit Alfabeta.
Suwarto, 2002, Perilaku Keorganisasian, Universitas Atma Jaya, Yogyakarta.
Syaiful Sagala, 2004, Manajemen Berbasis Sekolah dan Masyarakat, Penerbit Nimas Multima, Jakarta.
Taliziduhu, Ndraha, Manajemen Sumber Daya Manusia, Gramedia Pustaka, Jakarta, 2004.
The Liang Gie, 2003, Cara Kerja Efisien, Karta Kencana, Yogyakarta.
Thoha, Miftah, 2001, Perilaku Organisasi, Konsep Dasar dan Aplikasinya, PT. RajaGrafindo Persada,
       Jakarta.
Walker, James, 2002, Management Theories and Prenscriptions, Prentice Hall, New York




                                                       Jurnal Kepemimpinan Pendidikan | 574