Electronic Journal of Education, Social Economics and Technology
Vol. 4, No. 1, (2023), pp. 16~21
ISSN 2723-6250 (online)
DOI: https://doi.org/10.33122/ejeset.v4i1.100


Research Article


The influence of educational leadership on students’ academic
performance in secondary schools: A case of Itilima district
Catherine Mkenda Ferdinandi, Flora Mercury Kiwonde*

The Open University of Tanzania, Tanzania
catherinemkenda@gmail.com; flora.kiwonde@out.ac.tz; kiwondef@yahoo.com;
*Corresponding Author: flora.kiwonde@out.ac.tz

 ABSTRACT
 This study investigated the influence of educational leadership on students’ academic performance in secondary
 schools. The researcher applied the descriptive research design, which allowed the in-depth study of the influence of
 educational leadership on students’ academic performance. The study population included 109 respondents, which
 comprised Heads of Schools (HoSs), Secondary Schools’ Academic Masters, discipline masters, and Ward Educational
 Officers (WEO). The study used a simple random and purposive sampling technique to select a sample size of 52
 respondents. The researcher collected data through questionnaires. The data was analyzed by Ms-word and Ms-Excel
 and presented using tables. The Chi-square test and the T-test were employed in testing the association between
 leadership styles and students’ academic performance. The findings established that democratic leadership styles
 mostly influence students’ academic performance (R-value=0.932), implying that there is a strong and positive
 significant influence of democratic leadership styles on students’ academic achievement at a p = 0.004 level. For the
 laissez-faire leadership style, the relationship revealed an insignificant negative influence on students’ academic
 performance with a very weak relationship (R-value of 0.1) and was not significant (p = 0.072). Also, in the autocratic
 leadership style, although the relationship was moderate (R = 0.546), the relationship was insignificant with a p-value
 of 0.08. The results show that most school leaders prefer the use of democratic leadership style. The study recommends
 that head teachers should mostly use democratic leadership style if they want students to achieve or excel in good
 academic performance.
 Keywords: educational leadership; leadership styles




1. INTRODUCTION
Educational leadership is the responsibility of school administrators who strive to create positive change in educational
policy to enhance quality education and guiding teachers towards improving educational processes (Nsubuga, 2008). The
qualities of a good leader include providing a vision, establishing effective organizational structure, being an effective role
model, inspiring and motivating, delegating and empowering, and effective time management (Bank, 2020). School
performance is influenced by various kinds of leadership styles employed by heads of schools, which in turn leads to the
achievement of school goals and national goals at large (Kambambovu, 2018; Karadag, 2018; Isundwa, 2015; Thomas,
2015). Florence (2012) provided a full-range of leadership theories such as behaviour theory, normative decision theory,
cognitive resource theory and path-goal theory. From the theories, the leadership styles were identified: democratic,
authoritarian (autocratic) and laissez-faire. Democratic leadership is characterised by coordination, cooperation, and
collaboration where people are the primary decision-makers under a democratic management approach (Suraya & Yunus,
2012). Subordinates have a bigger say in decision-making, academic policy, and the execution of teaching systems and
procedures, which leads to school discipline and, as a result, academic excellence and overall school achievement. On the
other hand no participation in decision-making is allowed under an autocratic leadership style (Yulk, 2005). According to
Nsubuga (2008), the autocratic leadership style is the one in which the manager retains the majority of control and makes
choices with the goal of ensuring that the staff follows through. Autocratic leaders are detested by the general population
because they do not allow followers to take initiative, evaluate their surroundings, or improve themselves. Teachers and
students at schools where the leaders use authoritarian leadership style, feel uncomfortable and fearful of the authority
which limits their ability to realize their full potential. However, there are times when an autocratic leadership style is
suitable, such as when you have all the information you need to solve an issue, there is limited time, and the staff are
highly motivated (Ogunyinka & Adedoyin, 2013).
    A leader who adopts the laissez-faire leadership style, all the school's affairs will be in his possession, as will the entire
staff, in order to ensure that they perform effectively and meet the organization's goals and objectives. Because the leader
or head teacher has them involved in the management of the school, subordinates are empowered to work with freedom
and free will. This has a positive impact on students’ academic performance (Ogunyinka& Adedoyin, 2013). The
leadership style that is most effective depends on the characteristics of the situation and of the subordinates, although in
most instances, leaders must be flexible and adopt whichever style is called for (Adeyemi & Bolarinwa, 2013).

                                                                   16

Ferdinandi & Kiwonde                            Electronic Journal of Education, Social Economic and Technology, Vol. 4, No. 1, (2023), pp. 16~21


    In some schools, particularly community secondary schools (Ward Secondary Schools), majority of pupils do not
perform well in their exams, preventing them from continuing their studies resulting in disappointing summative
evaluation outcomes (Laddunuri, 2012). However, experience and records have proven that the leadership style of the
schools' head-teacher has a direct impact on the schools' overall success, because both instructors and pupils are expected
to perform under the schools' leadership (Florence, 2012). Effective leaders have been found to create school climates and
cultures that encourage both students and instructors, resulting in improved teaching and learning settings that are more
conducive to higher levels of academic accomplishment for students. Furthermore, in most school systems, a school leader
is obliged by systemic authorities to increase student learning and is held accountable for doing so by establishing shared
visions for motivating and energizing teachers and students (Ross & Gray, 2006).
    Tilley and Woodthorpe (2011) asserted that among the key factors that affect academic achievement at schools is
leadership style. Also, the study by Akaro (2017) found that the education system in many parts of the world is managed
poorly and administered inefficiently, resulting in unsatisfactory students' academic performance. Tanzania has been
witnessing a decline in academic achievement levels, which requires serious attention to resolve the problem. Much efforts
have been made to increase the students enrolment. However, what is persistently happening in education sector poses a
need for research to explore the ways leadership styles influence students’ academic performance in Tanzania secondary
schools hence the necessity for this study. This study was guided by the assumption that there is a direct relationship
between educational leadership and students academic performance.

2. LITERATURE REVIEW
The conceptual framework in Figure 1 indicates the dependent variable (academic performance) which is depending on
the independent variable (education leadership). Education leadership depends on the leadership styles applied by
educational leaders to perform their duties; these styles are autocratic leadership, democratic leadership, and laissez-faire
leadership. Also, the conceptual framework includes intermediate variables (quality leadership, and technical
qualification).




                                                 Figure 1. Conceptual Framework
                                             Source: Researchers’ Construction

3. RESEARCH METHOD
The study employed descriptive research design with a quantitative approach. The study used stratified and purposive
sampling technique to select a sample size of 52 respondents from a population size of 109 respondents in Itilima district,
the district that has been performing poorly in recent years. The study employed questionnaires as a primary data
collection method and documentary review as a secondary data collection method. The questionnaires with Likert scale
questions were administered to the teachers of the selected secondary schools.

4. RESULTS AND DISCUSSION
4.1 Demographic Information of the Respondents
Table 1 presents the personal information of the respondents such as gender, education level and age.
                                 Table 1. Demographic Information of the Respondents (n = 52)
                           Variable                               Frequency                                   Percentages (%)
                           Gender
                            Male                                      38                                             73
                           Female                                     14                                             27
                            Total                                     52                                            100
                       Educational level
                          Certificate                                  -                                              -
                           Diploma                                    20                                             38
                            Degree                                    30                                             58
                        Post-graduate                                  2                                              4
                             Total                                    52                                            100
                             Age
                        Below 30 years                                20                                             38
                         31-40 years                                  18                                             35
                         41-50 years                                   8                                             15
                        Above 51 years                                 6                                             12


                                                               17

Ferdinandi & Kiwonde                                         Electronic Journal of Education, Social Economic and Technology, Vol. 4, No. 1, (2023), pp. 16~21


                             Total                                                  52                                           100
                       Working experience
                         Below 5 years                                              5                                             10
                           6–10 years                                               19                                            35
                           11 years +                                               28                                            55
                              Total                                                 52                                           100
                       Type of Leadership
                         Authoritarian                                              5                                             10
                          Democratic                                                30                                            58
                         Laissez Faire                                              17                                            32
                             Total                                                  52                                           100
Source: Field Data, 2021

    Table 1 indicates the gender attribute that assisted the researcher to understand the gender distribution in the
selected sample. The findings show that most of the respondents 73% (38) were males, and 27% (14) of the respondents,
were females. The findings revealed the participation of both males and females in the study with males exceeding in
number. Also, the findings from Table 1 indicate that most of the respondents 58% (30) had a bachelor's degree in
education followed by 38% (20) of respondents having a diploma in education, and 4% (2) of respondents having a post-
graduate. This implies that most of the respondents who participated in this study had the necessary academic
qualifications to be employed in the teaching profession and had varying levels of educational qualification. Therefore,
these findings reveal that the participants have satisfactory understanding of the topic in discussion hence were able to
provide their comments about the influence of educational leadership on students’ academic performance.
    Moreover, the findings from Table 1 shows that the majority of the respondents 38% (20) were below 30 years of age;
this was closely followed by 35% (18) of respondents whose age group was 31-40 years while 15% (8) of respondents were
between 41-50 years, and another 12% (6) of respondents were 51 years and above. These results show that majority of the
respondents were aged below 30 years, and between 31-40 years old. This indicates that a good number of teachers who
took part in this study had experience that enabled them to understand the influence of educational leadership on
students’ academic performance. In addition, the findings from table 1 revealed that majority of teachers had experience
of 11 years and above (55%) which indicated that a good number of teachers who took part in this study have taught for a
period of more than 6 years, and they are assumed to have enough experience to understand the influence of educational
leadership on students’ academic performance.
    Also, findings in Table 1, shows that majority of school leaders 58% (30) reported utilizing a democratic leadership
style. Few school leaders 32% (17) use laissez-faire, and 10% (5) use autocratic leadership styles. The findings imply that,
this form of leadership is viewed as a valuable instrument for empowerment, teamwork, and collaboration. It has been
proven that when teachers are involved in the decision-making process, the school performance is improved. The findings
support a study by Allen (2009), which discovered that leaders use multiple leadership styles to address the many
scenarios that happen in the school, which can alter depending on the circumstances. The democratic leadership approach
enables a head teacher to direct tasks at diverse ability levels and in a variety of scenarios. A good leader may change his
leadership style to meet the changing needs of the firm and its employees. Furthermore, due to diverse situational
elements emerging from the subjects, the leaders choose the style to deploy depending on the situation. He goes on to say
that a smart leader must always strategize and think of a method to overcome any problem by adopting a variety of
leadership styles. As a result, leaders adopt multiple leadership styles based on the situation in order to minimize bias in
leadership.

4.2 The Influence of Educational Leadership to Students’ Academic Performance
               Table 2. The Relationship between School Heads’ Leadership Styles and Students’ Academic Performance
  S/                                                                 Teachers            Head Teachers         Sum of Mean       Mean sum
                            Performance                                                                          average          Rank            Decision
  N                                                              Mean       Rank         Mean        Rank
       I prefer democratic leadership to bring academic
  1                                                               3.89          1         4.1          1            4.0                1           Agree
       performance
       Quality leadership, good vision, and good technical
  2                                                               3.76          4         4.2          1            4.1                1           Agree
       qualifications of teachers
  3    The system of administration is top-down                   3.33          2        3.48          2            3.4                3          Neutral
       I prefer authoritarian leadership to bring academic
  4                                                               2.9           6        2.85          6            2.9                6          Disagree
       performance
       I prefer laissez-faire leadership to bring academic
  5                                                               2.38          7        2.21          7            2.3                7          Disagree
       performance
  6    Ordinary teachers are involved in making decisions         3.72          1        3.93          4            4.0                2           agree
       Head-teachers’ ability to work harmoniously with
  7    teachers (student academic performance is                  3.89          3        3.79          4             4                 2           Agree
       dependent on the leadership style I use)
Source: Field Data, 2021

   Although the researcher in this case regarded performance in the context of the overall school academic mean score,
the study sought to compare it with the prevailing style of leadership. Both head teachers were provided with this
statement: "Student academic performance is dependent on the leadership style I use." About 87% of respondents strongly
agree that academic performance is dependent on teachers’ or head teachers’ leadership styles. Then, this variable was
analyzed by using descriptive statistics analysis of the overall means of other suitable indicators of academic performance
employed by the schools’ head in the researched schools. Findings in table 2 shows that overall mean responses for both

                                                                            18

Ferdinandi & Kiwonde                                Electronic Journal of Education, Social Economic and Technology, Vol. 4, No. 1, (2023), pp. 16~21


teachers and head teachers showed that majority of the teachers prefer not to use authoritarian leadership (2.9) and
laissez-faire leadership (2.3) to improve academic performance.
    Also, based on the results in Table 2, the overall mean responses for the academic performance indicators of both
teachers and head teachers showed that majority of the teachers prefer democratic leadership to achieve academic
performance (4.0). This is supported by the majority of teachers who indicated that ordinary teachers are involved in
making decisions (4.0) and that quality leadership, good vision, and good technical qualifications of teachers are key to
academic performance in schools (4.0). Also, findings revealed that head teachers’ ability to work harmoniously with
teachers (student academic performance is dependent on the leadership style I use) has very high influences (4.0) on
student academic performance, meaning that head teachers' leadership styles play a very good role either positively or
negatively depending on different strengths. To justify the significance level of the variables with respect to leadership
styles, analysis of variance statistical significance Confidence Interval (CI) 95% at P-values ≤ 0.05) using Mann-Whitney
U-Test for differences between groups (leadership styles) to students’ academic indicators the results in table 3 were
noted.
    Martin (2001) is also consistent in his assertion that the national examinations target provides a common measure of
students' achievement for all previous examinations and paints a picture of a school that is determined to perform and has
put in place the necessary measures to ensure that they do so, thus serving as an academic indicator. The achievement of
national examination targets also demonstrates a well-coordinated collaboration between teachers and students under the
direction of a good head teacher. The findings are similar to the study by Devi & Subiyantoro (2021) who suggest that
educational leaders should be involved in policy creation with regard to leadership issues in order to have a control over
group activity. This is because if the leader does not assist in decision-making, the group lacks direction (Chaudhry &
Javed, 2012).
    Teachers do not want to be in a position of commanding authority since it lowers their morale and causes them to
neglect their responsibilities. To get things done, autocratic leaders use coercion which discourages teachers from
performing well hence poor performance. The autocratic head teachers were also task-oriented leaders who had to do
whatever it was necessary to complete the task, regardless of the staff's predicament. Furthermore, according to
documentary evidence in a report by Nsubuga (2005), teachers despise severe administrators who consistently cause
students' academic records to deteriorate. On the other hand, the democratic leadership style of head teachers has a
favorable influence on pupils' academic performance.
    The study also investigated the effects of democratic, laissez-faire, and authoritarian leadership styles on student
performance. The findings demonstrate that autocratic leadership styles have a detrimental impact on academic
attainment because they use a severe leadership style that is disliked by instructors. It implies that the employment of
more authoritarian approaches has a negative impact on student academic achievement. Charlton (2000) discovered that
head teachers who use severe control tactics are more likely to meet resistance from students and teachers, as well as an
increase in indiscipline, because they (teachers and students) tend to criticize authoritarian measures deployed.
                                    Table 3. Leadership Style Influence on Students’ Performance
                                                                            Respondents n=52
       Leadership styles
                                   Pearson Chi-Square (R)                     P-values at 95% CI (Asymp. Sig. at p ≤ 0.05 (2- tailed)
         Democratic                         0.932                                                         0.004
         Laissez-faire                      0.101                                                         0.072
          Autocratic                       -0.546                                                         0.081
Source: Field Data, 2021

    The results in Table 3 indicate that democratic leadership styles influence students' academic performance due to the
fact that their chi-square R-value is 0.932. Because the R-value is close to one, this implies that democratic leadership has
a strong and positive influence on students' academic performance. Additionally, the relationship is also significant at the
p 0.004 level. In the case of the laissez-faire leadership style, the results showed that it also positively influences students’
academic performances as the R-value is positive 0.101 and not significant (p=0.072).
    Although it is positive, the relationship is very weak. The laissez-faire head teacher tries to give away his powers and
does not follow up on progress. In most cases, laissez-faire head teachers do not prompt good academic performance
because they are too liberal and flexible. This is why their overall performance is often poor. The findings revealed that an
autocratic leadership style strongly (R=0.546) influences students’ academic achievement, but the relationship is
insignificant with a p-value of 0.081. The result indicated that the autocratic leadership style negatively influences
academic achievement because the r value is negative as they adopt harsh leadership styles that are widely detested by
teachers and students alike. It implies that the more autocratic leadership styles are used, the poorer the influence on
academic achievement will be. The findings are similar to the study by Pepper & Thomas (2017) which found that there is
direct effect of leadership in school performance.
    With excellent leadership, everyone is more likely to be active, and where everyone is involved, responsibility is more
observed. Being accountable necessitates a high level of performance. This is extremely crucial when it comes to academic
development, particularly when it comes to the management of student preparation time and co-curricular activities.
Teachers pointed out that proper consultation has improved cooperation between students, teachers, head teachers, and
parents, as an example of how this has influenced performance. As a result, the head teacher who adopts a bottom-up
strategy is more likely to succeed because when correctly implemented, democratic leadership can result in improved
school performance. This is similar to the study by Chuma, (2015) who found that academic performance has been
influenced by supporting and encouraging teamwork, good cooperation, and other elements such as good remuneration for
all employees, staff motivation, and student motivation. In order for a democratically oriented head teacher to function
well, the school must have a competent administration that is willing to implement ideas that will lead to good academic
accomplishment as well as a collaborative decision-making system at all levels of the school.

                                                                   19

Ferdinandi & Kiwonde                             Electronic Journal of Education, Social Economic and Technology, Vol. 4, No. 1, (2023), pp. 16~21


    Finally, the study found that, while there is a favourable association that is nonetheless weak, laissez-faire leadership
styles have no substantial impact on students' academic achievement. This is probably because those who employ this
technique fail to follow up and as they delegate responsibilities, performance suffers and/or no impact is observed. It is not
administratively healthy to leave everything to the mercy of the subordinates, some of whom may lack the essential skills
and competence to do the assignment. Others, particularly young and inexperienced teachers, may just not like to work
unless they are monitored. The findings back up Nsubuga's (2005) research, which revealed that groups were less
productive when supervisors avoided exercising control over their subordinates. This suggests that a laissez-faire
leadership style allows for activity neglect and a lack of follow-up, potentially diluting concerns about successful student
academic achievement. It should be noted that, while instructors are responsible for making academic judgments, the
head teacher is responsible for overseeing and approving those decisions because he or she is a school leader. Whatever
goes wrong, the leader must be held accountable. Within these parameters, the school leader should let already competent
and motivated subordinates execute their responsibilities in the way they see fit, but for staff who require orders to get
through challenging situations, laissez-faire approach can leave them leaderless and powerless.

5. CONCLUSION
The ongoing educational reforms require educational leaders who can work in democratic and participative ways in order
to build successful relationships to ensure effective delivery of quality education. It is thus apparent from this study that
there is a significant relationship between leadership styles (democratic) and school performance and that if schools hope
to operate as successful entities; leaders need to adopt contingency leadership style that observes the educational
situations and take cognizance of the diverse needs of all stakeholders to support academic performance in secondary
schools.


RECOMMENDATION
This study has established that students’ academic performance in schools is positively related to the leadership style
employed by secondary school head teachers. It is therefore recommended that the head teachers of secondary schools in
particular be encouraged to use democratic style of leadership in the management of secondary schools. The study also
recommends that there is a need for the government to put more endeavour in ensuring that seminars on school
leadership are provided consecutively to educational leaders so as to improve schools’ leadership and leadership styles
towards good students’ academic performance. Moreover, the government should train educational leaders leaving behind
the notion of demoting educational leaders, thinking that it is the only weapon to improve students’ academic results. In
order to promote a democratic leadership style in schools, head teachers should do away with top-down decision-making
processes, distribute the responsibility and power for leadership widely throughout the school, share decision-making
powers with staff, and allow staff to manage their own decision-making committees.

AUTHOR’S CONTRIBUTIONS
All authors discussed the results and contributed to from the start to final manuscript.


CONFLICT OF INTEREST
The authors declare that they have no competing interests.


REFERENCES
Akaro, E. A. (2017). Influences of the School Leadership Styles on the Students’ Academic Performance in Tanzania
       Community Secondary Schools: a case of Dodoma Municipality. Unpublished Masters’ Dissertation. The University
       of Dodoma.
Adeyemi, T. O., &Bolarinwa, R. (2013). Principals’ Leadership Styles and Student Academic Performance in Secondary
       Schools in Ekiti State, Nigeria. International Journal of Academic Research in Progressive Education and
       Development, 2(1), 187–198.
Allen, A. (2009). Leadership, a Communication Perspective. Waveland Press.
Bank, L. O. (2020)."Positive Leadership: Roles of the Leader". Unpublished manual: Retrieved 30th September 2020 from:
       https://www.liveoakbank.com/veterinary-resources/roles-leader/
Charlton, G. (2000). Human Habit of Highly Effective Organization. Pretoria:Van Schaik Press.
Chaudhry, A. Q., & Javed, H. (2012). Impact of Transactional and Laissez Faire Leadership Style on Motivation.
       International Journal of Business and Social Science, 3(7), 28-39.
Chuma, A. T. (2015) ‘An Assessment of Impact of School Leadership Styles on Students’ Academic Performance: A Case of
       Ilala Municipal District’. Unpublished Masters’ Dissertation. The Open University of Tanzania.
Devi, A. D., & Subiyantoro, S. (2021). Implementation of Democratic Leadership Style and Transformational Head of
       Madrasah in Improving the Quality. NidhomulHaq: Journal Manajemen Pendidikan Islam, 6(1), 14–26.
Florence, A. Y. (2012). Influence of Principals’ Leadership Styles on Students Academic Achievement in Secondary
       Schools. Journal of Innovative Research in Management and Humanities 3(1), 113-121.
Isundwa, S. J. (2015). ‘The Influence of Leadership Styles on Students’ Academic Achievement in Secondary Schools: A
       Case of Selected Secondary Schools in Morogoro Municipality’. Unpublished Masters Dissertation. The Open
       University of Tanzania.


                                                                20

Ferdinandi & Kiwonde                          Electronic Journal of Education, Social Economic and Technology, Vol. 4, No. 1, (2023), pp. 16~21


Kambambovu, M.E. (2018). Assessment of Leadership Styles in Relation to Students’
         Performance in Secondary Schools: a Case Study of Tabora Municipality. Unpublished
       Masters Dissertation. The Open University of Tanzania.
Karadag, E. (2018). The Effect of Educational Leadership on Students’ Achievement: Across-Cultural Meta-analysis
        Research on Studies Between 2008-2018. Asia Pacific Education Review, 21, 49-64.
Laddunuri, M. M. (2012). Status of School Education in Present Tanzania and Emerging Issues. International Journal of
        Educational Research and Technology, 3(1) 0976 – 4089.
Martin, L. (2001). Leadership as Pedagogy, Capital Development and School Effectiveness International Journal of
        Leadership in Educational Development, 1(1), 37-46.
Ogunyinka, L. & Adedoyin, H. (2013). Leadership Styles and Work Effectiveness of School Principals in Ekiti State: Case
        Study of Ado-Ekiti Local Government Area. Developing Country Studies, 3(3), 156-169.
Oyetunji, C. O. (2006). The Relationship Between Leadership Style and School Climate in Botswana Secondary Schools.
        Botswana: Citeseer Press.
Pepper, K. & Thomas, L. H. (2017). Making a Change: The Effects of the Leadership Role on School Climate. New York:
        Springer.
Ross, J. A., & Gray, P. (2006). School Leadership and Student Achievement: The Mediating Effects of Teacher Beliefs.
        Canadian Journal of Education/Revue Canadienne de l’éducation, 798–822.
Tilley, L., & Woodthorpe, K. (2011). Is it the End for Anonymity as we Know it? A Critical Examination of the Ethical
        Principle of Anonymity in the Context of 21st Century Demands on the Qualitative Researcher. Qualitative
        Research, 11(2), 197–212.
Yulk, G. (2005). Leadership in Organization. New York: Prentice Hall.




                                                             21