Journal of Education and Practice                                                                         www.iiste.org
ISSN 2222-1735 (Paper) ISSN 2222-288X (Online)
Vol.12, No.9, 2021


 But what is Leadership? A Systematic Review of the Leadership
 Concept in View of Heightened Educational Leadership in Africa

                                            Gyaviira Musoke Genza
               School of Education, College of Education & External Studies, Makerere University
                                      P. O. BOX 7062 Kampala, Uganda
                                 Corresponding author: gyaviira.genza@mak.ac.ug
Abstract
Although leadership is one of the most widely researched problems in the social sciences, to-date no standard
definition has been developed for it. Most of the more than 650 existing leadership “definitions” have been found
to deal with the “how” of leadership, and not the “what” (of leadership) itself, leaving the age-long conceptual
confusion surrounding the concept of leadership unresolved. In an attempt to provide a scholarly answer to this
problem, the current study leveraged existing literature to provide a refined definition of leadership. More
specifically, the study redefined the concept of leadership; highlighted the meaning of leadership in education; and
unveiled the concrete implications of the emerging leadership concept. In these endeavours, the study employed
an exploratory interpretative systematic review design with a conceptual thematic focus. For conceptual lenses,
the study utilized both classical definitional rules and Rost’s essentials of leadership, as well as Hallinger’s
conceptual framework for systematic reviews. In the end, the study generated a more precise definition of
leadership, which was particularly applied to education. Implications for heightened educational research and
practice in Africa were also unveiled. The study’s strongest contribution lies in not only rekindling systematic
debate on the meaning of leadership, but also in concretely exemplifying this debate by providing a refined
definition of leadership and applying the definition to a given field (education).
Keywords: Leadership, Educational leadership, Leadership in Africa, Systematic review.
DOI: 10.7176/JEP/12-9-14
Publication date:March 31st 2021

Introduction
         The role played by leadership in the growth and development of nations in general and institutions in
particular cannot be overemphasised (Rosari, 2019; Magara, 2017). Leadership acts as the magnetic glue that does
not only bring different forces together, but also keeps them together till mission accomplishment (Mensah, 2019).
In education in particular, “the quality of leadership makes a significant difference to school and student outcomes”
(Bush, 2008: 1). “But what is leadership?” That is the million dollar question that the current study attempts to
answer.
         Despite the importance of leadership, its meaning remains contentious, ambiguous, and vague
(Oguntibeju et al., 2014). There is no agreed upon definition. Rather, it is estimated that more than 650 documented
definitions of leadership exist today (Silva, 2016). Yet most of these definitions deal with “how” leadership is
performed, and not with “what” leadership itself is (Walters, 2009). Secondly, “many of those writing about
leadership are eager to assert that theirs is the one true definition” (Silva, 2016: 6). How many “one true definitions”
do we have then? Due to such “leadership concept clutter” (Ulrich & Smallwood, c.2012), today many studies use
the term leadership anyhow (Karp & Helgø, 2008), applying it arbitrarily to apparently differing behaviour
(Hašková, 2011), for example taking leadership to mean the same thing as management (Day & Sammons, 2016;
Spicker, 2012).
         Since clarification of terms is a key mark of scholarship, academic disciplines invest tremendous effort
in elaboration of their key concepts and constructs. Definitions help to provide semantic clarity, by clarifying
ambiguous terms and, hence, mitigating terminological confusion (Moore, 2009). “Any science or body of
knowledge having its subject poorly defined will, by necessity, have the content proportionally disjointed” (Walters,
2009: 37). Consequently, “the lack of a common, objective definition of leadership negates the possibility of
common findings or understanding” (Walters, 2009: 35).
         Even more practically, however, how can leaders be trained if it is unclear what leadership is? “Millions
of dollars are invested by organizations trying to develop their future leaders. But if nobody knows what exactly
leadership is, all those efforts could be meaningless” (Silva, 2016: 1). A precise conceptualisation is “the
foundation from which leadership can be evaluated, developed and influenced” (Joanna & Kim, 2011: 8). Thus,
defining leadership “is extremely important in order to understand deeply the phenomenon we are studying.
Good definitions and clear concepts could enable us to achieve great breakthroughs in the study and practice of
leadership” (Pentti, 2003: 74). As Rost (1991) believed, both studying and doing leadership require a clear
understanding of the essential nature of leadership. Hence the potential importance of this study in endearing both



                                                         127

Journal of Education and Practice                                                                          www.iiste.org
ISSN 2222-1735 (Paper) ISSN 2222-288X (Online)
Vol.12, No.9, 2021

leadership theory and practice, particularly in Africa where quite little of such research exists (Lopez & Rugano,
2018; Chikoko, Naicker & Mthiyane, 2015), although Hallinger (2017) speaks of surprising improvements since
2005.
         Even then, more than half of the existing African studies on leadership (and management) are from just
two countries (S. Africa and Nigeria), with Rwanda and Uganda performing quite poorly in E. Africa (Hallinger,
2017). Yet it is expected that Africa faces unique leadership problems (Lopez & Rugano, 2018); implying an urgent
need for contextualised leadership research that speaks to African experiences of cultural diversity and young
populations, for example. In education, Africa can boast of just a few “home-grown insights” (studies) on
leadership for school improvement (Chikoko, Naicker & Mthiyane, 2015). Hallinger (2017) has also indicated that
existing literature does not provide much systematic knowledge on how school leaders carry out their roles in
Africa. Intensive leadership research and training could be the game changer in revamping entire education
systems on the continent (Magara, 2017).
         Therefore the purpose of this study is to leverage existing literature to review the leadership concept so
as to make leadership research and practice more popular in Africa, particularly in the context of education. The
study has three objectives; namely, to redefine the concept of leadership more precisely; to highlight the meaning
of leadership in the context of education; and to unveil the implications of the emerging leadership concept.
         After a short discussion of the etymological and historical roots of leadership in the next section, the study
will examine philosophical roots of definitional science, followed by core methodological underpinnings, and
definitional point of departure. Focus then turns to a systematic examination of leadership definitions in Post-
Rostian literature (1991). Finally, the study makes a case for educational leadership, before summing up with study
implications, conclusions, and limitations.

Etymological and Historical Considerations
          Etymologically, “leadership” is one of the nouns from the verb “to lead”, which originates from the old
English word “leden” (or “loedan”), meaning “to make go”, “to guide” or “to show the way” (Pentti, 2003). Unlike
the noun “leader”, which first appeared in the English language as early as the year 1300, “leadership” first
appeared about 500 years later (c. 1820) (Pentti, 2003). Thus, Walters (2009) is justified in contending that “in
English, the term leadership [sic] has only been used extensively for about 200 years. However, the concept of
leading, guiding and influencing can be found as far back as recorded language can be traced” (p. 86). History
further reveals that the term “leadership [sic] has been used to refer to a position of predominance as well as...the
ability to act with influence while in such a position” (Walters, 2009: 87). However, this double usage problem
largely lies beyond the scope of the current study. History further reveals that as disciplines, leadership is older
than management, which first got prominence in the first half of the 20 th century (Pentti, 2003).

Philosophical roots of definitional science
           Since definitions are meant to state the essence of a thing (Aristotelian principle) (Moore, 2009), the
study’s linkage to philosophy is expected. More precisely, definitional science is rooted in Philosophy of language,
which aims not only at clarity of terms, but also at their logic and objectivity (Ekpenyong & Ikegbu, 2018). Thus,
also “in evaluating and formulating definitions of leadership, logical requirements proper to all definitions are
followed” (Walters, 2009: 264). These requirements (or “classical rules”) are essentially three; namely, a definition
must have a genus and a difference (differentia); its definiens (“meaning part”) must be simpler than the
definiendum (term being defined); and, its definiens and definiendum must be convertible (Walters, 2009: 158-
159). The three are propounded by the Classical Theory of Definition (Moore, 2009).
           “Genus” is the broad class to which a term belongs; and “differentia” is the distinctive difference. The
primary form of a definition is thus that of a genus and a difference, by indicating the whole (broader class) where
a term belongs, as well as the subset (specific feature) (Walters, 2009). In the definition of “university” as an
educational institution that awards degrees; “educational institution” is the genus (broader class), and “awarding
degrees” is the differentia (distinguishing a university from other educational institutions). By definiens (e.g.
“degree awarding educational institution”) being simpler than “definiendum” (e.g. “university”), what is aimed at
is, first, use of positive constructions – “what something is”, as contrasted with “what something is not”; hence
avoiding negative constructions (Walters, 2009). This principle would be broken by defining “university” as “an
educational institution that is neither a primary nor a secondary school”.
           Secondly, definitional simplicity implies excluding both derivatives (of the definiendum) and circular
forms in the definition. Defining university as “a universal educational institution”, would be begging the question
of what “universal” then means (Moore, 2009). Thirdly, simplicity implies using terms that are less complex than
the definiendum (Walters, 2009). Defining a university as “an educational institution that epitomizes
epistemological questing” tantamounts to failure in clarifying the term.
           On the principle of definiens and definiendum being convertible (Walters, 2009), it means that “If A
means B”, then “B means A”. For example if “a university is an educational institution that awards degrees”; then


                                                         128

Journal of Education and Practice                                                                           www.iiste.org
ISSN 2222-1735 (Paper) ISSN 2222-288X (Online)
Vol.12, No.9, 2021

“an educational institution that awards degrees is a university”. This principle explains the exclusion of some
leadership definitions from the current study, like that by Surji (2015: 154) that “leadership is influence”.
          Definitional science further indicates that a definition may be connotative (intensional) or denotative
(extensional) (Moore, 2009). Being connotative implies defining a term by delineating (outlining) “the set of
attributes or defining characteristics shared by that class of objects to which we apply the term” (Moore, 2009: 2-
3). This is contrasted with using a denotation, which implies outlining the entire class of objects that share those
attributes. The current study believes that defining leadership by simply enumerating the class of all objects that
the term refers to would be both deficient and impossible. The study went for a connotative definition; “one in
which the phenomenon with which the meaning of the term is connected is broken down into its constituent
elements” (Moore, 2009: 7). The advantage of such a definition is that “it not only conveys the meaning of the
word but also gives an analysis of the characteristics of the phenomenon itself” (Moore, 2009: 7). Copi and Cohen
(2005), as cited by Moore (2009), have even posited that definition by connotation is the most acceptable method
of definition in scholarly circles. A connotative definition’s definiens states the logically necessary and jointly
sufficient conditions for the application of the definiendum, hence sufficiency of definition, as propounded by the
Classical Theory of Definition (Walters, 2009; Moore, 2009; Burek, 2004).
          Particularly for connotative definitions by genus and differentia, Copi and Cohen (1994) as cited by
Walters (2009), gives five more specific rules: Focus on essential features; avoid circularity; capture correct
extension (avoid unnecessary stuff); avoid figurative language; and, be affirmative. These five criteria constitute
the classical blue print for valid scholarly definitions. The criteria were also considered necessary for a leadership
definition because, as Walters (2009) observes, “the multitude of definitions that presently proliferate the field of
leadership studies are often presented without acknowledgement of any criteria appropriate to definition, thus
allowing for endless attempts to define leadership” (p. 40).
          Of the three prominent types of connotative definitions (lexical, stipulative and précising) (Moore, 2009),
the study thought its purpose would be better served using a précising definition (also called “précising analytical
definition”). A précising definition is one that,
          Stipulates additional features [of a term] so as to increase the precision of a term’s meaning, thereby
          eliminating the ambiguities and vagueness characterizing the common usage of the term… It [a précising
          definition] must remain connected to established usage – one is not free to assign whatever meaning one
          chooses to the term. However, a précising definition is not a mere report of common usage. It goes beyond
          lexical definition in that it incorporates additional attributes in the definiens so as to narrow the scope of
          the term’s meaning (Moore, 2009: 4-5).
The current study’s précising definition is aimed at spelling out more precisely the meaning of the term
“leadership”, while at the same time, as much as possible, respecting usage in existing studies. In all, the study
aimed at a definition that is both précising and connotative – a précising connotative definition.

Study’s core methodology
         The study employed an exploratory interpretative systematic review [SR] design (Hallinger & Hammad,
2017; Hallinger, 2013; Seers, 2015) with a conceptual thematic focus (Karp & Helgø, 2008; Ndarukwa, Chimbari
& Sibanda, 2019). SRs (Systematic reviews) methodically bring together research available on a given topic,
compare evidence from selected studies, and synthesise it to develop one coherent narrative (Himmelfarb Library,
2020; Seers, 2015). SR research is justified by its potential “role in the advancement of knowledge by highlighting
milestones of progress along particular lines of inquiry… [and] laying the groundwork for conceptual analyses
and empirical studies” (Hallinger, 2013: 127). “Meaning of leadership” was the current review’s thematic focus.
         For assembling a sample of studies to be used, the study followed bounded search procedures (Hallinger,
2013), by taking Rost (1991) as the starting point and restricting the sample to leadership studies done thereafter.
Since currency was not the study’s core preoccupation, the study went as far back as 1991, the year Rost published
his seminal work on leadership. The study’s time delimitation was thus both historical and pragmatic, basing on
Rost (1991) and on availability, respectively. Rationale for Rost (1991) is further discussed below.
         The study restricted its searches to the Googlescholar™ search engine, because it “represents a more
suitable database for reviews of Educational Leadership and Management research [sic]” (Hallinger et al., 2017:
5). Use of one search engine is valid as long as the engine indexes a large set of pertinent studies from respected
journals (Gumus, Bellibas, Esen & Gumus, 2018). The key search words used were “meaning of leadership”,
“concept of leadership”, “what is leadership?”, and “leadership definition”, with the first and second phrases
yielding more relevant results.
         The study particularly included only those Post-Rostian studies that essentially aimed at defining
leadership, hence excluding studies that had only made casual mentions of the meaning of leadership, without a
concerted concern for contributing to a bigger understanding of the leadership concept. It is by this criterion that
such studies as Kuluchumila (2018) were excluded.
         For sample size, SRs have “no magic number that defines the “optimal” number of papers to be included


                                                          129

Journal of Education and Practice                                                                          www.iiste.org
ISSN 2222-1735 (Paper) ISSN 2222-288X (Online)
Vol.12, No.9, 2021

[sic]” (Hallinger, 2013: 133). Thus, the study included all and only relevant studies discovered. In the end, the
sample consisted of mixed sources (peer-reviewed articles, dissertations, books and book chapters), published in
English between 1991 and 2021.
          Conceptual lenses were borrowed from the logical criteria of classical definitional science, as well as the
four essential elements of Rost (1991)’s prototype leadership definition (discussed below). As much as possible,
the study adhered also to Hallinger (2013)’s conceptual framework for conducting SRs in educational leadership
and management (p. 130). The framework pivots around stating a study’s central topics of interest, conceptual
lenses, data sources and types, data analysis techniques, and major results and implications (Hallinger, 2013: 130).
          For validity and reliability, Creswell (1998)’s advice that scholars use at least two of his eight checks (as
cited by Walters, 2009), was followed. Four checks were utilized: prolonged engagement with the literature (for
two years), peer review (two other leadership scholars played the “devil’s advocate”), rich description (of diverse
leadership conceptualisations), and triangulation of sources (using not only journal articles, but also books and
dissertations; even following up sources listed in the references of given Googlescholar™ studies).
          Data analysis involved making sense of each leadership definition using the stated conceptual lenses.
Narrative synthesis was then employed to integrate diverse leadership conceptualisations (Hallinger et al., 2017).
The review went beyond aggregation of available data to provide further interpretive insights (Ndarukwa et al.,
2019) about the meaning of leadership. Data were presented using descriptions, verbatim narratives and tables.
Since the study did not involve any access to individual-level data, no ethical approval was deemed necessary
(Ndarukwa et al., 2019). Only secondary data already available in the public domain was utilized.

Definitional point of departure
          By design, the early 1990s were the study’s starting point. The reason was that, in as far as leadership
conceptualisation is concerned, this was the time of publication of “two milestone leadership works” (Walters,
2009: 13): Bass (1990) and Rost (1991). Bernard Morris Bass (1925-2007) examined 7,500 leadership studies to
come up with a 1990 leadership concept contained in a book entitled, “Bass and Stodgill’s Handbook of Leadership:
Theory, Research, and Managerial Applications”. At about the same time, Joseph C. Rost (1931-2008) assessed
450 books, chapters and/or articles to come up with a book entitled “Leadership for the Twenty-First Century”.
Here, Rost examined definitions of leadership from 1900 to1979. The importance of these two seminal works is
evidenced by Walters (2009);
          In the nearly 20 intervening years [1990-2010], since Rost and Bass, there was no further evidence in the
          literature that anyone had again tried to combine or summarize various leadership definitions into a
          single definition, or to identify common elements in any context (p. 19).
The current study also sought to discover existing leadership “commonalities” and “convergences”, and to build
on these to further an appreciation of the leadership concept.
          Bass (1990) defined leadership as: An interaction between two or more members of a group that often
involves a structuring or restructuring of the situation and the perceptions and expectations of the members (pp.
19-20). The current study found this definition to be disjointed and lacking in precision. More so, its definiens is
not simpler than the definiendum. Thus, the current study opted for Rost (1991) as the point of departure.
          Rost (1991) defined leadership as: “an influence relationship among leaders and followers who intend
real changes that reflect their mutual purposes” (p. 102). He also outlined the essential elements of his definition:
(1) Influence relationship; (2) leaders and followers as the people in the relationship; (3) intending of real changes;
and (4) development of mutual purposes. The four are further explained.
          According to Rost (1991: 105-106), leadership is not a position but a relationship based on influence (not
statutory authority). This “influence” is multi-dimensional (top-down, down-up, and horizontal). Thus, anyone can
be a leader or a follower, depending on who is influencing the other. Secondly, the people involved in the
relationship are leaders and followers (Rost, 1991: 107-112), not superordinates and subordinates. For Rost,
followers also carry out leadership, not followership. Typically there is more than one follower and more than one
leader in the relationship, hence the plural element in the definition.
          Thirdly, leaders and followers intend real changes (pp. 113-117). Intention means “willingness” or
“purposeful desire”. For Rost, changes (plural) can only be championed now (in the present); otherwise their
realisation cannot be in the now. In the present, leaders and followers can only give solid evidence of this intention
(by their words and actions). By “real” changes is meant developments that are substantial (not cosmetic); those
transforming the holistic aspirations of both parties. Lastly, leaders and followers develop mutual “purposes”, not
(mere) “goals” (Rost, 1991: 118-123). Like vision, purpose is holistic. The mutuality (“fellowship”) of purposes
is forged in the non-coercive influence relationship.
          Rost (1991)’s leadership definition is itself not without issues, otherwise it would perhaps already have
settled leadership definition controversies. For example, one sees that Rost (1991)’s definition is tautological
(circular), by defining “leadership” in terms of “leaders and followers”. Secondly, does any kind of influence do?
What unique kind of influence is involved in leadership, as contrasted, for example, with another kind in


                                                         130

      Journal of Education and Practice                                                                                      www.iiste.org
      ISSN 2222-1735 (Paper) ISSN 2222-288X (Online)
      Vol.12, No.9, 2021

      management? Further critique and correction of Rost (1991)’s definition was deemed necessary, using connotative
      definitions discovered in Post-Rostian literature.

      Post-Rostian leadership conceptualisations
                A review of leadership definitions that were developed after Rost’s was guided by the following questions:
      How evident are Rost’s four essential elements in post-Rostian literature? Does the literature perhaps ignore them
      and come up with its own other elements? Might the essential elements end up being more than Rost’s four? Does
      the literature perhaps reduce the elements to less than four? Looking for Rost in studies that came after him is an
      attempt at gauging both the validity and currency of Rost’s leadership definition, and of searching for ways of
      improving upon it. The current study capitalized on definitions that met the general logical requirements (Walters,
      2009). The discovered definitions are presented verbatim; however, some few were adapted, for example Winston
      and Patterson (2006)’s, because it was defining “leader”, yet the current study defines “leadership”. But for all
      definitions (verbatim or not) source pages are indicated – for readers’ further corroboration.

                   Table 1: Chronological presentation of pertinent post-Rostian leadership definitions
         Source study                                Leadership definition                                       Essential elements
1.    Patterson (1993) in     “The process of influencing others to achieve mutually agreed upon         -   Present: 1, 2, 4
      Murphy, Goldring,       purposes for the organization”                                             -   Absent: 3
      Cravens, Elliot &                                                                                  -   New (element): Organisational
      Porter (2007: 2)                                                                                       setting.
2.    Barker (1997: 351)      “A dynamic social and political relationship that is based in a mutual     -   Present: 1, 4
      summarized Rost’s       development of purposes which may never be realized”                       -   Absent: 2, 3
      definition as:                                                                                     -   New: None (seen)
3.    Koontz & Weihrich       “The art or process of influencing people so that they will strive         -   Present: 1, 2, 4
      (1998: 344)             willingly and enthusiastically toward the achievement of group goals”      -   Absent: 3
                                                                                                         -   New: None (seen)
4.    Musaazi (2000)          A social process of influencing the behaviour and activities of an         -   Present: 1, 2
                              organisation or groups to achieve the organizational goals.                -   Absent: 3, 4
                                                                                                         -   New: Organizational setting
5.    Cacioppe (2001: 9)      “The ability to influence and develop individuals, teams and               -   Present: 1, 2, 3, 4
                              organisations to achieve a worthwhile vision that meets the present        -   Absent: None
                              needs of everyone and everything affected by their work”.                  -   New: Developing individuals
                                                                                                             & groups
6.    Fairholm,    (2002:     “The art of influencing people to accomplish organizational goals”.        -   Present: 1, 2
      34)                                                                                                -   Absent: 3, 4
                                                                                                         -   New: Organisational goals
7.    Yukl, (2002: 7) &       “A process of influencing others to understand and agree about what        -   Present: 1, 2, 4
      Yukl (2006: 8)          needs to be done and how to do it, and the process of facilitating         -   Absent: 3
      [Definition             individual and collective efforts to accomplish shared objectives”         -   New: None (seen)
      remained the same –
      verbatim]
8.    Bush & Glover           “A process of influence leading to the achievement of desired              -   Present: 1, 2, 4
      (2003: 10)              purposes. It involves inspiring and supporting others towards the          -   Absent: 3
                              achievement of a vision for the school which is based on clear personal    -   New: organisational vision
                              and professional values”.
9.    Antonakis,              “The influencing process – and its resultant outcomes – that occurs        -   Present: 1, 2
      Cianciolo         &     between a leader and followers and how this influencing process is         -   Absent: 3, 4
      Sternberg (2004: 5)     explained by the leader’s dispositional characteristics and behaviors,     -   New: Leader & follower
                              follower perceptions and attributions of the leader, and the context in        attributes; context (time &
                              which the influencing process occurs”.                                         space).
10.   Winston           &     Leadership is the process – by one or more people – of selecting,          -   Present: 1, 2
      Patterson (2006: 7)     equipping, training, and influencing one or more follower(s) who have      -   Absent: 3, 4
                              diverse gifts, abilities and skills, and focusing the follower(s) to the   -   New: Organisational setting.
                              organization’s mission and objectives causing the follower(s) to
                              willingly and enthusiastically expend spiritual, emotional, and
                              physical energy in a concerted coordinated effort to achieve the
                              organizational mission and objectives.
11.   Vroom &          Jago   “A process of motivating people to work together collaboratively to        -   Present: 1, 2, 3
      (2007: 18)              accomplish great things”                                                   -   Absent: 2, 4.
                                                                                                         -   New: None (seen)

12.   OECD-ISL as cited       The process of intentional influence exerted by one person (or group)      -   Present: 1, 2
      by Révész (2011)        over another/others to inspire the activities and relationships in an      -   Absent: 3, 4



                                                                     131

      Journal of Education and Practice                                                                                 www.iiste.org
      ISSN 2222-1735 (Paper) ISSN 2222-288X (Online)
      Vol.12, No.9, 2021

                               organization. Achieving organisational goals is the essence of such      -   New: Group leadership;
                               intentional influence.                                                       organisational setting.

13.   Northouse (2013) in      “A process whereby an individual influences others to achieve a          -   Present: 1, 2, 4
      (Magara, 2017: 151)      common goal and is composed of leaders, followers, and situations”.      -   Absent: 3
                                                                                                        -   New: Situational dynamics.
14.   Smith (2013: 2)          “The ability to adapt the given settings, so that everyone feels         -   Present: 2
                               empowered to contribute creatively, to solving the problems in a given   -   Absent: 1, 3, 4
                               situation”                                                               -   New: Problem solving; given
                                                                                                            situations.
15.   Sharma &          Jain   “Leadership is a process by which a person influences others to          -   Present: 1, 2
      (2013: 310)              accomplish an objective and directs the organization in a way that       -   Absent: 3, 4
                               makes it more cohesive and coherent”.                                    -   New: Group cohesion;
                                                                                                            organisational setting.
16.   Kruse (2013: 3)          “Leadership is a process of social influence, which maximizes the        -   Present: 1, 2, 4
                               efforts of others, towards the achievement of a goal”.                   -   Absent: 3
                                                                                                        -   New: None (seen)
17.   Starr (2014) in          “Motivating, influencing and facilitating change, while gaining          -   Present: 1, 2, 3
      Mayra (2016: 36)         support and supporting followers through trust and inspiration”          -   Absent: 4
                                                                                                        -   New: Trust
18.   Silva (2016: 3)          “The process of interactive influence that occurs when, in a given       -   Present: 1, 2, 4
                               context, some people accept someone as their leader to achieve           -   Absent: 3
                               common goals”.                                                           -   New: Contextual realities.

                 Table 1 reveals that Rost’s essential elements have been variously represented by Post-Rostian literature.
      The first element (“influence relationship”) is directly reflected in such phrases as “the process of influencing
      others” (Murphy et al., 2007), “a dynamic social and political relationship” (Barker, 1997), and “process of
      interactive influence” (Silva, 2016). In other studies, however, an “influence relationship” is only implied, as in
      “process of motivating people” (Vroom et al., 2007), whereby motivation is taken to be a form of influence (Vroom
      et al., 2007). Nearly all current definitions of leadership involve the process of influence (Walters, 2009). Thus,
      the first essential element is found to hold much currency in Post-Rostian literature.
                 For “leaders and followers” (2nd element), it is directly visible in such phrases as “influence exerted by
      one person (or group) over another/others” (Révész, 2011)), and “a person influences others” (Sharma et al., 2013).
      Indirectly, it is implied by “influencing people” (Fairholm, 2002) or “influencing others” (Yukl (2006), since two
      groups (or more) are implied. For the third element (“real changes”), the study saw it directly in “facilitating
      change” (Mayra, 2016); but only implied in “to achieve a worthwhile vision” (Cacioppe, 2001), and “to accomplish
      great things” (Vroom et al., 2007). Lastly, “mutual purposes” were more directly perceptible in “a mutual
      development of purposes” (Barker, 1997), “mutually agreed upon purposes” (Murphy et al., 2007), and
      “achievement of desired purposes” (Bush et al., 2003). Indirectly, it was read in expressions such as “organizational
      mission and objectives” (Winston et al., 2006), and “achievement of group goals” (Koontz et al., 1998). To get a
      more precise status of Rost in Post-Rostian studies, a condensed representation of each of the above four elements
      was summarized as in Table 2.

                  Table 2: Condensed representation of each essential element in Post-Rostian studies
                     Rostian essential element           Studies in which it is present        Statistically
                                                                                            f (n = 18)      %
      1.     Influence relationship                        1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10,
                                                           11, 12, 13, 15, 16, 17, 18           17          94
      2.     Leaders and followers                        1, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10, 11,
                                                           12, 13, 14, 15, 16, 17, 18           17          94
      3.     Intention of real changes                               5, 11, 17                   3          17
      4.     Development of mutual purposes                1, 2, 3, 5, 7, 8, 13, 16, 18          9          50

                Table 2 reveals that Post-Rostian literature overwhelmingly confirms Rost (1991)’s first and second
      essential elements by 94%. The same literature is found to have rejected Rost’s element of “real changes”, since
      only 17% of the studies reflect it. The fourth element was confirmed and rejected in equal measure (50% by 50%).
      However, further analysis of Rost (1991) reveals that his “mutual purposes” and “real changes” are quite similar
      – purpose/vision is the desired change. Thus, a leadership definition that in essence has “mutual purposes”, such
      as Silva (2016), does not really need to mention “real changes”; it would be a redundancy. Perhaps that is why,
      according to Table 2, of the nine (9) studies that have either “mutual purposes” or “real changes” (50%), only one
      study (Cacioppe, 2001) goes ahead to include the other. Said differently, only one study has both “mutual purposes”


                                                                    132

Journal of Education and Practice                                                                            www.iiste.org
ISSN 2222-1735 (Paper) ISSN 2222-288X (Online)
Vol.12, No.9, 2021

and “real changes” in its definition.
         The researcher interpreted these findings to mean that Rost (1991)’s essential elements are actually three,
not four. Secondly, since it is the same “real changes” element that had least frequency in Post-Rostian studies
(17%), we could as well do away with it as the first correction to Rost (1991). Thus, provisionally, Rost (1991)’s
definition reduces to: An influence relationship among leaders and followers who strive after mutual purposes.
         An analysis of data in Table 1 yielded also some two “new” elements that Rost (1991) did not include in
his definition, yet five to six Post-Rostian studies have them. The two are “organisational/group setting” and
“contextual dynamics”, as in Table 3.

                                         Table 3: New “essential” elements
                   New element                     Studies with the element                Statistically
                                                                                        f (n=18)        %

 1.    Organisational/group setting                     4, 6, 8, 10, 12, 15                 6           33

 2.    Contextual dynamics                               1, 9, 13, 14, 18                   5           28

          Table 3 indicates that whereas six studies (33%) included an element of “organisational / group setting”
in their leadership definitions; five studies (28%) depicted a “contextual dynamics” element. How “essential” are
these elements in the definition of leadership? For example, must leadership necessarily be conceptualised in terms
of an organisational context? What is the role of situational factors such as time and space in the eventual play out
of the leader-follower game? Further literature review was done to gather “data” on these issues.
          The review indicated that truly leadership takes place in the context of a group (Meraku, 2017), team
(Hogan & Kaiser, 2005) or organisation (such as school) (Ogawa & Bossert, 2000), and is meant to influence the
attainment of organisational goals (Meraku, 2017; Ogawa et al., 2000). However, the literature was quiet on
whether, the term “organisation” is necessary in a leadership definition. The study that came close to affirm the
inclusion of “group” was Hogan et al. (2005), which contended that “leadership should be defined in terms of the
ability to build and maintain a group that performs well” (p. 172). Nevertheless, in general it did not look necessary
to include the word “group” (or “organisation”) in the definition.
          For “situation” – in tandem with contingency theories (Oc, 2018; Vroom et al., 2007) – literature revealed
that leader-follower relations take place in the interplay of given contexts (Antonakis, Avoliob &
Sivasubramaniamc, 2003). Thus, contextual factors are key facilitators or obstacles of leadership enactment
(Brauckmann, Pashiardis & Ärlestig, 2020). Similarly, for Vroom et al. (2007), situations do not only shape how
leaders behave, but also affect the consequences of leaders’ behaviour. Thus, Oc (2018) and Jepson (2009) rejoice
that leadership research has, at least recently, woken up to the importance of contextual variables in leadership
practice. These are variables such as the immediate social context, cultural context, and institutional context
(Jepson, 2009). Some of these are internal (within an organisation); others are external (Alexander, Anderson,
Anterasian & Lee, 2017; Braun, Schyns & Peus, 2016; Antonakis et al., 2003). If leadership is affected by such
critical contextual factors, depicting them in a leadership definition appeared to be logical. The study therefore
makes another correction to Rost and defines leadership as: An influence relationship among different persons who
agree to work together in a given situation so as to realise their mutual purposes.
          However, there was still need of qualifying “influence”, since not any kind of “influence” (relationship)
is leadership. Some helpful qualifying hints were spotted in Post-Rostian studies: “intentional influence” (Révész,
2011); “social influence” (Kruse, 2013); “legitimate interaction” (James, Connolly & Hawkins, 2019); and
“interactive influence” (Silva, 2016). The last one was found preferable because it implies dynamism (passion),
collaboration (teamwork) and collegiality (among equals). Thus, the study’s refined leadership definition is: An
interactive influence relationship among different persons who agree to work together in a given situation so as to
realise their mutual purposes.
          This definition seems to meet the three general logical requirements (Walters, 2009). It has both a genus
and a difference. Its genus is “leadership as a relationship”. Its difference is “influence among different persons
who agree to…” Secondly, the definition’s definiens is simpler than the complex term “leadership”. Thirdly, the
definiens and definiendum are convertible. Without losing sense, we may say: “An influence relationship among
different persons who agree to work together in a given situation in order to realise their mutual purposes is
leadership”.
          Lastly, the refined definition satisfies also Copi et al. (1994)’s five more specific definitional rules (in
Walters, 2009). First, only essential features have been included in the definition. These are: influence relationship;
different persons (being involved); working together to realise mutual purposes; and (doing so within) the context
of a given situation. Second, as a correction for Rost (1991)’s circularity, the words “leaders and followers” have
been dropped. Thirdly, it looks like the resultant definition is parsimonious (economical); only necessary concepts


                                                         133

       Journal of Education and Practice                                                                        www.iiste.org
       ISSN 2222-1735 (Paper) ISSN 2222-288X (Online)
       Vol.12, No.9, 2021

       have been included. Also figurative language has been avoided (4th rule); and the definition is affirmative (what
       leadership is), not negative (5th rule). The definition will now be applied to education – one of the disciplines in
       which leadership is most studied (Spicker, 2012).

       Leadership in education contexts
                 Using the refined definition of leadership in general, how are we to define leadership in education in
       particular? This was the study’s second objective. In education, leadership is usually referred to as “educational
       leadership” [EL], or simply “school leadership” [SL] (Dalal & Rani, 2013). Although many studies use the terms
       EL and SL synonymously (Waite & Bogotch, 2017; Leithwood et al., 2006), the current study preferred EL because
       SL appears to be a subset of EL. Secondly, SL is quite close to education management; for example in the United
       Kingdom, “SL” has supplanted “educational management” (Day & Sammons, 2016). However, the current study
       utilized also some studies that used SL, as long as they applied SL in terms of influence behaviour. Literature
       reviewed yielded a few but informative connotative definitions of EL (Table 5).
                             Table 5: Sample connotative definitions of educational leadership
               Source                                   Definition                              Researcher’s comments
1.   James,     Connolly     & EL as “legitimate interaction in an educational - Process: Legitimate interaction
     Hawkins (2019: 618)          institution intended to enhance engagement with           (authentic interface).
                                  the institutional primary task [of teaching & - Participants: Those in educational
                                  learning]”                                                institutions.
                                                                                        - Bottom line: Enhancing teaching &
                                                                                            learning.
2.   Dalal & Rani (2013: 1)       “Leadership in school is the process of enlisting - Process: Enlisting & guiding.
                                  and guiding the talents and energies of teachers, - Participants: Staff, learners & even
                                  pupils and parents towards achieving common               parents.
                                  educational aims”.                                    - Bottom line: Achievement of
                                                                                            educational aims.
3.   EPNoSL          [European SL as “a multi-faceted process of strategically - Process: Purposeful use of others’
     Policy Network of School using the unique skills and knowledge of teachers,            resources; inspiring others.
     Leadership] as cited by pupils, and parents, toward achieving common - Participants: school heads,
     Kollias (2013: 13)           educational goals. It is more about relationships         leadership teams, teachers, pupils,
                                  rather than people or processes… Leadership is            and parents (all levels).
                                  present at all levels of an organization, directed at - Bottom line: Achieving common
                                  serving the most important stakeholders, through          education goals (in general), not
                                  inspiring others in the organization to take part in      just classroom instruction only.
                                  the management process… School leadership
                                  therefore coveys dynamism and pro-activity and is
                                  not restricted to principals or school heads but also
                                  includes other leaders in education, such as
                                  members of a formal leadership team and other
                                  persons who contribute towards the aims of the
                                  school, even including student leadership”

4.   Bush (2008: 20)               SL as “a process of influence based on clear values    -   Process: Value based influence.
                                   and beliefs and leading to a ‘vision’ for the school   -   Participants: “leaders”, staff &
                                   [sic]. The vision is articulated by leaders who seek       other stakeholders.
                                   to gain the commitment of staff and stakeholders to    -   Bottom line: Better future for the
                                   the ideal of a better future for the school, its           school, students & other
                                   students and stakeholders”.                                stakeholders.

                According to Table 5, EL is about “legitimate interaction” (James et al., 2019), “enlisting and guiding
       others” (Dalal et al., 2013), “strategic use of others’ resources” (EPNoSL, in Kollias, 2013), and/or “value-based
       influence” (Bush, 2008). Participants in it are school heads, teachers, teams, learners, and even parents (EPNoSL,
       in Kollias, 2013); and is aimed at achieving common education goals (in general) (Dalal et al., 2013; Kollias, 2013;
       Bush, 2008), but particularly enhancing teaching and learning (as the bottom line) (James et al., 2019).
                The current study assumed the above constructs into its refined definition of leadership. The definition’s
       element of “interactive influence relationship” catered for James et al. (2019)’s “legitimate interaction” and sister
       notions such as “value-based influence” (Bush, 2008). “Participants” were discovered in “among different
       persons”, which became “among school heads, teachers, teams, learners, and even parents”. But this seemed to be
       a long yet far from exhaustive list of members. It was reduced to “among different stakeholders”. Lastly, for bottom


                                                                134

Journal of Education and Practice                                                                        www.iiste.org
ISSN 2222-1735 (Paper) ISSN 2222-288X (Online)
Vol.12, No.9, 2021

line, the study adapted “common education goals, particularly teaching and learning” as the “mutual purposes”.
The current study therefore defines EL as “an interactive influence relationship among different stakeholders who
agree to work together in a given situation so as to realise their mutual purposes in general, but enhancing teaching
and learning in particular”.

Study implications for research and practice
          First, leadership being an interactive influence relationship or behaviour, and not an office, anyone in an
organisation can, and should, play the leader. For example, one does not need to first be appointed a head teacher,
to begin leading. Even those at the bottom of organisational hierarchies (e.g. classroom teachers) can exercise
leadership. The often heard excuse by many teachers in Africa for not making significant differences in their
institutions – that they are “mere” teachers – is unwarranted. Leadership knows no hierarchical levels. Anyone can
turn into a leader, for example by ensuring subject mastery and professional expertise, and influencing colleagues
to transform learning in their school or district. This is teacher leadership, which is badly needed in Africa today.
We teachers have no right to be “mere teachers” anymore; ours is the right to be leaders at the same time. Since
formal positions are few in schools (vis-à-vis the number of teachers), most of us will be non-positional leaders,
who, however, wield massive influence in bringing about change and development on the continent.
          Similarly, the study’s findings imply that those appointed organisational managers or school
administrators are not necessarily the de facto leaders in their institutions. Although ideally leadership and
management should be visible in the same person such as head teacher, the reality is often different. Many heads
stop at “heading”; they fail to metamorphose into leaders, and therefore remain “mere” administrators or “mere”
managers. Whereas management is acquired from above – “by virtue of this appointment” – leadership is acquired
from “below” (by one’s words and actions). Once a head teacher eventually succeeds in winning over the minds
and hearts of students, staff and other stakeholders, then s/he is exercising leadership. The implication is that
whether head or classroom teacher, each one has some journey (of personal transformation and influence) to walk
before becoming a leader.
          Another implication is that though leadership is different from management, the two are needed in the
successful functioning of organisations such as schools. Every new educational program needs to be both led and
managed. For example, an inspiring school curriculum introduced by a school board does not only require trustable
individuals (leaders) to convince teachers’ hearts and minds to buy into it, but also skilled planners and organisers
(managers) to execute it efficiently and effectively. In order for the “organisational coin” to be complete, we need
both sides (leadership and management) to be present. How exactly a multiplicity of active leaders and
administrators can co-exist, in a school setting for example, is an issue that deserves more scholarly attention,
particularly in Africa where head teachers often play the boss (Bush, 2008) – the only bull in the kraal.

Conclusion
          The study concludes that although the issue of a leadership definition constitutes an age-old problem in
leadership research, existing literature is not without plausible answers, only waiting to be assembled into a
meaningful whole. Secondly, the study contends that leadership is “an interactive influence relationship among
different persons who agree to work together in a given situation so as to realise their mutual purposes”. This
technical/strict definition differentiates leadership from management. However, both are needed for organisational
excellence. For EL (Educational Leadership), the study has redefined it as “an interactive influence relationship
among different stakeholders who agree to work together in a given situation so as to realise their mutual purposes
in general, but enhancing teaching and learning in particular”. These conceptualisations (of both leadership and
EL) will help to heighten educational leadership research and practice in Africa.

Contribution
         The study’s strongest contribution lies in not only rekindling systematic debate on the meaning of
leadership, but also in concretely exemplifying such debate. Notably, this study has carried out debate by building
on “answers” already existing in literature, and not simply by introducing entirely new ideas from nowhere, as
many previous studies had done. Secondly, the study unveils and popularizes a relatively novel approach to
conceptual clarifications in leadership studies, education and beyond, grounded on the logical principles of
definitional science. In this regard, the study exemplifies both how to state a précising connotative definition and
how to measure the strength of the ensuing conceptualisation by using definitional science principles. Finally, the
study clearly brings out the possibility and desirability of becoming outstanding leaders even without first
occupying any formal position. This study’s revelations will hopefully encourage more individuals to dare mutate
into exceptional leaders.

Limitations
    The current study’s restriction to secondary data limits it. An empirical testing of the refined definition’s


                                                        135

Journal of Education and Practice                                                                        www.iiste.org
ISSN 2222-1735 (Paper) ISSN 2222-288X (Online)
Vol.12, No.9, 2021

validity remains desirable. Secondly, since leadership is often confused with management, a concurrent discussion
of the relationship between leadership and management would be useful. The study has also raised storm on the
question of how a multiplicity of active leaders and administrators can mutually co-exist in the same institution.
However, these issues lay beyond the scope of the current study. Future research should take interest in such issues.

References
          Alexander, W., Anderson, M., Anterasian, C. and Lee, J. (2017). Context matters: The five elements of
context that most impact senior leader success. US: SpencerStuart.
          Almaki, S. H., Silong, A. D., Idris, K. and Wahat, N. W. A. (2016). Understanding of the Meaning of
Leadership from the Perspective of Muslim Women Academic Leaders. Journal of Educational and Social
Research. Vol. 6 No.2; pp. 225-236.
          Antonakis, J. Avoliob, B. J. and Sivasubramaniamc, N. (2003). Context and leadership: an examination
of the nine-factor full-range leadership theory using the Multifactor Leadership Questionnaire. The Leadership
Quarterly, 14 (3), pp. 261-295.
          Antonakis, J., Cianciolo, A. T., Sternberg, R. J. (2004). Leadership: past, present, and future. The nature
of leadership. Los Angeles: SAGE.
          Barker, R.A. (1997). How Can We Train Leaders if We Do Not Know What Leadership Is? Human
Relations, Vol. 50, No. 4, 1997, pp. 343-362.
          Bass, B. M. (1990). Bass & Stodgill’s Handbook of Leadership: Theory, Research, and Managerial
Applications (3rd Ed.). New York: The Free Press.
          Brauckmann, S., Pashiardis, P., Ärlestig, H. (2020). Bringing context and educational leadership together:
fostering the professional development of school principals. Professional Development in Education.
https://doi.org/10.1080/19415257.2020.1747105.
          Braun, S., Schyns, B. and Peus, C. (2016). Conclusion: leadership lessons from compelling contexts.
Monographs in leadership and management, 8 (8), pp. 465-479.
          Bush, T. (2008). Leadership and management development in education. Los Angeles: SAGE.
          Bush, T. and Glover, D. (2003). School leadership: concepts and evidence. University of Reading: NCSL.
          Cacioppe, R. (2001). Redefining leadership for the 21st century. University of Western Australia: Integral
Leadership Centre.
          Burek, P. (2004). Adoption of the Classical Theory of Definition to ontology modeling.
https://www.researchgate.net/publication/221655979
          Chikoko, V., Naicker, I. and Mthiyane, S. (2015). School leadership practices that work in areas of
multiple deprivation in South Africa. Educational Management Administration & Leadership, Vol. 43(3), pp. 452-
467.
          Day, C. and Sammons, P. (2016). Successful school leadership. Berkshire: Education Development Trust.
          Ekpenyong, B. & Ikegbu, E. A. (2018). The language of philosophy and the philosophy of language: a
symbiotic paradigm. Budapest International Research and Critics Institute-Journal (BIRCI-Journal). Volume I,
No 3, pp. 296-305. www.birci-journal.com
          Fairholm, M. R. (2002). Defining leadership: a review of past, present, and future ideas. Center for
Excellence in Municipal Management: George Washington University.
          Gumus, S., Bellibas, M. S., Esen, M. & Gumus, E. (2018). A systematic review of studies on leadership
models in educational research from 1980 to 2014. Educational Management Administration & Leadership, Vol.
46(1) 25–48
          Hallinger, P. (2013). A conceptual framework for systematic reviews of research in educational leadership
and management. Journal of Educational Administration, 51; 126-149.
          Hallinger, P. & Hammad, W. (2017). Knowledge production on educational leadership and management
in Arab societies: A systematic review of research. Educational Management Administration & Leadership; pp. 1-
17. DOI: 10.1177/1741143217717280
          Hallinger, P. (2017). Surfacing a hidden literature: A systematic review of research on educational
leadership and management in Africa. Educational Management Administration & Leadership, 20(10), pp. 1-23.
          Hogan, R. and Kaiser, R. B. (2005). What we know about leadership. Review of General Psychology, Vol.
9, No. 2, pp. 169-180.
          Himmelfarb       Library,    2020).    Meta-Analysis.          https://himmelfarb.gwu.edu/tutorials/study
design101/metaanalyses.cfm
          James, C., Connolly, M. & Hawkins, M. (2019). Reconceptualising and redefining educational leadership
practice, International Journal of Leadership in Education. DOI: 10.1080/13603124.2019.1591520
          Joanna, P. & Kim, T. J. (2011). Leadership development: crisis, opportunities and the leadership concept.
Leadership, Volume 7, Number 2, pp. 137-150.
          Karp, T. & Helgø, T. (2008). The future of leadership: the art of leading people in a ‘‘post-managerial’’


                                                        136

Journal of Education and Practice                                                                      www.iiste.org
ISSN 2222-1735 (Paper) ISSN 2222-288X (Online)
Vol.12, No.9, 2021

environment. Foresight; Vol. 10 No. 2 (2008), pp. 30-37.
           Koontz, H. & Weihrich, H. (1998). Essentials of management (5th Ed.). New Delhi: Tata McGraw-Hill
Publishing Company Ltd.
           Kruse, K. (2013) What Is Leadership? Forbes. http://www.forbes.com/sites/kevinkruse/
2013/04/09/what-is-leadership/2/
           Kuluchumila, R. C. (2018). Researching education leadership in Tanzanian secondary schools. Mauritius:
LAP Lambert Academic Publishing.
           Law, S. & Glover, D. (2011). Educational leadership and learning: practice, policy and research.
Buckingham: Open University Press.
           Leithwood, K., Day, C., Sammons, P., Harris, A. and Hopkins, D. (2006). Successful School Leadership:
What It Is and How It Influences Pupil Learning. NCSL; University of Nottingham.
           Lopez, A. E. and Rugano, P. (2018). Educational leadership in post-colonial contexts: What can we learn
from the experiences of three female principals in Kenyan secondary schools? Education Sciences Journal, 8 (99),
pp. 1-15.
           Mensah, J. (2019) Sustainable development: Meaning, history, principles, pillars, and implications for
human action: Literature review. Cogent Social Sciences, 5(1), pp. 1-21.
           Meraku (2017). Role of leadership in organisational effectiveness. Journal of Economics, Business and
Management, Vol. 5, No. 11, pp. 336-340.
           Moore, J. W. (2009). The Logic of Definition. DRDC, Toronto.
           Ndarukwa, P., Chimbari, M. J. & Sibanda, E. N. (2019). Protocol on a systematic review of qualitative
studies on asthma treatment challenges experienced in Sub-Saharan Africa. Systematic Review 8, 149 (2019).
https://doi.org/10.1186/s13643-019-1068-7
           Oc, B. (2018). Contextual leadership: A systematic review of how contextual factors shape leadership
and      its     outcomes.      The    Leadership      Quarterly,     Vol.   29,    Issue     1,    pp.     218-235.
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.leaqua.2017.12.004
           Ogawa, R. T. and Bossert, S. T. (2000). Leadership as an organisational quality. The Jossey-Bass
education series. San Francisco: Jossey-Bass Inc., pp. 38-58.
           Patterson, J. L. (1993). Leadership for Tomorrow’s Schools. Alexandria, VA: Associaiton for Supervision
and Curriculum Development.
           Rosari, R. (2019). Leadership definitions application for lecturers’ leadership development. Journal of
Leadership in Organizations, Vol.1, No. 1 (2019), pp. 17-28.
           Rost, J. C. (1991). Leadership for the twenty-first century. New York: Praeger.
           Seers, K. (2015). Qualitative systematic reviews: their importance for our understanding of research
relevant to pain. British Journal of Pain, Vol. 9(1), 36-40.
           Sharma, M. K. and Jain, S. (2013). Leadership management: principles, models and theories. Global
Journal of Management and Business Studies; Vol. 3 (3), pp. 309-318.
           Silva, S. (2016). What is Leadership? Journal of Business Studies Quarterly 2016, Volume 8, Number 1,
pp. 1-5.
           Sinek, S. (2009). Start with why: how great leaders inspire everyone to take action. New York: Penguin
Group Inc.
           Spicker, P. (2012). “Leadership”: A perniciously vague concept. International Journal of Public Sector
Management, 2012, 25(1), pp. 34-47.
           Surji K. M. (2015). Understanding leadership and factors that Influence leaders’ effectiveness. European
Journal of Business and Management, Vol.7, No.33, 2015; pp. 154-167.
           Ulrich, D. & Smallwood, N. (c.2012). What is leadership? Michigan Ross School of Business: RBL
Group.
           Vroom, V. H. and Jago, A. G. (2007). The Role of the Situation in Leadership. American Psychologist,
Vol. 62, No. 1, pp. 17–24
           Waite, D. and Bogotch, I. (2017). The Wiley international handbook of educational leadership. Hoboken,
NJ: John Wiley & Sons, Inc
           Walters, D. C. (2009). Exploring a definition of leadership and the biography of Dr. Frank B. Wynn.
Graduate Student Theses, Dissertations, & Professional Papers. https://scholarworks.umt.edu/etd/1299
           Washbush, J. B. (2005). There is no such thing as leadership, revisited. Management Decision, Vol. 43
No. 7/8, 2005; pp. 1078-1085.
           Winston, B. E. & Patterson, K. (2006). An Integrative Definition of Leadership. International Journal of
Leadership Studies, Vol. 1 Iss. 2; pp. 6-66.
           Yukl, G. (2002). Leadership in Organizations (5th Ed.). Upper Saddle River, NJ: Prentice Hall.
           Yukl, G. (2006). Leadership in organizations (6th Ed.). Upper Saddle River, NJ: Pearson-Prentice Hall.



                                                       137