Chapter 10
Moral Professionalism in the Context
of Educational Leadership

Eija Hanhimäki




Abstract This chapter aims to investigate moral professionalism in the context of
educational leadership. Many researchers have investigated school administration
ethics and ethical educational leadership based on case studies. However, the moral,
ethical and nonrational aspects have been omitted from the discussion, even if they
are present in school policies and practices. This chapter includes an analysis of data
gathered as narratives in a study of educational leaders and teachers (N = 82) who
participated in two educational leadership training programmes from 2019 to 2021
at one Finnish university. Based on the results, the kinds of ethical dilemmas the
educational leaders encountered and how they worked as moral professionals were
identified. The results showed that the main parties, in both ethically easy and ethi-
cally difficult dilemmas, were staff members. In the ethically easy dilemmas, the
main theme concerning staff was interactions and conflicts; in the ethically difficult
dilemmas, it was work arrangements. The most frequently mentioned principles and
values in the ethical dilemmas were fairness, justice, equality, the child’s interest
and well-being.

Keywords Moral professionalism · Educational leadership · Ethical leadership ·
Narratives · Ethical dilemmas



Introduction

Previous research on educational leadership has emphasised practical and rational
points of view, while the moral, ethical and nonrational aspects have been omitted
from the discussion. However, ethical values are present in all aspects of school




E. Hanhimäki (*)
Department of Education, University of Jyväskylä, Jyväskylä, Finland
e-mail: eija.h.hanhimaki@jyu.fi

© The Author(s) 2024                                                               201
R. Ahtiainen et al. (eds.), Leadership in Educational Contexts in Finland,
Educational Governance Research 23,
https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-031-37604-7_10

202                                                                       E. Hanhimäki


policies and practices (Day & Johansson, 2008). Moral professionalism is also at
risk when educational leaders and teachers encounter ethical and value conflicts in
their work, even if they do not recognise the ethical dimension in these situations
(e.g. Campbell, 2008).
   Many researchers have considered school administration ethics and ethical edu-
cational leadership based on case studies (e.g. Hanhimäki, 2011; Hanhimäki &
Risku, 2021; Shapiro & Stefkowich, 2005; Strike et al., 2005). Ethical leadership
creates an ethical and educational community in which people ‘live well together
and in which children learn how to live well together in the larger community’
(Strike, 2007, p. 146). In the present study, the concept of moral leadership is used
in addition to ethical leadership because the primary focus is on the practice of
leadership. Moral professionalism can be defined as the quality of educators’ pro-
fessional practices (Sockett, 1993), which are judged by professional standards and
codes of ethics and which become evident in the moral practices and roles of educa-
tors in the everyday life of schools (Hanhimäki, 2011).
   Moral leadership is a broad phenomenon that includes personal characteristics,
ways of leading and their effects on the community (e.g. Fullan, 2003; Strike, 2007).
Hanhimäki (2011) investigated the moral professionalism of educators, such as
principals and teachers, working in challenging urban Finnish schools in which
pupils came from economically and socially deprived backgrounds and exhibited
attendance and behaviour problems. The main results emphasised that the loudest
moral voices heard and repeated in the educators’ narration were caring, cooperation,
respect, commitment and professionalism (Hanhimäki, 2011). Moreover, the moral
profiles of the principals involved in the study differed, even if they were all moral
professionals: these profiles included the gentle mediator, the just leader, the
effective professional and the caring communicator. However, these principals
shared the same key values, which were trust, cooperation, equality and caring
(Hanhimäki, 2008; Hanhimäki & Tirri, 2008).
   This chapter aims to investigate moral professionalism in the context of educa-
tional leadership. This study’s data were gathered as narratives (N = 82) from edu-
cational leaders and teachers participating in two educational leadership training
programmes between 2019 and 2021 at one Finnish university. In these narratives,
the educational leaders and teachers described the easy and difficult ethical situations
they encountered in their work. The results reveal what kinds of ethical dilemmas
the educational leaders encountered and how they worked as moral professionals in
their educational contexts. The research questions were as follows:
1. What kinds of ethical dilemmas do educational leaders and teachers encounter in
   their work?
2. How do they work as moral professionals in their educational contexts?

10   Moral Professionalism in the Context of Educational Leadership                 203


Moral Professionalism in Educational Leadership

According to previous research, teaching is a moral activity (e.g. Hansen, 2001),
and educators’ professional morality and ethical conduct have been actively
investigated (e.g. Campbell, 2003; Hanhimäki, 2011; Tirri, 2003; Tirri & Husu,
2002). Furthermore, good instruction can be defined as teaching that seeks at best to
promote learners’ moral, psychological and physical well-being (Carr, 2000).
However, teachers do not always recognise the moral dimension of their work (e.g.
Campbell, 2008; Sockett, 1993; Tirri, 1999). In addition to teaching, the moral
dimension is widely present in educational contexts because education can be seen
as a moral endeavour (Zubay & Soltis, 2005).
    Ethical and moral standards also guide educational leaders’ work in terms of
their relationships and practices (Day, 2005; Fullan, 2003). In the Finnish context,
ethical educational leadership is guided by contemporary education policy
documents, including legislation and other regulations, curricula and trade unions’
ethical recommendations for educational leaders and teachers. Finnish educational
governance comprises four main lines: the state, local authorities, labour
organisations and civic organisations at the local, regional, national and transnational
levels. Although legislation and other regulations mandate education providers,
teachers have the autonomy to organise their education provision. This means that
educational leaders and teachers serve the education providers, who are mainly
local authorities. When we look at the legislation (e.g. Administrative Procedure
Act, 2003; Basic Education Act, 1998), it says, for example, that every school must
have sufficient staff and a principal who is responsible for everything in the school.
In practice, this is determined by local steering documents, such as annual work
plans. Furthermore, the key principles of good administration include serving in an
appropriate manner, providing services and cooperating (Hanhimäki & Risku, 2021).
    The Finnish curriculum system includes national, local and school tiers, which
enable education providers to interpret and enact education. Basic values are also
included in these curricula. For example, in the National Core Curriculum for Basic
Education 2014, the main values are that every pupil is unique and has the right to
high-quality education. Furthermore, humanity, civilisation, equality, democracy,
cultural diversity and a sustainable way of life are the values that guided the making
of the national curriculum (Finnish National Agency for Education, 2022a). The
fundamental values of the National Core Curriculum for Early Childhood Education
and Care 2018 have much in common with those for comprehensive education,
emphasising the intrinsic value of childhood, growing as a human being, a child’s
rights, equality, diversity and a healthy and sustainable way of life (Finnish National
Agency for Education, 2022b).
    During previous decades, many professions and trade unions in the education
field established their own values and ethical principles to support and guide their
members in ethical matters. For example, the Trade Union of Education (1998,
2014) published the Code of Ethics for Finnish Teachers. The main emphasis is that
educational professionals must have good professional skills and ethical principles.

204                                                                        E. Hanhimäki


The main values in these codes are human worth, honesty, justice, responsibility and
freedom (Trade Union of Education, 1998; 2014). In the Principal’s Ethical Code,
the Finnish Association of Principals (2018) emphasises caring in the principal’s
profession both as communication between the school community and society and
as taking care of one’s school community. Other main values in this code are
equality, respect, encouragement and hope.
    The Code of Ethics for Finnish Municipal Directors of Education by the Finnish
Association of Educational Experts (2019) states the municipal directors’ ethical
duties, such as promoting and securing the fulfilment of citizens’ cultural rights.
Equality, respect, encouragement, trust, professional and sustainable development
and hope are the main values in this code. The Ethical Principles for Professionals
in Early Childhood Education by the Trade Union for the Public and Welfare Sectors
(2020) underline children’s rights, respect for people and the environment and
support for staff. The main values in these principles are respect, equality,
cooperation, encounter, professional development, responsibility, trust and
well-being.
    Hanhimäki and Risku (2021) investigated the cultural and social foundations of
ethical educational leadership in the Finnish context. They mapped ethical
educational leadership from curricula, legislation, ethical principles and empirical
results, including, for example, how educational leaders define moral professionalism
as part of their educational leadership competences. Consequently, it is possible to
see specific main values and ethical principles throughout the educational system.
First, striving for equality forms the fundamental ethical principle at all levels of the
Finnish educational and societal system and is based on the Nordic welfare state
ideology. Second, taking care of all individuals is a fundamental characteristic of
the Finnish educational system. Third, multiprofessional collaboration is traditional
for our system in terms of how to support people’s well-being and development
(Hanhimäki & Risku, 2021).
    In the Finnish educational system, educational leaders and teachers have a sig-
nificant amount of autonomy, agency and responsibility, for example, in developing
curricula for their schools together with educational providers, stakeholders and
special interest groups. The growing role of value-based leadership, complexity,
unexpected changes, diversity and different individual needs challenge every educa-
tional professional’s ability to address ethical considerations and moral practices. In
teacher education and education in educational leadership, it is also challenging to
determine how to respond to these professional development needs. There have
been promising results when educational leadership students have engaged in reflec-
tive ethical assignments that are closely connected with their moral practices in their
professional development (Hanhimäki & Risku, 2021). Reflexivity should be sup-
ported by these kinds of professional development programmes for leaders. For
example, a new vision of education that is more sensitive to moral and ethical issues
is being developed in the United States (Normand et al., 2021).

10   Moral Professionalism in the Context of Educational Leadership                 205


 ncountering Ethical Dilemmas in the Everyday Work
E
of Educators and Leaders

The educators of school communities encounter various ethical dilemmas in their
everyday school life, including diversity and conflicts between community members.
At their core, ethical dilemmas are concerned about solutions and determining the
right thing to do (Hanhimäki, 2011). According to previous research, teachers are
not always aware of the moral impact of their actions (Jackson et al., 1993). Teachers
have also felt that they are ill-prepared to deal with ethical dilemmas in their work
(Hanhimäki & Tirri, 2009; Lyons, 1990; Tirri, 1999). Ethical sensitivity, ethical
judgement skills, ethical focus and competence in ethical actions are the main skills
of moral experts (Narvaez, 2005, 2006). When Finnish principals and teachers were
investigated in a case study, ethical sensitivity, especially reading and expressing
emotions, was present in the critical incidents at challenging urban schools, and this
created opportunities for cooperation and caring relationships with the students and
their families (Hanhimäki & Tirri, 2009).
    Ethical challenges and ethical dilemmas have been investigated in various lead-
ership sectors and contexts other than education. For example, Feldt et al. (2013)
studied ethical dilemmas in leaders’ work in different sectors of society. There are
two types of decision-making situations: when the leader does not know the right
thing to do or knows it but does not follow it for some reason (Nash, 1993, as cited
in Feldt et al., 2013). Normally, ethical dilemmas concern everyday work, but this
is not often the case for big and strategic decisions. However, these situations can be
very difficult because they are related to human beings and, for example, their fur-
ther possibilities of finding employment. Feldt et al. (2013) also analysed the con-
nection between ethical dilemmas and psychological stress and the meaning of the
ethical organisational culture in this context. They found that leaders are meaningful
role models in their communities, and ethical leadership is like the backbone of the
organisational culture (Feldt et al., 2013).
    Moral conflicts can also be used to investigate business leaders’ moral identities
and how to support them in their development by increasing discussions and using
different individual approaches to resolve moral conflicts (Huhtala et al., 2020).
Collin et al. (2020) investigated human resource development practices that support
creativity in Finnish growth organisations. Their results showed that everyday fair
leadership is one of the main factors that supports creativity in the workplace so
that, for example, employees can trust in problematic situations where help and sup-
port are available and no one is left to navigate this on their own. One interesting
question is what is special in leadership in educational contexts compared with
leadership in other sectors.
    Sustainability is a topical point of view that is closely related to ethical leader-
ship and encountering ethical dilemmas. Leaders play a significant role in terms of
how they promote an ethical culture and facilitate training and discussion on ethical

206                                                                       E. Hanhimäki


questions and principles concerning ethical dilemmas. This role also supports an
ethically sustainable way of working (Pihlajasaari et al., 2013). Sustainable work
promotes the development of personal resources, which leads to sustainable work
ability. One way to create sustainable work is work crafting, ‘in which existing
personal resources are benefited from, developed further through learning, or
translated into novel resources’ (Kira et al., 2010, p. 616); moreover, ‘at its best,
work crafting is a collaborative activity between employees, supervisors and other
stakeholders’ (Kira et al., 2010, p. 628).
    Self-determination theory is closely related to sustainable work and ethical lead-
ership. When three innate psychological needs—competence, autonomy and relat-
edness—are satisfied, self-motivation and mental health are enhanced. This theory
is significant in many ways, and in the context of educational leadership, it strength-
ens the idea of how to motivate and bind members of educational communities
(Ryan & Deci, 2000). According to Hargreaves and Fink (2004), sustainable leader-
ship must be supported by the system. This means that sustainable leadership can-
not be the responsibility of one individual; it should be created by distributing
leadership and responsibility. Sustainable leadership is also socially just and pro-
motes diversity (Hargreaves & Fink, 2004). When we consider moral professional-
ism in ethical dilemmas, the meaning of sustainable leadership is important in terms
of how moral practices can follow sustainable principles.
    When people encounter ethical dilemmas, they can use different moral orienta-
tions. Justice and care are perhaps the best known moral orientations: a justice ori-
entation can be described as equal respect and an ideal of reciprocity, and a care
orientation emphasises the ideals of attention and response to need. Oser (1991)
investigated teachers’ professional morality and presented a model that describes
teachers’ professional decision-making: in addition to justice and care, claims con-
cerning truthfulness are critical, and how a teacher coordinates these moral dimen-
sions to solve conflicts is influenced by professional morality. Both female and male
educators can have different moral orientations, not just emphasising, for example,
care as a female orientation (Hanhimäki, 2011).



Data and Methods

The data for this study were gathered from educational leaders and teachers in three
training programmes between 2019 and 2021 (N = 82) at one Finnish university.
These training programmes concentrated on educational leadership, one on
intermediate studies in educational leadership (N = 24) and two on good practices
in educational leadership (N = 58). The participants were mainly educational
leaders, including principals, municipal directors of education and leaders in early
childhood education and care centres, and they had different levels of education.
Moreover, there were teachers from various educational contexts. For example, all
but one of the participants from intermediate studies were principals; one was a
teacher. The data were gathered as written case descriptions, either as course

10   Moral Professionalism in the Context of Educational Leadership                 207


assignments or separate electronic surveys. Most of these case descriptions were
written anonymously, but the writers’ leadership or teaching status was described in
the cases. Permission to conduct the research was sought before the participants
wrote and sent their texts. In these case descriptions, the educational leaders and
teachers were asked to describe easy and difficult ethical situations, the persons who
were involved in these situations and the principles and values that guided the
solutions to these situations.
    The final analysis included 43 narratives of ethically easy situations and 39 nar-
ratives of ethically difficult situations. The narratives’ length varied from a few sen-
tences to two pages. Data-driven content analysis was used to answer the first
research question about the kinds of ethical dilemmas educational leaders and
teachers encounter in their work. The analysis started with reading the narratives
many times. Then, the narratives were coded with letters and numbers (E = easy,
D = difficult; e.g. the narrative of the first easy situation was coded as E1) and
labelled according to the codes, the parties in the situations, the situations’ themes
and the guiding ethical principles and values in the solutions of the situations. In
particular, the focus was on the parties and themes of the situations when the first
research question was investigated. Theory-guided content analysis was used to
investigate the data in relation to the second research question of how the educational
leaders and teachers work as moral professionals in their educational contexts.
Furthermore, quotations from the most descriptive narratives were added to the
results.
    In addition to qualitative analysis, quantification of the qualitative data was pos-
sible because of the large number of narratives (Tuomi & Sarajärvi, 2003). The
number of times the various parties, themes, principles and values appeared in the
narratives was counted.



Results

The first research question was what kinds of ethical dilemmas educational leaders
and teachers encountered. In the results, the ethically easy and ethically difficult
situations refer to the characteristics of these situations in which ethical dilemmas
denote the consideration of the right thing to do (Hanhimäki, 2011). When the
narratives were tabulated according to the codes, it was possible to recognise how
the educational leaders and teachers responded to the ethically easy and ethically
difficult dilemmas. The parties refer to who or what the people or things in the
dilemma were when the educational leaders or teachers described the situation in
their narratives.
    Table 10.1 shows the names and numbers of the mentioned parties, the themes
and the principles and values in the narrative. However, the aim of the quantification
was not general applicability of the results because the study was qualitative.
Regarding the parties mentioned in the educational leaders and teachers’ ethically
easy dilemmas, most of them were staff, followed by students, students and families,

208                                                                                  E. Hanhimäki

Table 10.1 Parties, themes, principles and values in the ethically easy and ethically difficult
dilemmas
Dilemmas             Ethically easy dilemmas (43)             Ethically difficult dilemmas (39)
Parties              Staff (17), students (10), students      Staff (20), students and families (7),
                     and families (7), staff and students     students (6), staff and students (4),
                     (6), resources (3)                       resources (2)
Themes               Staff: interaction and conflicts         Staff: work arrangements (10/20),
                     (5/17), working hours (3/17), work       rules of operation (6/20), interaction
                     arrangements (4/17), rules of            and conflicts (4/20)
                     operation (4/17), school premises        Students and families: study
                     (1/17)                                   arrangements (4/7), interactions and
                     Students: behaviour (6/10), support      conflicts (3/7)
                     and rights (4/10)                        Students: behaviour (5/6), study
                     Students and families: study             arrangements (1/6)
                     arrangements (3/7), behaviour (3/7),     Staff and students: study
                     interactions and conflicts (1/7)         arrangements (2/4), support and
                     Staff and students: study                rights (2/4)
                     arrangements (5/6), rules of             Resources: division of resources
                     operation (1/6)                          (2/2)
                     Resources: division of resources
                     (3/3)
Principles and       Staff: fairness (5), well-being (3),     Staff: justice (4), fairness (4),
values (number of    justice (3), the child’s interest (3),   equality (3), common rules (3),
mentions in the      responsibility (2), equality (2),        realism (2), professional ethics (2),
narratives)          common rules (2)                         law (2), humanity (2), well-being
                     Students: justice (4), fairness (4),     (2)
                     common rules (3), law (2),               Students and families: the child’s
                     optimism (2)                             interest (3), fairness (3), humanity
                     Students and families: ethical values    (2), respect (2)
                     (2), justice (2), respect (2)            Students: equality (2), justice (2)
                     Staff and students: justice (2)          Staff and students: the child’s
                     Resources: fairness (2)                  interest (2)
                                                              Resources: justice, responsibility,
                                                              honesty, ethical reflection, striving
                                                              for good, early influencing, equality


staff and students and resources. As for the ethically difficult dilemmas, half the
parties in the dilemmas were staff; students and families, students, staff and students
and resources were less often mentioned.
    The main themes of the ethically easy dilemmas concerning staff were interac-
tions and conflicts, working hours, work arrangements, rules of operation and
school premises. For the ethically easy dilemmas concerning students, the main
themes were behaviour and support and rights. The main themes concerning stu-
dents and families were study arrangements, behaviour and interactions and con-
flicts. The main themes concerning staff and students were study arrangements
and rules of operation. The main theme concerning resources was the division of
resources.
    For the ethically difficult dilemmas, the main themes concerning staff were work
arrangements, rules of operation and interaction and conflicts. The main themes

10    Moral Professionalism in the Context of Educational Leadership                                209


concerning students and families were study arrangements and interactions and
conflicts. For the dilemmas concerning students, the main themes were behaviour
and study arrangements. The main themes concerning staff and students were study
arrangements and support and rights. For the dilemmas concerning resources, the
main theme was the division of resources.
   In summary, the main parties in both the ethically easy (17/43) and the ethically
difficult dilemmas (20/39) were staff. In the ethically easy dilemmas, the main
theme concerning staff was interactions and conflicts (5/17); the main theme
concerning staff in the ethically difficult dilemmas was work arrangements (10/20).
These results emphasise the significance of human resource management in ethical
educational leadership.
   The second research question was how educational leaders and teachers work as
moral professionals in their educational contexts. The following definition of moral
professionalism was used in the theory-guided analysis: the quality of the educators’
professional practices (Sockett, 1993), which are judged by professional standards
and codes of ethics and which become evident in educators’ moral practices and
roles in the everyday lives of schools (Hanhimäki, 2011). The coding of the data
showed the principles and values that guided educational leaders and teachers in
ethically easy and ethically difficult dilemmas with different parties, in other words,
when they worked as moral professionals.
   In the ethically easy dilemmas concerning staff, the most frequently mentioned
principles and values were fairness (5), well-being (3), justice (3) and the child’s
interest (3). For example, one educational leader described a dilemma concerning a
conflict between three employees, which the leader solved according to the princi-
ples of fairness, justice and respect:
     One employee told another colleague how a third colleague had been curt with her and did
     not talk with her. Another colleague told me, and after that, I asked the first and third
     colleagues to speak with me, first separately and then together. The discussion ended so that
     they reached an understanding and realised that they were heard and understood. The
     situation was easy because I did not take sides in this dispute, but I saw that it was just that
     they did not understand each other’s way of thinking and interacting. I remember that I
     thought about how important it is to give space for feelings, but understand deeply and show
     respect to everyone [with] the principles of fairness, justice and respect. (E5)

   The most frequently mentioned principles and values in the ethically easy dilem-
mas with students were justice (4), fairness (4) and common rules (3). In the ethi-
cally easy dilemmas with students and families, the main principles and values were
ethical values (2), justice (2) and respect (2). The main principles and values in the
ethically easy dilemmas with staff and students were justice (2) and resource fair-
ness (2).
   For the ethically difficult dilemmas with staff, the most frequently mentioned
principles and values were fairness (4), justice (4), equality (3) and common rules
(3). For example, one educational leader wrote about the situation of an employee’s
misconduct that was solved according to the principles of fairness, justice and
honesty:

210                                                                                   E. Hanhimäki

   During the last school year, I had a project employee from outside the school. I received
   feedback that his working methods and working hours were not in order. I solved the
   situation by listening to him, and it went well. This person admitted his mistakes and
   corrected his working methods. This situation was challenging because it was difficult, and
   his attitude towards an employer was already very negative when he started his job. In
   addition, I considered the right way to react—suitable but strict. The principles of justice,
   fairness and honesty guided [me]. Lying and misconduct are mainly wrong, as well as self-­
   interest at the expense of others. (D14)

   In the ethically difficult dilemmas with students and families, the main principles
and values were the child’s interest (3) and fairness (3). The main principles and
values in the ethically difficult dilemmas with students were equality (2) and justice
(2); with staff and students, it was the child’s interest. With resources, many
individual principles or values were mentioned once, such as justice, responsibility
and ethical reflection. In both the ethically easy and ethically difficult dilemmas, the
educational leaders and teachers mentioned other principles and values, but these
were only mentioned once under the themes of the dilemmas, so they are not listed
in Table 10.1. However, most of these were mentioned under other themes, such as
the principles and values of equality, justice and well-being.
   In summary, the most frequently mentioned principles and values in the ethically
easy dilemmas were fairness, justice, common rules, equality, well-being and the
child’s interest. For the ethically difficult dilemmas, the most frequently mentioned
principles and values were fairness, justice, equality, the child’s interest and
humanity. The child’s interest was the principle most often mentioned in the
ethically difficult dilemmas in comparison to the ethically easy dilemmas. This is
seen, for example, in the case when the educator solved a situation in which the
dilemma was a pupil’s grade repetition, and the child’s interest was one of the main
principles in this decision:
   It was difficult to watch a pupil’s mother’s crushing reaction. It was very justified to repeat
   the grade, but the mother’s story reawakened my own motherhood. I understood the
   mother’s pain and worries, but also a child’s future pain when learning will not improve. It
   was difficult to decide between these things. (D3)

   When all the mentioned principles and values in encountering ethical dilemmas
were summarised, the most frequently mentioned principles and values were
fairness and justice followed by equality, the child’s interest and well-being.
   After the narratives were coded, these principles and values were compared with
the professional standards and codes of ethics that guide the educators’ work in the
Finnish context. These were the contemporary education policy documents,
including legislation and other regulations, curricula and trade union ethical
recommendations for educational leaders and teachers. These documents emphasise
the main principles and values of, for example, human dignity, equality, diversity,
sustainability, honesty, justice, freedom, caring, respect, encouragement, hope,
trust, cooperation, professional development, responsibility and well-being.
   When the principles and values in the policy documents were compared with this
study’s results, they were in line, as fairness, justice, equality, the child’s interest
and well-being are also emphasised in the policy documents. Human dignity and

10   Moral Professionalism in the Context of Educational Leadership                 211


how the educational leaders and teachers encounter people were described through
the principles and values of fairness, justice and equality. The principles and values
of the child’s interest and well-being also reflect a caring attitude. However, one
value in the policy documents that was rarely mentioned by name in these data was
sustainability, but it was included, for example, when the educational leaders and
teachers described the sustainable results of their solutions.



Discussion

The aim of this chapter was to investigate moral professionalism in the context of
educational leadership and add another dimension to studies on ethics in school
administration and ethical educational leadership. Although many researchers have
published investigations into the ethics of school administration and ethical
educational leadership (e.g. Hanhimäki, 2011; Hanhimäki & Risku, 2021; Shapiro
& Stefkowich, 2005; Strike et al., 2005), the moral, ethical and nonrational aspects
have been omitted from the discussion, even if they are present in all aspects of
school policies and practices (Day & Johansson, 2008).
    Previous research has reported that educational leaders and teachers do not
always recognise the ethical dimension in their work (e.g. Campbell, 2008). In the
present study, the narratives collected from educational leaders and teachers
described the easy and difficult ethical situations they encountered in their work and
illustrated the kinds of ethical dilemmas they faced and how they worked as moral
professionals in their educational contexts.
    The findings were that the main parties in both the ethically easy and the ethi-
cally difficult dilemmas were staff, concerning interactions and conflicts in the easy
dilemmas and work arrangements in the difficult dilemmas. The most frequently
mentioned principles and values in the ethically easy dilemmas were fairness,
justice, common rules, equality, well-being and the child’s interest. For the ethically
difficult dilemmas, the most frequently mentioned principles and values were
fairness, justice, equality, the child’s interest and humanity. The child’s interest was
more frequently mentioned in the ethically difficult dilemmas than in the ethically
easy dilemmas. When the policy documents’ principles and values were compared
with the results of this study, they were very much in line as fairness, justice,
equality, the child’s interest and well-being are also emphasised in the policy
documents. One value in the policy documents that was rarely mentioned by name
in these data was sustainability.
    If we compare these results with previous research results on ethical educational
leadership in the Finnish context, the same main values and ethical principles were
found and seen throughout the educational system. Equality, caring and
multiprofessional collaboration (Hanhimäki & Risku, 2021) were also among the
oft-mentioned principles and values in these data. However, the results emphasised
fairness, justice, equality, the child’s interest and well-being more than previous
studies because the context of the present study was ethical dilemmas. The

212                                                                       E. Hanhimäki


decision-­making point of view was strong in these narratives, which could explain
the amount of justice orientation in these results. However, a caring orientation was
also present, especially through the principles and values of the child’s interest and
well-being.
   In Northern European countries, there is a clear connection between develop-
ment of educational leadership and socio-historical changes that has also affected
values and ethical principles. For example, the weight of tradition and a political
consensus to fight inequalities have established a lasting climate of cooperation in
Nordic schools. The common good of the local community can also be found, for
example, as social solidarity between community members in the United States and
New Zealand, while there is an expectation for the educational leaders to sustain
local discussion. The Chinese educational leaders try to ensure social stability and
harmony against the market and hierarchy. This international comparison emphasises
the meaning of community trust and how it drives innovation, solidarity and social
justice in Finland (Normand et al., 2021).
   Based on the results of this study, it can be stated that the educational leaders and
teachers recognised the principles and values that guide them in both ethically easy
and ethically difficult dilemmas. In only one narrative, the narrator did not know the
guiding principle or value in the dilemma. This conclusion creates hope, in contrast
with the previous research that raised concerns that educational leaders and teachers
do not always recognise their work’s ethical dimension and are ill-prepared to deal
with ethical dilemmas (e.g. Campbell, 2008; Day & Johansson, 2008; Hanhimäki &
Tirri, 2009; Lyons, 1990; Tirri, 1999).
   Furthermore, it is significant how research on moral professionalism and educa-
tion in educational leadership can create both the theoretical and empirical basis for
educational leaders’ and teachers’ work as moral professionals. Reflective ethical
study has been used in educational leadership education with promising results.
When studies on educational leaders and teachers are closely connected with their
moral practices, the professional development process naturally combines theoreti-
cal and empirical points of view with the help of reflexivity (Hanhimäki & Risku,
2021; Normand et al., 2021). Using case studies has also been a very efficient and
evocative pedagogical method in educational leadership education (Hanhimäki &
Risku, 2021). It is possible to use written case stories, or the participants can write
their own. The case stories can be handled using drama methods or discussions on
the dilemmas and different ethical orientations to solve the dilemmas. The main
point is to have a person reflect individually and with peers, become aware of his/
her ethical thinking and develop his/her ability to work as a moral professional.
Moreover, case studies can be used in both pre- and in-service teacher education
(Hanhimäki, 2011; Hanhimäki & Risku, 2021; Hanhimäki & Tirri, 2009).
   Fairness and justice were the most frequently mentioned principles and values in
the ethical dilemmas of this study. Fair leadership notably affects creativity and trust
in the workplace (Collin et al., 2020). While sustainability was mentioned in the
educational policy documents, it was rarely mentioned by the participants in this
study. However, one of the main results of this study was that the main parties, in

10   Moral Professionalism in the Context of Educational Leadership                  213


both the ethically easy and the ethically difficult dilemmas, were staff, which
underlines the significance of human resource management in educational
leadership. The easy dilemmas with staff concerned interactions and conflicts; the
difficult dilemmas focused on work arrangements. Previous studies have investigated
sustainable leadership and work in different sectors. The findings indicate the
important role of leaders as promoters of an ethical organisational culture, who, in
doing so, support an ethically sustainable way of working (e.g. Kira et al., 2010;
Pihlajasaari et al., 2013).
    In conclusion, if we consider what is special in moral professionalism in the
context of educational leadership in comparison to leadership in different sectors,
one answer can be the relationships with many people of different ages and from
various backgrounds. Relationships also play a central role in the ethical principles
and values for educational professionals, for example, in the Code of Ethics for
Finnish Teachers (Trade Union of Education in Finland, 1998, 2014) and the
Principals’ Ethical Code (Finnish Association of Principals, 2018). In practice,
educational leaders and teachers are directly or indirectly connected with other
people, including their colleagues, students and children, families or other
cooperation partners. Thus, how the system supports educational leaders and
teachers in their moral professional work is essential to ensure that their efforts can
be sustainable and they can be sensitive towards themselves and other people.
    What educational leadership can learn from leadership in other sectors is, for
example, how to utilise theories and practices of sustainability in human resource
management. In the long term, ethical and sustainable educational leadership
increases the motivation and commitment of the members of educational
communities and strengthens well-being. A future challenge for research and
education in educational leadership is to provide support and education for
educational leaders and teachers on how to develop their moral professionalism
skills, for example, with the help of reflective ethical studies.
    The data of this study were gathered in one university, but with three separate
datasets from different training programmes, which increases the credibility of the
findings. Furthermore, the participants were educational leaders and teachers from
various educational contexts, ranging from early childhood education and care to
higher education; this triangulation of the data strengthens the credibility of the
study (Patton, 1999; Tuomi & Sarajärvi, 2003). In addition to the qualitative
analysis, quantification of the qualitative data was also used in this study, even if the
aim was not a general applicability of the qualitative results. However, the large
number of narratives facilitated the counting of the responses (Tuomi & Sarajärvi,
2003). The nature of the case assignment was to describe both easy and difficult
ethical situations; this affected the results of this study, which emphasised some
values, such as fairness, justice and equality, more than other values. Even if this is
a limitation of the study, the results are in line with the previous research results
from the Finnish context (e.g. Hanhimäki & Risku, 2021) and internationally (e.g.
Normand et al., 2021).

214                                                                                   E. Hanhimäki


References

Administrative Procedure Act 434. (2003). https://www.finlex.fi/fi/laki/kaannokset/2003/
   en20030434.pdf
Basic Education Act 628. (1998). https://www.finlex.fi/fi/laki/kaannokset/1998/en19980628.pdf
Campbell, E. (2003). Moral lessons: The ethical role of teachers. Educational Research and
   Evaluation, 9(1), 25–50.
Campbell, E. (2008). Preparing ethical professionals as a challenge for teacher education. In
   K. Tirri (Ed.), Educating moral sensibilities in urban schools (pp. 3–18). Sense Publishers.
Carr, D. (2000). Professionalism and ethics in teaching. Routledge.
Collin, K., Lemmetty, S., & Riivari, E. (2020). Human resource development practices supporting
   creativity in Finnish growth organizations. International Journal of Training and Development,
   24(4), 321–336. https://doi.org/10.1111/ijtd.12199
Day, C. (2005). Principals who sustain success: Making a difference in schools in challenging
   circumstances. International Journal of Leadership in Education, 8(4), 273–290.
Day, C., & Johansson, O. (2008). Leadership with a difference in schools serving disadvantaged
   communities: Arenas for success. In K. Tirri (Ed.), Educating moral sensibilities in urban
   schools (pp. 19–34). Sense Publishers.
Feldt, T., Huhtala, M., & Lämsä, A.-M. (2013). Johtajan työn eettiset haasteet [Ethical chal-
   lenges in the leader’s work]. In P. Pyöriä (Ed.), Työhyvinvointi ja organisaation menestys
   (pp. 137–154) Gaudeamus.
Finnish Association of Municipal Directors of Education. (2019). Code of ethics for Finnish
   Municipal Directors of Education. https://peda.net/yhdistykset/opsia/ajankohtaista/sjepl/sjep
Finnish Association of Principals. (2018). Principal’s ethical code. https://surefire.fi/web/
   rehtorin-­ammattieettiset-­ohjeet/
Finnish National Agency for Education. (2022a). The 2014 national core curriculum for basic
   education. https://www.oph.fi/sites/default/files/documents/perusopetuksen_opetussuunnitel-
   man_perusteet_2014.pdf
Finnish National Agency for Education. (2022b). The 2018 national core curriculum for early
   childhood education and care. https://www.oph.fi/sites/default/files/documents/varhaiskasva-
   tussuunnitelman_perusteet.pdf
Fullan, M. (2003). The moral imperative of school leadership. Corvin Press.
Hanhimäki, E. (2008). Moral profiles of successful urban school principals. In K. Tirri (Ed.),
   Educating moral sensibilities in urban schools (pp. 35–49). Sense Publishers.
Hanhimäki, E. (2011). Moral professionalism in interaction. Educators’ relational moral voices in
   urban schools. Doctoral dissertation, University of Helsinki. Waxmann.
Hanhimäki, E., & Risku, M. (2021). The cultural and social foundations of ethical educational
   leadership in Finland. In R. Normand, L. Moos, M. Liu, & P. Tulowitzki (Eds.), The cultural
   and social foundations on educational leadership. An international comparison. Springer.
Hanhimäki, E., & Tirri, K. (2008). The moral role and characteristics of Finnish urban school
   principals. Journal of Research in Character Education, 6(1), 53–65.
Hanhimäki, E., & Tirri, K. (2009). Education for ethically sensitive teaching in critical incidents at
   school. Journal of Education for Teaching, 35(2), 107–121.
Hansen, D. T. (2001). Exploring the moral heart of teaching. Teachers College Press.
Hargreaves, A., & Fink, D. (2004). The seven principles of sustainable leadership. https://www.
   ascd.org/el/articles/the-­seven-­principles-­of-­sustainable-­leadership
Huhtala, M., Fadjukoff, P., & Kroger, J. (2020). Managers as moral leaders: Moral identity pro-
   cesses in the context of work. Journal of Business Ethics. Advance online publication., 172,
   639. https://doi.org/10.1007/s10551-­020-­04500-­w
Jackson, P. W., Boostrom, R., & Hansen, D. (1993). The moral life of schools. Jossey-Bass.
Kira, M., van Eijnatten, F. M., & Balkin, D. B. (2010). Crafting sustainable work: Development of
   personal resources. Journal of Organizational Change Management, 23(5), 616–632.

10   Moral Professionalism in the Context of Educational Leadership                                215

Lyons, N. (1990). Dilemmas of knowing: Ethical and epistemological dimensions of teachers’
    work and development. Harvard Educational Review, 60, 159–181.
Narvaez, D. (2005). The neo-Kohlbergian tradition and beyond: Schemas, expertise, and character.
    In C. Gustavo & C. P. Edwards (Eds.), Moral motivation through the life span (pp. 119–163).
    University of Nebraska Press.
Narvaez, D. (2006). Integrative ethical education. In M. Killen & J. G. Smetana (Eds.), Handbook
    of moral development (pp. 703–732). Erlbaum.
Nash, L. (1993). Good intentions aside. Harvard Business School Press.
Normand, R., Moos, L., Liu, M., & Tulowitzki, P. (2021). School leadership in search of common
    goods and complex equality: An alternative to neoliberal vision. In R. Normand, L. Moos,
    M. Liu, & P. Tulowitzki (Eds.), The cultural and social foundations on educational leadership.
    An international comparison (pp. 253–267). Springer.
Oser, F. (1991). Professional morality: A discourse approach (the case of the teaching profession).
    In W. Kurtines & J. Gewirtz (Eds.), Handbook of moral behavior and development (Vol. 2,
    pp. 191–228). Lawrence Erlbaum Associates.
Patton, M. Q. (1999). Enhancing the quality and credibility of qualitative analysis. Health Services
    Research, 34(5), Part II, 1189–1208.
Pihlajasaari, P., Feldt, T., Mauno, S., & Tolvanen, A. (2013). Resurssien ja toimivaltuuksien puute
    eettisen kuormittuneisuuden riskitekijänä kaupunkiorganisaation sosiaali- ja terveyspalvelu-
    issa [The shortage of resources and personal authority as a risk factor of ethical strain in social
    affairs and health services of the city organization]. Työelämän tutkimus, 11(3), 209–222.
Ryan, R. M., & Deci, E. L. (2000). Self-determination theory and the facilitation of intrinsic moti-
    vation, social development, and well-being. American Psychologist, 55(1), 68–78.
Shapiro, J. P., & Stefkowich, J. A. (2005). Ethical leadership and decision making in education
    (2nd ed.). Lawrence Erlbaum Associates.
Sockett, H. (1993). The moral base for teacher professionalism. Teachers College Press.
Strike, K. A. (2007). Ethical leadership in schools. Corwin Press.
Strike, K. A., Haller, E. J., & Soltis, J. F. (2005). The ethics of school administration (3rd ed.).
    Teachers College Press.
Tirri, K. (1999). Teachers’ perceptions of moral dilemmas at school. Journal of Moral Education,
    28, 31–47.
Tirri, K. (2003). The teacher’s integrity. In F. Oser & W. Veugelers (Eds.), Teaching in moral and
    democratic education (pp. 65–81). Peter Lang.
Tirri, K., & Husu, J. (2002). Care and responsibility in “the best interest of the child”: Relational
    voices of ethical dilemmas in teaching. Teachers and Teaching: Theory and Practice, 1, 65–80.
Trade Union for the Public and Welfare Sectors. (2020). Ethical principles for the professionals
    in early childhood education. https://www.jhl.fi/tyoelama/ammattialat/kasvatus-­ja-­ohjausala/
    varhaiskasvatuksen-­eettiset-­periaatteet/
Trade Union of Education in Finland. (1998). Code of ethics for Finnish teachers.
Trade Union of Education in Finland. (2014). Code of ethics for Finnish teachers.
Tuomi, J., & Sarajärvi, A. (2003). Laadullinen tutkimus ja sisällönanalyysi [Qualitative research
    and content analysis]. Tammi.
Zubay, B., & Soltis, J. F. (2005). Creating the ethical school. Teachers College Press.

216                                                                                 E. Hanhimäki

Open Access This chapter is licensed under the terms of the Creative Commons Attribution 4.0
International License (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/), which permits use, sharing,
adaptation, distribution and reproduction in any medium or format, as long as you give appropriate
credit to the original author(s) and the source, provide a link to the Creative Commons license and
indicate if changes were made.
    The images or other third party material in this chapter are included in the chapter’s Creative
Commons license, unless indicated otherwise in a credit line to the material. If material is not
included in the chapter’s Creative Commons license and your intended use is not permitted by
statutory regulation or exceeds the permitted use, you will need to obtain permission directly from
the copyright holder.