School Management of Social Capital Based
                                     To Improve Teacher’s Performance

                                              Erwin Erlangga1, Sugiyo2, Haryono3, Titi Prihatin4
                               {erwinerlangga@usm.ac.id1, sgy11@mail.unnes.ac.id2, fransharyono@mail.unnes.ac.id3.
                                                          titiprihatin.oce@gmail.com4}

                                                        Universitas Negeri Semarang1,2,3,4


                               Abstrak. This study aimed to explain the management of social capital in MI
                               Annur Losari Brebes to improve the performance of teachers. The method used
                               in this study was a qualitative-descriptive approach. Subjects consisted of cases
                               selected using purposive sampling. The research location was at MI Annur
                               Losari Brebes. The research was carried out with four steps, namely; method of
                               extracting data: observation, interviews, and documentation. Data analysis
                               method used was inductive models. The researchers found that the management
                               of MI schools in Brebes Regency used social capital to improve the teacher's
                               performance in the form of hospitality. Second, social capital management
                               showed a pattern of bridging and strengthening through networking
                               components, mutually beneficial and helpful relationships, and trust. The
                               advantage of this research is that friendship is social capital that can be used to
                               improve school's performance.


                               Keywords: School Management, Social Capital, Teacher Performance.


                       1. Introduction

                            One of the educational problems faced by Indonesian people is the improvement of the
                       quality of education at every level and the insignificant educational unit, especially in
                       elementary education level [1]. Various efforts have been made to improve the quality of
                       education, including through various trainings and increasing teacher competencies,
                       procurement of books and learning equipment, improvement of educational facilities and
                       infrastructure, and improving the quality of school management [2]. However, various
                       indicators of the quality of education have not shown significant improvement. Some schools
                       show quite encouraging results, but most others are still apprehensive[3].
                            In line with the demands of society and global development, education in Indonesia has
                       undergone two very fundamental changes [4], first, the application of the concept of social
                       capital-based management. By applying this concept, the implementation of education in
                       schools must prioritize social capital and it is hopefully will be more democratic, and the
                       management and coaching of teachers can be adapted to the conditions, demands of the
                       community, and the resources of each school. Second, curriculum changes, from curriculum
                       that emphasize social capital to curriculum 13[5]. The curriculum emphasizes that the learning
                       process is based on certain competencies that must be achieved through the learning process.




ISET 2019, June 29, Semarang, Indonesia
Copyright © 2020 EAI
DOI 10.4108/eai.29-6-2019.2290281

Curriculum 13 puts forward a democratic learning process that relies on values, beliefs, norms
and rules. Thus, the implementation of the learning process is expected to really guarantee the
child becomes active and creative [6]
     The application of the concept of social capital-based management and the application of
curriculum 13 require changes in teacher's performance[7]. The implementation needs to be
carried out comprehensively by empowering teachers and schools. To improve the quality of
education formally, aspects of teacher have important roles in realizing it, in addition to other
aspects such as facilities / infrastructure, curriculum, students, management, and procurement
of books. Teacher is the key to the success of education, because the core of educational
activities is teaching and learning which requires the role of the teacher. Many factors
influence teacher performance, such as in this research conducted. The results showed that
there was a positive and significant influence among education (X1), communication skills
(X2) and work motivation (X3) together with performance [8]. The research found that there
are positive and significant influences of those three variables toward teacher performance [9].
     The duties and obligations of the principal, besides setting the activities of an educational
institution, must also be able to work together and be closely connected to the community. He/
she is obliged to arouse the enthusiasm of staff, teachers and employees to work better, build
and maintain kinship, cohesiveness and unity among teachers, employees and students,
develop school curriculum, understand school plans and know how to run them, pay attention
to and seek for teacher's welfare and so on [10]. Those encourage every organization to further
optimize its performance in order to exist and develop according to expectations. Likewise,
the leadership of the principal is expected to continue to exist and be able to optimize the
performance of the teacher so that it can carry out an activity program that produces qualified
education [11].
     In renewing the national education system, a national education vision, mission and
development strategy have been established. The vision of education is the realization of the
education system as a strong and authoritative social institution to empower and to develop all
citizens of Indonesia into qualified human beings so that they are able and proactively respond
to the challenges of an ever changing era. Related to this vision, a set of principles has been
established to become the basis for implementing education reform [12]
     One of the principles is that education is held as a process of civilizing and empowering
students that lasts for life, where in the process there must be educators who provide
exemplary and are able to build willingness, and develop the potential and creativity of
students. The implication of this principle is a paradigm shift in the education process, namely
from the teaching paradigm to the social capital-based learning paradigm [13].


2. Methods

     The approach in this study is classified as qualitative-descriptive research type, because
explorative descriptive methods were used in this study. Through exploration, it is expected to
be able to get information about the feelings, and aspirations of the subjects in understanding
and living their lives. The location of this study was at MI Annur Losari Brebes Regency. In
this study, data were divided into two types according to their nature, namely primary and
secondary data. The primary data were in the form of key informants, in this case were
principals, teachers, staffs, members of foundation, school committees or other data sources in

the form of certain social situations that were full of information in accordance with the focus
of the research.
     This primary data were extracted directly from the source at the research location, where
MI Annur was located. Primary data collection was done by interviewing key figures (key
persons) involved in improving teacher's performance. Secondary data were obtained from the
records in the foundation, school committee and school. Besides, it was also obtained from
books, theses and articles from newspapers and magazines and on the internet that discussed
teacher performance. The informants used here were nonprobability sample. The choice of
purposive nonprobability sample was deliberately set because conditions in the field were not
possible to reach the entire population. The main instrument used in this study was the author
himself using the method of observation, listening and interviewing. The data analysis
techniques were:



               Collecting Data
                                                         Presenting data




               Data Reduction
                                                                  Drawing
                                                              Conclusion/Verific
                                                                    ation


                              Figure 1. Data Analysis Technique


3. Results and Discussion

     The results of the study stated that the existence of strong leadership from the head was a
requirement to develop the potential of social capital. His activities always share power with
staff, so that there is no need to carry out total supervision and inherent in all authority and
responsibility[14]. With trust and norms, teachers will perform well due to social capital. From
the perspective of several teachers, principals were considered to be quite competent and some
of them even stated that the current headmaster was better than the previous ones. The current
leadership is considered to work according to procedure, democratic and decisively build
social capital. Evaluation is also routinely carried out in the form of routine meetings once a
month [15].While the school principal himself also stated that the organization at MI Annur
was very bureaucratic and executed the job description that had been set. So everything goes
according to the rules. Furthermore, among principal, vice principals, teachers and staffs work
together in jobs that do require teamwork, for example during the accreditation process. This
is a manifestation of strong social capital in managing social capital [16].

     However, there are some lacks in the leadership of the principal in managing social
capital. The lacks felt by the teachers were the lack of supervision carried out by the Principal
and the lack of mentioned scheduled supervision [17]. MI Annur continues to carry out human
resource development programs both internally and externally. Internally, the teachers and
staff are always involved in every activity both academic and non-academic so that they will
improve their abilities. Externally, the teachers routinely attend MGMP activities and other
seminars held by the Government Education Office with funding support from the school. The
foundation also provides support for this program in the form of financial support. This is the
result of developing social capital [18].
     One of the results shown was the success of two MI Annur teachers who obtained
certification from the government due to social capital. However, due to limited funds, the
Foundation has not been able to finance all teaching staff to continue their education to higher
level (S1 or S2). In terms of quality of learning, the application of the KTSP curriculum runs
as it should, although at first it was a bit difficult due to limited time and resources. But,
gradually continued efforts were made in the curriculum and the development of questions
from the school using social capital [19].
     Teacher is the main driving force of teaching and learning activities at schools. The
quality, professionalism and competence of teachers greatly determine the quality of education
held in a school. In any educational organization anywhere and everywhere, the teacher's role
is very dominant. An increase in teacher's competency from time to time is highly expected, as
one of the barometers to improve the quality of education services in a school. Increasing the
competence of teachers should include the improvement of pedagogical, personal, social and
professional competencies [20].
     Schools that are successful in providing optimal education services to students can be
assured of having excellent teachers with competency levels. In the future, teacher's
competency should be made as one of the sustainable policy programs in every educational
institution including schools. In connection with this, MI Annur continues to strive to improve
the quality of its human resources through seminars, MGMP, as well as opportunities for
further study[21]. Although the financial support for the development of human resources from
the foundation is very limited, the teachers and administrative staff still try to improve their
quality by participating in training programs in the MGMP. As a result, two teachers passed
the certification [22].


4. Conclusion

     The conclusion that can be taken is that hospitality is the social capital in MI Annur
Brebes. Teachers are the main activator of teaching and learning activities in schools. The
quality, professionalism and competence of teachers greatly determine the quality of education
held in a school. In any educational organization, anywhere and everywhere, the teacher's role
is very dominant. An increase in teacher performance from time to time is highly expected,
one barometer of improving the quality of education services in a school is through social
capital.

Reference
  [1.]    Goddard RD. Relational Networks, Social Trust, and Norms : A Social Capital Perspective
          on Students ’Chances of Academic Success. 2016;25(1):59-74.
  [2]     Acar E. Effects of Social Capital On Academic Success : A Narrative Synthesis. 2011;6
          (June):456-461.
  [3].    Lindfors P, Minkkinen J, Rimpelä A, Hotulainen R. Family and School Social Capital,
          School Burnout and Academic Achievement : a Multilevel Longitudinal Analysis Among
          Finnish Pupils. Int J Adolesc Youth. 2017;3843:1-14. doi:10.1080/02673843.2017.1389758
  [4].    Dematthews D. Community Engagement : A Case Study of an Elementary School in Ciudad
          Juárez , Mexico.2013. 28(1):167-194.
  [5].    Mulford B. Building Social Capital In Professional Learning Communities : Importance,
          Challenges and a Way Forward. 2007:1-14.
  [6].    Gonzalez J. Understanding the Role of Social Capital and School Structure on Latino
          Academic Success. 2013;2(1).
  [7].    Cohen, D Prusak, L In Good Company. How Sosial Capital Makes Organizations Work.
          Harvard Business Press.2014.28(2):167-178
  [8].    Differences I. Social Capital and Student Achievement in Norwegian Secondary Schools.
          2008:1-15.
  [9]     Tokas S. Education and Social Capital. 2016;7(3):257-265. doi:10.5958/2231-
          458X.2016.00026.9
  [10].   Ekİncİ A. The Effects of Social Capital Levels in Elementary Schools on Organizational
          Information Sharing. 2012;12(4):2513-2520.
  [11].   Takakura M, Hamabata Y, Ueji M, Kurihara A. Measurement of Social Capital at School
          and Neighborhood among Young People. 2014;10:1-8.
  [12].   Bowles S, Ciccone A, Tella R Di, et al. Teaching Practices and Social Capital. 2013;(Putman
          1993).
  [13].   Huang L, Dămean D, Cairns D. Social Capital and Student Achievement : Exploring the
          Influence of Social Relationships on School Success in Norway and Romania.
          2015;(September):1638-1649.
  [14].   Hargreaves ba, fullan m. Of Profession Al With An Investment In Collaboration , Teachers
          Become Nation Builders. 2013;34(3):36-39.
  [15].   Adger, W.N. Sosial Capital, Collective Action, and Adaption to Climate. Economic Change.
          Economic Change. Economic Geography.2013.79(4),387- 404
  [16].   Hargreaves A. School Social Capital and School Effectiveness. Journal Of
          Social.2010;37:119-136.
  [17].   Dervin F. Guanxi , Social Capital and School Choice in China. 2014;56:134-123
  [18].   Darwis, M. Guard. Social Capital and Civil Society. Internasional Monetary Fund Working
          Paper, In Elinor Ostrom And TK ahn.Massachuttes: 2014.80(4),145-245
  [19].   Gordon EM, Trygstad PJ, Pasley JD, Banilower ER. How Teachers Develop Social Capital :
          Illustrative Cases from the Knowles Science Teaching Foundation. 2016;(April).
  [20].   Cahuc P, Shleifer A, Algan Y. Teaching Practices and Social Capital. 2011;(6052).
  [21].   Catts R, Ozga J. What is Social Capital and how might it be used in Scotland ’ s Schools ?.
          2015;(36).
  [22].   Liou T, Chang N. The Applications of Social Capital Theory in Education.
          2008;11(September):99-122.