Making Space for Cultural Equality
in Educational Leadership




This book foregrounds postcolonial theory as a lens through which to explore
the concept of ‘global heritage’ and argues that the meso-­level spaces of insti-
tutional ethos and cultural pedagogy must take an active role in the pursuit of
cultural equality.
   Through interviews and accounts of observational, empirical data, chapters
draw attention to how the cultural capital of Global Majority students is insti-
tutionally positioned as a racialised and inferior cultural capital that is con-
stantly required to ‘prove itself’ in the Western school. Ultimately, the book
contributes to international discussion on decolonising education and the
spaces within in order to enact change, further the field, and more precisely to
recognise the importance of global heritage as vital to a transformative under-
standing of the West’s cultural identity within a globalised world.
   This book will appeal to scholars, researchers and post-­graduate researchers
in the fields of multicultural education, school leadership, management and
administration, and education policy and politics more broadly. Those inter-
ested in social justice, ideas of cultural and racial equality, and the sociology of
education more broadly will also benefit from the volume.

Mathew Barnard is Lecturer in Education, Keele University, UK

Routledge Research in Decolonizing Education




The Routledge Research in Decolonizing Education series aims to enhance our
­understanding and facilitate ongoing debates, research and theory relating to decolo-
 nization, decolonizing education and the curriculum, and postcolonialism in educa-
 tion. The series is international in scope and is aimed at upper-level and post-graduate
 students, researchers, and research students, as well as academics and scholars.
 Books in the series include:

Exclusionary Rationalities in Brazilian Schooling
Decolonizing Historical Studies
Natália Gil

Funds of Knowledge and Identity Pedagogies for Social Justice
International Perspectives and Praxis from Communities, Classrooms, and
Curriculum
Edited by Moisés Esteban-Guitart

Decolonizing Study Abroad through the Identities of Latinx Students
A Manifesto to Reclaim Identities and Heritage
G. Sue Kasun, Beth Marks, and Julián Jefferies

Decolonizing the Internationalization of Higher Education in the Global South
Applying Principles of Critical Applied Linguistics to Processes of
Internationalization
Edited by Kléber Aparecido da Silva, and Lauro Sérgio Machado Pereira

Making Space for Cultural Equality in Educational Leadership
School Ethos and Postcolonial Pedagogy
Mathew Barnard



For more information about the series, please visit www.routledge.com/Routledge-Research-in-
Decolonizing-Education/book-series/RRDE

Making Space for Cultural
Equality in Educational
Leadership
School Ethos and Postcolonial Pedagogy


Mathew Barnard

First published 2024
by Routledge
4 Park Square, Milton Park, Abingdon, Oxon OX14 4RN
and by Routledge
605 Third Avenue, New York, NY 10158
Routledge is an imprint of the Taylor & Francis Group, an informa
business
© 2024 Mathew Barnard
The right of Mathew Barnard to be identified as author of this work
has been asserted in accordance with sections 77 and 78 of the
Copyright, Designs and Patents Act 1988.
All rights reserved. No part of this book may be reprinted or
reproduced or utilised in any form or by any electronic, mechanical, or
other means, now known or hereafter invented, including photocopying
and recording, or in any information storage or retrieval system,
without permission in writing from the publishers.
Trademark notice: Product or corporate names may be trademarks or
registered trademarks, and are used only for identification and
explanation without intent to infringe.
British Library Cataloguing-in-Publication Data
A catalogue record for this book is available from the British Library
Library of Congress Cataloging-in-Publication Data
Names: Barnard, Mathew, author.
Title: Making space for cultural equality in educational leadership :
school ethos and postcolonial pedagogy / Mathew Barnard.
Description: Abingdon, Oxon ; New York, NY : Routledge, 2025. |
Series: Routledge research in decolonizing education | Includes
bibliographical references and index.
Identifiers: LCCN 2024006766 (print) | LCCN 2024006767 (ebook) |
ISBN 9781032390260 (hardback) | ISBN 9781032390314 (paperback) |
ISBN 9781003348085 (ebook)
Subjects: LCSH: Educational leadership. | Educational equalization. |
Postcolonialism--Philosophy. | Culturally relevant pedagogy. |
Educational sociology.
Classification: LCC LB2806 .B32 2025 (print) | LCC LB2806 (ebook) |
DDC 371.2/011--dc23/eng/20240214
LC record available at https://lccn.loc.gov/2024006766
LC ebook record available at https://lccn.loc.gov/2024006767
ISBN: 978-1-032-39026-0 (hbk)
ISBN: 978-1-032-39031-4 (pbk)
ISBN: 978-1-003-34808-5 (ebk)
DOI: 10.4324/9781003348085
Typeset in Times New Roman
by SPi Technologies India Pvt Ltd (Straive)

Contents




  About the Author                                               vi


1 Introduction: Making Space for Transformative
  Leadership                                                      1

2 The Colonial Metanarrative: the Expansion of Europe;
  the Expansion of England                                       18

3 Cultural Securitisation and the Meso-level Space: Towards a
  Decolonising Global Education                                  34

4 An Empirical Study of Leadership, Ethos and Cultural
  Capital in Institution A                                       55

5 An Empirical Study of Leadership, Ethos and Cultural
  Capital in Institution B                                       84

6 An Empirical Study of Leadership, Ethos and Cultural
  Capital in Institution C                                      116

7 Cultural Emancipation                                         141

  Index                                                         152

About the Author




Mathew Barnard is a lecturer with an interest in social, political and global
 aspects of education, in both formal and informal settings. He is the author
 of a number of journal articles. He is particularly interested in the growing
 securitisation of culture, politics and epistemology within educational insti-
 tutions and public spaces today. He has taught on both undergraduate and
 postgraduate courses. His experience – as both student and lecturer – is
 spread across a number of universities.

1       Introduction
        Making Space for
        Transformative Leadership




Educational institutions are much more than sites of performativity (Ball, 2003)
and input–output measurement (Biesta, 2015): they have the symbolic power to
either legitimise and include diverse cultural capital as part of a country’s
(global) cultural heritage or to devalue and exclude it. As Amthor and Roxas
(2016:161) state:

    When the wider discourses are imbibed with anti-­immigrant sentiment,
    or when the racialized social structures impose a sense of constraint on
    youth’s positive identity development and transition, schools could pro-
    vide the space where educators have an important and powerful reach to
    impact adaptation and well-­being.

Sadly, despite cultural differences having the potential to enrich school life
(Nieto et al., 2008) and to be an invaluable source of global learning opportuni-
ties (Guo-­ Brennan & Guo-­      Brennan, 2019; Guo-­Brennan & Guo-­Brennan,
2021), it is often excluded and racialised. Cultural diversity continues to be
viewed negatively – as a deficit (e.g. see Shapiro & MacDonald, 2017; Subedi,
2013) – rather than a positive addition to global learning within the Western
school. In England, perhaps the foremost colonial power of the 19th century,
this diverse cultural capital is often excluded through the official, colonial curric-
ulum (Kanu, 2006; Tomlinson 2019; Winter 2018; Winter & Mills 2020; Iffath
2020; Nagre, 2023) that privileges Whiteness (Bhopal 2018) and monolingualism
as a legacy of colonialism and ‘modernity’ in Western democracies (Welply
2023). This book therefore forms part of the academic literature that looks to
disrupt Whiteness in cultural capital research (Richards et al. 2023). It does this
through a postcolonial lens and by focussing on institutional cultural pedagogy
and ethos. This monograph therefore theoretically and empirically demonstrates
the significance of the colonial past to the present. It demonstrates how this
colonial ideology closes off the possibilities for new imaginaries to emerge. It
also demonstrates how this can be challenged through a (re)contextualised, cul-
turally relevant leadership approach (Arar, 2020; García-­Carmona et al., 2021)
as opposed to the decontextualised leadership of neoliberal rationality.


                                                          DOI: 10.4324/9781003348085-1

2   Introduction

    The international significance of this book is that its two central themes –
colonial legacies acting negatively on students of colour and their diverse cul-
tural capital, and the importance of the meso-­level space in resisting this – are
growing in importance due to continuing international migration (Arar, 2020)
and the subsequent increase of cultural and ‘racial’ diversity within the Global
West. Within the USA, immigrant and refugee youth are the fastest-­growing
segment of the nation’s youth (Amthor & Roxas, 2016). In Canada, interna-
tional migrants account for more than 80% of the population growth, where
39–49% of the total child population by 2036 is predicted to be constituted of
first-­and second-­  generation immigrant children (Guo-­     Brennan & Guo-­
Brennan, 2021). In Australia, 27.6% of the population were born overseas:
India and China contributed the most to this percentage after England, with
the Philippines coming in fifth (Australian Bureau of Statistics, 2022). In New
South Wales government schools, approximately one-­third of students come
from a language background other than English, and this is 27% in Victorian
government schools (Ho, 2019). In New Zealand, close to 30% of the popula-
tion are classed within ‘non-­European’ categories (Stats New Zealand, 2018).
In England and Wales, one in six usual residents were born outside of the UK,
equating to 10 million people. 6.4 million of these people were born outside the
European Union, the continuation of a longer-­term trend (Office for National
Statistics, 2022). Government figures show that 30% of secondary school stu-
dents are from an ‘ethnic minority’ (Department for Education, 2018).
    However, this increasing diversity is positioned as a pre-­criminalised diver-
sity: as a threat to monological cultural identity. This has led to the racialised
securitisation of ‘the heritage’ and to culture within our schools and colleges.
This is where regular cultural and political issues have become de-­democratised
and enclosed within a discourse of security. That is to say, an issue is moved
‘from ordinary politics into security’ (Khan, 2016:307). This, it is argued here,
is a direct result of colonial legacies mutually supporting authoritarian neo-
liberalism and – increasingly – authoritarian democracies (see, e.g. Hintz &
Milan, 2018; Giroux, 2021; Ogden, 2022). We see this in the continuing ‘refu-
gee crisis’ that has led to ‘fortified’ borders in Europe and the USA that look
to reinforce racialised distinctions between those who ‘belong’ and those who
don’t (Knudsen et al., 2022). As a result of this securitisation, opportunities
for cultural growth and dialogue – for both the individual and society – are
becoming increasingly scarce. There is, in fact, a growing ‘racialised govern-
ance under neoliberalism’ (Winter & Mills, 2020, 51) as we increasingly see a
Western retreat from multiculturalism and anti-­racism (Gilroy, 2005; Halstead,
2010; Kapoor, 2013; Warmington, 2014; McGhee & Zhang, 2017; Joppke,
2017) in official policy discourse in favour of a reductionist (Keddie, 2014)
and racist nativism (Smith, 2016) across the Global North (Winter & Mills,
2020). This is further demonstrated through the rise of the global countering
violent extremism policy paradigm (Abbas, 2018) which is often translated
into cultural securitisation and can be viewed as a continuation of ‘the much-­
older colonial education-­security relationship’ (Winter & Mills, 2020, 47).

                                                                  Introduction 3

England is of particular interest internationally because the country is now
seen as an important player globally in the development of securitisation pol-
icy (Jerome et al. 2019).
   Other countries have also moved to heighten security as well as placing
greater emphasis on the promotion of centralised (i.e. securitised and
Westernised) values within education. This has been demonstrated in Australia
(Peterson & Bentley, 2016) and France (James, 2021) through the promotion of
centralised and hegemonic values. Furthermore, within French schools there
has been cultural securitisation systematically targeting the Muslim minority
as a potential threat to the ‘people’ (Peker, 2021), mirroring the cultural securi-
tisation – and targeting of Muslims – within England (Barnard, 2022).
Language itself is also becoming securitised/hegemonised across the continent
(Khan, 2016; Flubacher & Busch, 2022): an ideological and cultural fortifica-
tion to accompany the physical fortification of Europe (Knudsen et al., 2022)
where migration continues to be socially constructed as a threat (Bello, 2022).
This book argues that this cultural securitisation can be directly traced back to
colonial mentalities and the colonial metanarrative (Bristol, 2012) stemming
from the legacies of European imperialism. This book also argues that this
cultural securitisation is an integral cornerstone of neoliberal education policy
that promotes a ‘neutral’ and post-­cultural view of education that disguises the
colonial ideology of ‘white modernity’ (Dyer, 1997; Bonnett, 2000).

The Focus of This Book
The central argument of this book is that there is a colonial legacy – a colonial
ideology – from the past that constitutes a series of unequal relationships
which continue to pervade society. This project argues that school leaders need
to recognise and understand the ways in which historical processes continue to
bear down on the present, and how Global Majority students remain subject
not just to the ‘white gaze’, as Yancy (2017) puts it, but also a disciplinary and
judgemental ‘humanist gaze’, as the empirical chapters of this book will
demonstrate. This recognition and understanding is especially important in
the afterward of multicultural and anti-­racist education. This book therefore
looks to help school/college leaders fill the conceptual void left by the retreat
of multiculturalism through a transformative leadership approach premised
on a global postcolonial education. This will enable leaders to understand
how colonial ideology and processes continue to marginalise the cultural cap-
ital and cultural contributions of students of colour. These students, after all,
are from the Global Majority, a term that will be used throughout this book.
This term includes people who have been ‘racialised as “ethnic minorities”,
but who in fact form 85% of the world’s population’ (Campbell-­Stephens,
2021:7). The term Global Majority looks to empower people of colour
through ‘erasing the limitations of a minority mindset’ (Campbell-­Stephens,
2021:4) and to reposition their cultural capital away from exotic and racialised
Othering (Said, 2003).

4   Introduction

   Cultural capital is referred to here as the epistemic, linguistic, artistic, reli-
gious and historic heritage and knowledge of Global Majority students. It is
argued in this book that a fundamental legacy of colonialism is that ‘race’ con-
tinues to retain its powerful symbolic force (Schwarz, 1996:11) as a marker for
racialised British (and wider Western) society. As Hall (1997) states, once a per-
son has been categorised ‘racially’ they can then be categorised culturally,
within a hierarchy of culture. This forms a sort of ‘double racialisation’: first
through colour and then – flowing from this – through culture based on colo-
nial assumptions about the Other (see following chapter). This maintains the
‘superiority’ of Whiteness (and what it represents) over Global Majority people
in regard to epistemology, art, religion, science, politics and so on (Said, 2003).
The purpose of this monograph is to explore whether diverse cultural capital is
institutionally recognised in predominantly Global Majority schools and col-
leges in resistance to this cultural hierarchy that privileges ‘whiteness’ and
Eurocentric culture within the Humanist tradition (Braidotti, 2013). This book
explores the extent to which the embodied cultural capital of Global Majority
students is empowered and legitimised as symbolic capital (Bourdieu, 1990).
   To do this, the study looks at how both staff and student leaders under-
stand, recognise, articulate and interact with diverse cultural capital within
their respective institutions. It explores how and if these educational institu-
tions encourage Global Majority students to contribute to cultural production
(Hall, 1999) through having their embodied cultural capital symbolically and
institutionally recognised. This is important because a legacy of colonialism is
that Global Majority students continue to exist in a state of ‘coloniality of
being’ (Maldonado-­Torres, 2007) which means that these racialised students
have had their capacity to give – to contribute to cultural production – taken
away from them (for more on this, see Chapter 3).
   This book therefore uses interview, observational and documentary data, to
explore whether diverse cultural capital is embedded within the institutional
environment, ethos and cultural pedagogy of these institutions. Furthermore,
this project looks for evidence of this diverse cultural capital forming a global
and discursive multicultural capital, ‘where the construction of social reality is
not only an individual enterprise, but may also become a collective enterprise’
(Bourdieu, 1990:131). This is important in an age where education has become
characterised as a private benefit rather than a public good (Thomson, 2019).
Again, this is looked for within each institution’s ethos, environment and open
spaces. These open spaces are not only the physical open spaces of the school/
college but also the ideational open spaces outside of those occupied by the
formal curriculum and centralised cultural agendas.
   Therefore, this monograph identifies and theorises – through empirical evi-
dence – the meso-­level space of school ethos and cultural pedagogy as a rare
space for resistance to dominant and monocultural notions of ‘the heritage’
(Hall, 1999). It does this through postcolonial thought combined with key con-
cepts taken from the sociologist Pierre Bourdieu and the spatial theory of Henri
Lefebvre. It then explores whether this meso-­level space is recognised as such by
staff and student leaders within two secondary schools and one sixth-­form

                                                                    Introduction 5

college in Leicester, England, a city widely recognised as a leading multicultural
city, not just in Britain, but also in Europe (Singh, 2003). It looks to see whether
the global heritage of Global Majority students is recognised as symbolic and
institutional cultural capital within these establishments through, as a repre-
sentative example, the examination of their social/open spaces; documents
(such as the newsletter); extra-­curricular activities; material culture; and assem-
blies and celebrations. This is then complemented with a range of semi-­
structured interviews with staff and student leaders across the three institutions.
     This monograph therefore explores and critiques the loss of multicultural
educational structures in England before suggesting ways in which structures
that recognise the cultural capital of Global Majority students can be
­re-­established at the meso-­level (through institutional ethos and cultural ped-
 agogy) rather than through the government-­directed micro-­level (the formal
 curriculum) and macro-­level (neoliberal education policy). As such, this
 study explores the potential for the reconstruction of meso-­level structures
 for the recognition of the continuing effects of colonial histories and the rec-
 ognition of global heritage. An important aspect of the distinctive contribu-
 tion of this research is that it goes beyond critique to suggest practicable
 possibilities for political action. The research demonstrates that this could be
 achieved through leveraging this meso-­level space vacated by neoliberal poli-
 cies and direct government control. However, this book also warns that gov-
 ernments are beginning to take a keener interest in this space. It therefore
 calls on school/college leaders to recognise their agency in bringing about
 greater cultural equality through the utilisation of this space (and the decol-
 onisation of this space) for the democratic production of culture.
     While academics such as Bhopal (2018) have highlighted the myth of the
 ‘post-­racial’ society, it should also be recognised that highly individualised con-
 ceptions of ‘race’ have been promoted in official discourse and policy (such as
 ‘race’ now being a protected individualised characteristic in England). This has
 led to a decontextualised, ahistorical and bodied understanding of ‘race’. The
 purpose of this is to create a ‘neutral’ post-­cultural school environment within a
 wider policy of cultural securitisation. Within educational institutions this
 means that Global Majority students may have their bodied colour ‘included’ –
 or captured – within, for example, promotional visuals highlighting racial diver-
 sity, and especially through basic anti-­discriminatory legislation. But this does
 not include their embodied identities. That is to say, their diverse cultural capitals
 remain excluded. Global Majority students consequently find themselves in
 what this book terms as in(ex)clusion. This is demonstrated in multi-­racial
 spaces in the West, where a bodied heterotopia rather than an embodied hetero-
 topia has been produced. It will therefore be empirically demonstrated how pol-
 icy and practice implicitly affirms the cultural capital of White ‘native’ students
 while neutralising the cultural capital of Global Majority students. Furthermore,
 it is argued here that the colonial metanarrative – like the concept of Whiteness
 itself – is ‘invisibly’ integrated within global ideational projects of ‘modernity’
 promulgated through global neoliberal education policy. That is to say, colonial-
 ism has largely migrated from direct territorial control to the control of an

6   Introduction

abstract and global ideal or utopia. This book will demonstrate this through the
exploration of institutional ethos and cultural pedagogy, the meso-­level space.
    The international significance of this space is that it provides a rare oppor-
tunity for teacher and student agency within a globalising neoliberal policy
discourse (Ball, 2012; Lingard et al., 2013; Biesta, 2015) ascribed to by many
national governments in the turn towards authoritarian neoliberalism (Hursh,
2019) and, consequently, democratic erosion (Kulz, 2021; Holloway, 2021). As
stated above, it is argued here that this current global trend acts as a form of
colonisation/securitisation of which global heritage schools and their students
are particularly vulnerable to. However, the meso-­level space of institutional
ethos and cultural pedagogy can act as a counterbalance to this. It is a space
that can escape the restrictions of the formal curriculum, a curriculum that
confers cultural legitimacy on some groups but not on others (Apple, 2004). It
is a space where history continues and will be something unique to each school
in most global contexts. So, what is the meso-­level space referred to here? This
book identifies it as each institution’s ethos and cultural pedagogy. It consists
of messages and symbolic codes communicated through such things as the
school’s open spaces, its corridors, reception areas, and – as will be demon-
strated – even, sometimes, the structure of the building itself. It is also commu-
nicated through newsletters, official websites, whole school events, assemblies
and extra-­curricular activities. As well as this, it is produced and communi-
cated through its material culture, such as displays and artefacts.

Leadership and Global Heritage
This book argues that school/ college leaders need to recognise and understand
the ways in which historical processes continue to bear down on the present.
They need to understand how these processes (in collusion with the processes
of neoliberal education policy) continue to marginalise the cultural capital and
cultural contributions of Global Majority students within the space of an
institution’s cultural pedagogy and ethos. Therefore, this study looks at whether
the embodied (global) cultures, narratives, histories and experiences of Global
Majority students within these institutions are recognised by leaders as a way
to contest unequal power/cultural relations reproduced by the formal colonial
curriculum and wider racialised British (and Western) society. It looks to see
how and to what extent these institutions reveal a localised, institutional
agency that resists the colonial metanarrative – or ‘invisible empire’ (Wemyss,
2016) – in a city world-­renown for its civic multiculturalism. It looks at whether
these institutions promote a transnational, global sense of belonging. As Guo-­
Brennan and Guo-­Brennan (2021:60) state:

    Culturally responsive and socially just leadership is crucial for tackling
    the justice and equity issues in schools because it not only challenges
    educational inequality but also identifies, institutionalizes, and celebrates
    diverse cultural perspectives and practices of all students.

                                                                   Introduction 7

It is for this reason that school leaders need to have a contextualised and his-
torical understanding of cultural diversity through the concept of embodi-
ment. However, educational leadership and management texts exhibit ‘a
propensity for ahistorical accounts of practice’ (Eacott, 2016), especially over
recent years where there has been an emphasis on ‘school improvement’ poli-
cies (Eacott, 2013; Biesta, 2015; Thomson, 2017) in which education is viewed
‘as a private benefit not a public good’ (Thomson, 2019:109). Educational
management texts therefore often focus on the individual ‘consumer’ of educa-
tion where inclusion and diversity matters are focussed on ensuring that all
‘consumers’ have equality of access to neoliberal education structures, no mat-
ter what their individual circumstances (‘race’, disability, etc.) may be; or, what
Joppke (2017:4) describes as ‘a formalistic and individualistic approach to
antidiscrimination’ that predominates in both Europe and the USA.
    This is considered the ‘distributional’ approach to social justice issues (Guo-­
Brennan & Guo-­Brennan, 2021). Or, as this book defines it, in(ex)clusion:
bodied rather than embodied (contextualised) inclusion. There has therefore
been little recent guidance for school/college leaders in terms of leading in the
multicultural school/college, other than in regard to fulfilling minimum statu-
tory equality goals. The dominant distributional approach has side-­lined a
more inclusive and comprehensive approach to social justice within education,
a relational approach, where social justice issues within schools ‘are related to
broad power structures that promote educational inequality’ (Guo-­Brennan &
Guo-­Brennan, 2021:59). In this current climate, taking England as an example,
it is difficult to imagine research such as Effective Leadership in Multi-­ethnic
Schools (Walker et al., 2005) being officially produced by the Department for
Education (DfE) for the benefit of school leaders now. This is because neolib-
eral ideology does not have a vocabulary for recognising and articulating cul-
tural difference within a highly atomised education system. Relational
vocabulary has been erased in official efforts to enclose the school and to secu-
ritise ‘official’ cultural pedagogy. As Pak and Ravitch (2021:4) state, critical
questions and reflections are for the most part

   absent in the mainstream leadership field, which is awash with ‘how-­to’
   books, leadership theory handbooks, leadership research, and profes-
   sional development programs and materials for leaders. These leadership
   resources most often lack material (let alone critical conversations) about
   social and intersectional identities, racial literacy, power and privilege, as
   well as about how cultural and social norms influence teaching, learning,
   and leading. Mainstream leadership materials treat leadership as a neu-
   tral act and thus serve to reinforce White saviorism and deficit orienta-
   tions of historically marginalized students.

Indeed, leadership texts that do on occasion address issues of ‘racial’ and eth-
nic inequality tend to treat the subject in a mainly ahistorical and decontextu-
alised way. These texts do not centralise the tenet of how ‘race’ has been socially

8   Introduction

constructed as a concept historically (Kundnani, 2007); they view the issue
from the position of individualised leadership qualities to be acquired, such as
‘courageous leadership’ or ‘social justice leadership’, without recognising how
the absence of spaces and their structures that recognise the embodied rather
than just the bodied contribute to the structural reproduction of ‘racial’ and
cultural inequality. There is instead a focus on the uber-­leader, on ‘transforma-
tional leadership’, that has become the normative leadership orientation
throughout the West (Pak & Ravitch, 2021). This theory views the school in
enclosed isolation, as an organisation to be made more ‘effective’, largely fall-
ing within the ‘school improvement agenda’ (Flint & Peim, 2012), without rec-
ognition of broader ideologies and societal issues that perpetuate educational
inequalities (Shields & Warke, 2010).
   Instead of transformational leadership, a transformative leadership approach
has been put forward (Shields, 2011; Pak & Ravitch, 2021) which is more
closely linked to the transformative educational goals of authentic inclusion
and social justice, with a particular focus on cultural equality:

    Transformative leadership requires leaders to continuously reflect on their
    own biases and goals, understand how power and privilege operate,
    appreciate the intra-­diversity of cultural groups and the values of cultural
    differences, form cross-­cultural alliances, see and confront inequalities
    that manifest in school settings, and possess the moral courage to actively
    and collaboratively work toward social transformation through education.
                                                                (Shields, 2011:6)

This would necessarily entail a decolonisation of educational mindsets, for lead-
ers to (re)learn ‘the knowledge that has been pushed aside, forgotten, silenced,
or discredited by the forces of modernity’ (Shakeir et al., 2021:201). In other
words, the recognition and utilisation of diverse cultural capital in the demo-
cratic production of culture. It is argued here that this can be achieved through
framing transformative leadership within the conceptual coherence of a decolo-
nising global education, such as that theorised by Subedi (2013). This book
therefore urges school leaders to take a culturally responsive leadership approach
which ‘identifies, institutionalizes, and celebrates diverse cultural perspectives
and practices of all students’ (Guo-­Brennan & Guo-­Brennan, 2021:60) through
cultural democracy. This means that relying on the generosity of individual
‘super-­leaders’ is not enough: there has to be a collective reimagining/recon-
struction of school structures to support the democratic production of culture.
   This book therefore looks to develop the vocabulary and conceptual foun-
dations of transformative leadership with the aim of cultural and epistemolog-
ical emancipation for Global Majority students. This is important because, as
already mentioned (and will be demonstrated throughout this research),
colonial-­neoliberal schooling has no language or vocabulary for recognising
cultural inequality. It does not recognise or even understand terms such as
‘social justice’. Therefore, isolated attempts at transformative leadership are,

                                                                   Introduction 9

for the most part, systematically rejected by the securitised school, especially at
the micro-­level of the formal (colonial) curriculum. Transformative leadership
therefore needs to produce a transformative space. It also requires a transform-
ative pedagogy to bring conceptual coherence to transformative leadership for
cultural and epistemological justice. This space and pedagogy, it will be argued
here, is a postcolonial global education operationalised through the structures
of the meso-­level.
   Transformative leadership should also not just be transformative for the his-
torically marginalised, but transformative of the leader’s self–other relationship.
This relationship is as much internal as it is external. Unfortunately, in the West,
with its pervasive and insidious colonial ideology, this relationship amounts to
an external self–other(ed) relationship. This is where the marginalised other is
Othered (Said, 2003) and externalised as someone distinct and separate from the
self, in binary opposition, so that a true dialogical (middle) relationship is pre-
vented from informing leadership practice. Instead, a racialised distance is
maintained as a continuing legacy of colonialism. This will be empirically
demonstrated in the ensuing chapters. It will also be argued that a decolonising
transformative leadership approach will allow for a monological self–other(ed)
relationship to be transformed into an internal dialogical self–other relation-
ship that can be externalised through the school’s meso-­level structures.
   It is argued in this book that the meso-­level structures could be easier to (re)
construct and democratise than micro-­        level (the formal curriculum) and
macro-­level (government education policy) structures. Leaders could therefore
leverage the ‘middle-­space’ and its structures to provide a platform for trans-
formative leadership through dialogue; to provide space for a push-­           back
against democratic erosion (Kulz, 2021; Holloway, 2021; Barnard, 2022;
Gilbert, 2022; Apple et al., 2022) at the macro-­and micro-­levels. However, in
order to do this, leaders must have a historical and contextualised understanding
of cultural diversity. While the formal inequitable curriculum remains stub-
bornly resistant to change, this project identifies the meso-­level space of school
ethos and cultural pedagogy as a space that has the potential for leaders to
achieve democratic cultural production, where Global Majority students can
have their diverse cultural capital symbolically institutionalised (Bourdieu,
1986) and where – subsequently – a greater sense of belonging is created. This
project therefore looks to see how cultural diversity is recognised by leaders
beyond racialised (Miles, 1993), ethnicised (Myers, 2015) and bodied differ-
ence, and instead how it is recognised as part of the institution’s collective mul-
ticultural capital (Matas and Bridges, 2008).


Outline of the Book
Following this introduction, Chapter 2 will detail the lasting legacies of coloni-
alism for Global Majority students in Western settings, with a particular focus
on England. It will provide an overview of the ‘colonial metanarrative’ referred
to earlier with the aim of introducing a wider contextualisation to the research.

10 Introduction

This chapter will therefore provide important historical contextualisation, not
just in regard to England, but also with reference to the wider Western sphere.
This chapter frames the monograph through recent developments in colonial
historiography that sees European Imperialism as constitutive of a larger
Eurocentric colonial process that is based on a series of unequal relationships
which continue to pervade society. This is demonstrated in the continuing colo-
nial metanarrative and an invisible and normalised ‘non-­located’ Whiteness that
devalues and marginalises majority world (non-­Western; see Alam, 2008) cul-
tural capital and its contribution to British (and Western) cultural development.
    Chapter 3 will highlight the importance of the meso-­level space of school
ethos and cultural pedagogy as space for agency and transformative leader-
ship, before moving forward in theoretically identifying and locating this space,
based on Lefebvre’s (1991) spatial theory. It highlights the potential of this
space as an alternative to the racialised and centrally directed macro-­and
micro-­levels. It will then theoretically demonstrate how the concept/methodo-
logical tools of Bourdieu’s cultural capitals (embodied, objectified, institution-
alised and symbolic) can be employed for making the cultural pedagogy of this
meso-­level space visible. This chapter therefore suggests a distinctive and sys-
tematic approach to critically identifying, locating and reading (decodifying)
cultural pedagogy within this space in order to understand how ‘the visible,
that which is immediately given, hides the invisible which determines it’
(Bourdieu, 1989:16). This chapter also highlights how the meso-­level space is
not immune from government securitisation policy, whether that be in the form
of authoritarian neoliberalism, the rehearsal of discipline brought about by
the global pandemic, or cultural and political securitisation initiated through
hegemonic and nationalistic policy discourse (Winter & Mills, 2020).
    Chapters 4–6 detail the empirical investigation on how and to what extent the
embodied cultural capital of Global Majority students is positioned within the
meso-­level space of cultural ethos and pedagogy of the three research sites. The
first section of each of these chapters explores whether diverse cultural capital is
institutionally recognised in schools and colleges where students of colour are in
the majority. It looks for possibilities for a decolonising global education to
emerge (Subedi, 2013) that can challenge hegemonic colonial ideology so that
Global Majority students can escape the coloniality of being (Maldonado-­
Torres, 2007). That is to say, it looks for the drawing of diverse cultures into the
institutional centre to include ‘the active production of culture’ rather than just
a conservation of one version of the past (Hall, 1999:4). This is achieved when
diverse cultural capital is recognised as institutional cultural capital rather than
just ‘simple’ (Bourdieu, 1986:21) or racialised (Cartwright, 2022) cultural capital.
    The first section of each of these chapters therefore looks for evidence of
this diverse cultural capital forming a global multicultural capital that informs
each researched institution’s ethos and cultural pedagogy, thus granting it
symbolic power (Bourdieu, 1989). The cultural pedagogy of an institution is
its ‘official’ cultural voice and values, often transmitted through websites,
newsletters, vision and values statements, social structures, social spaces and
associations. This can be found in objectified cultural capital (Bourdieu, 1986)

                                                                   Introduction 11

such as artefacts, words, pictures, documents and actions (dance, drama, etc.).
As Hammersley and Atkinson (2007:135) point out, ‘if we want to make sense
of many social worlds, we ought to take account of how they are physically
constituted’. These sections, therefore, look to find the institution’s ‘visible
philosophy on multiculturalism’ (Matas & Bridges, 2008:11) as well as to
observe its spatial codes (Lefebvre, 1991) in regard to power imbalances. Often
this cultural ethos/pedagogy is unconsciously transmitted. Furthermore, cer-
tain values can be both visible but misrecognised behind everyday ‘norms’.
   The second section of each of these chapters concentrates on how student
leaders recognise, understand, articulate and interact with diverse cultural cap-
ital. These sections rely on semi-­structured interviews with groups of student
leaders. It explores the tangible and ideational resources and structures availa-
ble to student leaders in promoting their embodied cultural capital – and per-
haps a decolonising global education – within the sites of research in the
afterward of multicultural/anti-­racist education. It empirically demonstrates
how the students interact within an unofficial multiculturalism as a way to
validate their own embodied cultural capital and global heritage.
   The third section of each of these chapters looks at how staff leaders recog-
nise, understand, articulate and interact with the vast cultural diversity within
their respective institutions. These sections continue to explore the tangible
and ideational resources and structures available to staff and student leaders in
promoting the embodied cultural capital of Global Majority students within
the sites of research. These sections therefore explore whether the meso-­level
space vacated by neoliberal policies that establish relations between central
government and micro-­level institutional control is leveraged as a way of rec-
ognising and valuing Global Majority cultural capital by staff leaders. It
explores the extent to which this embodied cultural capital is empowered and
legitimised as symbolic capital by staff leaders, as well as whether this global
heritage has become part of the mainstream institutional ethos and cultural
pedagogy within the schools researched in this study. Evidence is therefore
sought to see if this global cultural capital is promoted as a counter-­narrative
to monoculturalism, macro-­level securitisation policy and colonial ideology.
   Chapter 7 draws the strands of the monograph together. It will briefly restate
the previous chapters’ conclusions before moving into a wider discussion. It con-
cludes with a reflection on the potential to achieve change through educational
leadership that will be of interest to leaders in schools and colleges with culturally
diverse students. It will reflect on how the embodied cultural capital of Global
Majority students can be recognised as a means of producing a locally generated
global education that can speak back to neoliberal and colonial orthodoxy.

Contextual Information
This study takes place in Leicester, an English multicultural city of medium
size located in the East Midlands region. The ‘Leicester model’ for multicul-
turalism is often upheld as a beacon to other multicultural cities (Jones, 2015).
It is also reflected in national media coverage (The Guardian (Addley, 2001);

12 Introduction

The Independent (Popham, 2013); Mail Online (Spillett, 2016)) as well as the
international media (New York Times, 2001; The Times of India, 2016). The
city also received official recognition of its multiculturalism when the Queen
chose the city as the first stop on her Diamond Jubilee tour, reflecting the view
that ‘Leicester represents the multi-­culturalism of twenty-­first-­century Britain’
(Madgin, 2016:368). However, recently, this civic multiculturalism has come
under threat through public disorder and cultural discord (Murray et al., 2022).
   Leicester’s national (and to a lesser extent, international) image as the mul-
ticultural city outside of London was cemented during the late 1990s and early
2000s through the ‘place branding’ of Leicester’s cultural diversity as multicul-
turalism gradually became ‘a more explicit and assimilated element of the city
image, with local stakeholders deliberately deciding to communicate it towards
external audiences’ (Hassan & Giovanardi, 2018:49). This is demonstrated in
official documents such as A Vision for Cultural Life in Leicester (LCC, 2000).
   Rather than promote the city’s diversity as ‘exotically diverse’ (Gun & Hyde,
2013:2), Leicester has attempted to incorporate cultural diversity as an endur-
ing and beneficial feature of Leicester, part of its historical narrative (Herbert,
2016:330), ‘in order to define its post-­industrial identity as characterised by
openness and inclusivity’ (Gun & Hyde, 2013:2). For many people, ‘the sym-
bolic and lived value of Leicester is conceived in relation to other places and
transnational affiliations’ (Clayton, 2012:1680). This study looks to see if this
transnational belonging and global heritage is evident in Leicester’s schools
and colleges, where students with heritage from formerly colonised nations
now make up (in many of the city’s educational institutions) the large majority
of the student population. The ideas and issues generated by this study will
resonate in other cities, towns and schools where Global Majority students
continue to live with the legacies of European colonialism.


References
Abbas, Tahir. (2018). Implementing ‘Prevent’ in countering violent extremism in the
  UK: a left-­realist critique. Critical Social Policy 39(3): 396–412.
Addley, E. (2001). Side by side. In The Guardian, 01/01/2001. https://www.theguardian.
  com/uk/2001/jan/01/britishidentity.features11 (Accessed 06/09/19).
Alam, S. (2008). Majority world: challenging the west’s rhetoric of democracy. Amerasia
  Journal 34(1): 88–98.
Amthor, F. R., & Roxas, K. (2016). Multicultural education and newcomer youth: re-­
  imagining a more inclusive vision for immigrant and refugee students. Educational
  Studies 52(2): 155–176.
Apple, M. W. (2004). Ideology and Curriculum. New York: Routledge.
Apple, M. W., Biesta, G., Bright, D., Giroux, H. A., Heffernan, A., McLaren, P., Riddle,
  S., & Yeatman, A. (2022). Reflections on contemporary challenges and possibilities
  for democracy and education. Journal of Educational Administration and History
  54(3): 245–262.
Arar, K. (2020). School Leadership for Refugees’ Education– Social Justice Leadership
  for Immigrants, Migrants and Refugees. London: Routledge.

                                                                       Introduction 13

Australian Bureau of Statistics. (2022). https://www.abs.gov.au/statistics/people/people-­
  and-­communities/cultural-­diversity-­census/latest-­release
Ball, S. (2003). The teacher’s soul and the terrors of performativity. Journal of Education
  Policy 18(2): 215–228.
Ball, S. (2012). Global Education INC: New Policy Networks and the Neo-­             liberal
  Imaginary Abingdon: Routledge.
Barnard, M. (2022). Theorising the meso-­level space of school ethos and cultural ped-
  agogy in relation to securitisation policy. Journal of Education Policy 37(6): 944–964.
  Available at https://www.tandfonline.com/
Bello, V. (2022). The spiralling of the securitisation of migration in the EU: from the
  management of a ‘crisis’ to a governance of human mobility? Journal of Ethnic and
  Migration Studies 48(6): 1327–1344.
Bhopal, K. (2018). White Privilege: The Myth of a Post-­          Racial Society. Bristol:
  Policy Press.
Biesta, G. (2015). Resisting the seduction of the global education measurement indus-
  try: notes on the social psychology of PISA. Ethics and Education 10(3): 348–360.
Bonnett, A. (2000). White Identities: Historical and International Perspectives. Harlow:
  Pearson Education Limited.
Bourdieu, P. (1986). The Forms of Capital. In S. J. Ball (Ed.), The RoutledgeFalmer
  Reader in Sociology of Education (pp. 15–29). London: Routledge Falmer.
Bourdieu, P. (1989). Social space and symbolic power. Sociological Theory 7(1): 14–25.
Bourdieu, P. (1990). In Other Words. Stanford: Stanford University Press.
Braidotti, R. (2013). Posthuman humanities. European Educational Research Journal
  12(1): 1–19.
Bristol, L. (2012). Postcolonial Thought: A Theoretical and Methodological Means for
  Thinking through Culturally Ethical Research. In J. Lavia, & S. Mahlomaholo(Eds.),
  Culture, Education, and Community: Expressions of the Postcolonial Imagination (pp.
  15–32). New York: Palgrave Macmillan.
Campbell-­Stephens, R. M. (2021). Educational Leadership and the Global Majority:
  Decolonising Narratives. Switzerland: Springer Nature.
Cartwright, A. (2022). A theory of racialized cultural capital. Sociological Inquiry
  92(2): 317–340.
Clayton, J. (2012). Living the multicultural city: acceptance, belonging and young iden-
  tities in the city of Leicester. England, Ethnic and Racial Studies 35(9): 1673–1693.
Department for Education. (2018). Schools, Pupils and Their Characteristics: January
  2018, Department for Education. London. Retrieved March 26, 2019. https://assets.
  publishing.service.gov.uk/government/uploads/system/uploads/attachment_data/
  file/719226/Schools_Pupils_and_their_Characteristics_2018_Main_Text.pdf
Dhondy, F. (2016) How Leicester became UK’s multicultural model. The Times of
  India, 08/05/16. https://timesofindia.indiatimes.com/home/sunday-­times/deep-­focus/
  How-­Leicester-­became-­UKs-­multicultural-­model/articleshow/52169078.cms
Dyer, R. (1997). White. London: Routledge.
Eacott, S. (2013). Towards a theory of school leadership practice: a Bourdieusian per-
  spective. Journal of Educational Administration and History 45(2): 174–188.
Eacott, S. (2016). Mobilizing Bourdieu to Think Anew about Educational Leadership
  Research. In M. Murphy, & C. Costa (Eds.), Theory as Method in Research: On
  Bourdieu, Social Theory and Education (pp. 117–131). Abingdon: Routledge.
Flint, K. J., & Peim, N. (2012). Rethinking the Education Improvement Agenda:
  A Critical Philosophical Approach. London: Continuum.

14 Introduction

Flubacher, M. C., & Busch, B. (2022). Language advocacy in times of securitization
   and neoliberalization: The Network LanguageRights. Lang Policy 21: 545–560.
García-­ Carmona, M., Fuentes-­       Mayorga, N., & Rodríguez-­       García, N. (2021).
   Educational leadership for social justice in multicultural contexts: the case of Melilla.
   Spain. Leadership and Policy in Schools 20(1): 76–94.
Gilbert, F. (2022). The reciprocal rebellion: promoting discussion in authoritarian
   schools. Changing English 29(3): 232–250.
Gilroy, P. (2005). Postcolonial Melancholia. New York: Columbia University Press.
Giroux, H. A. (2021). Race, Politics, and Pandemic Pedagogy: Education in a Time of
   Crisis. London: Bloomsbury Academic.
Gun, S. and Hyde, C. (2013). Post-­industrial place, multicultural space: the transforma-
   tion of Leicester, c. 1970–1990. International Journal of Reginal and Local History, 8
   (2), 94–111.
Guo-­Brennan, L., & Guo-­Brennan, M. (2019). Global Citizenship Education and
   Social Justice for Immigrant Students: Implications for Administration, Leadership
   and Teaching in Schools. In K. Arar, & K. Beycioglu (Eds.), Handbook on Promoting
   Social Justice in Education (pp. 1–20). Springer International Publishing.
Guo-­  Brennan, L., & Guo-­    Brennan, M. (2021). Leading welcoming and inclusive
   schools for newcomer students: a conceptual framework. Leadership and Policy in
   Schools 20(1): 57–75.
Hall, S. (1997). Race, the Floating Signifier. Northampton, MA: (Transcript featuring
   Stuart Hall) (Media Education Foundation). https://www.mediaed.org/transcripts/
   Stuart-­Hall-­Race-­the-­Floating-­Signifier-­Transcript.pdf (Accessed 06/09/19).
Hall, S. (1999). Whose heritage? Un-­settling ‘the heritage’, re-­imagining the post-­
   nation. Third Text 13(49): 3–13.
Halstead, M. (2010). In Defence of Multiculturalism. In Y. Raley, & G. Preyer (Eds.),
   Philosophy of Education in the Era of Globalization (pp. 181–197). Abingdon:
   Routledge.
Hammersley, M., & Atkinson, P. (2007). Ethnography (3rd ed.). Abingdon: Routledge.
Hassan, I., & Giovanardi, M. (2018). The difference of ‘being diverse’: city branding
   and multiculturalism in the ‘Leicester model’. Cities 80(2018): 45–52.
Herbert, J. (2016). Immigration and the Emergence of Multicultural Leicester. In
   R. Rodger, & R. Madgin (Eds.), Leicester: A Modern History (pp. 330–346).
   Lancaster: Carnegie.
Hintz, A., & Milan, S. (2018). Through a glass, darkly: everyday acts of authoritarian-
   ism in the liberal west. International Journal of Communication 12: 3939–3959.
Ho, C (2019). Ethnic Divides in Schooling: Discussion Paper. Centre for Policy
   Development. https://cpd.org.au/wp-­content/uploads/2019/05/Ethnic-­Divides.pdf
Hoge, W. (2001) British city defines diversity and tolerance. The New York Times,
   08/02/01. https://www.nytimes.com/2001/02/08/world/british-­city-­defines-­diversity-­
   and-­tolerance.html
Holloway, J. (2021). Metrics, Standards and Alignment in Teacher Policy: Critiquing
   Fundamentalism and Imagining Pluralism. Singapore: Springer.
Hursh, D. (2019). The Rise of Authoritarian Neoliberalism. In J. Wilkinson R. Niesche,
   & S. Eacott (Eds.), Challenges for Public Education: Reconceptualising Educational
   Leadership, Policy and Social Justice as Resources for Hope (pp. 145–158). Abingdon:
   Routledge.
Iffath, H. (2020). ‘Miss, what’s colonialism?’: confronting the English literary heritage
   in the classroom. Changing English 27(4): 369–382.

                                                                     Introduction 15

James, J. (2021). Teaching anti-­terrorism: how France and England use schools to coun-
  ter radicalisation. The Conversation. https://theconversation.com/teaching-­anti-­
  terrorism-­how-­france-­and-­england-­use-­schools-­to-­counter-­radicalisation-­150921
  (Accessed 06/04/21).
Jerome, L., Elwick, A., & Kazim, R. (2019). The impact of the prevent duty on schools:
  a review of the evidence. British Educational Research Journal 45(4): 821–837.
Jones, S. H. (2015). The ‘metropolis of dissent’: Muslim participation in Leicester and
  the ‘failure’ of multiculturalism in Britain. Ethnic and Racial Studies, 38(11):
  1969–1985.
Joppke, C. (2017). Is Multiculturalism Dead? Cambridge: Polity Press.
Kanu, Y., Ed. (2006). Curriculum as Cultural Practice: Postcolonial Imaginations.
  Toronto, Buffalo, London: University of Toronto Press.
Kapoor, N. (2013). The advancement of racial neoliberalism in Britain. Ethnic and
  Racial Studies 36(6): 1028–1046.
Keddie, A. (2014). The politics of Britishness: multiculturalism, schooling and social
  cohesion. British Educational Research Journal 40(3): 539–554.
Khan, K. (2016). Citizenship, Securitization and Suspicion in UK ESOL Policy. In
  K. S. Arnaut, M. Spotti, J. Blommaert, & M. Karrebæk (Eds.), Engaging
  Superdiversity: Recombining Spaces, Times and Language Practices (pp. 303–320).
  Bristol: Multilingual Matters.
Knudsen, B. T., Oldfield, J., Buettner, E., & Zabunyan, E. (2022). Introduction. In
  B. T. Knudsen, J. Oldfield, E. Buettner, & E. Zabunyan (Eds.), Decolonizing Colonial
  Heritage: New Agendas, Actors and Practices in and beyond Europe. Abingdon:
  Routledge.
Kulz, C. (2021). Everyday erosions: neoliberal political rationality, democratic decline
  and the Multi-­Academy Trust. British Journal of Sociology of Education 42(1): 66–81.
Kundnani, A. 2007. The End of Tolerance: Racism in 21st Century Britain. London:
  Pluto Press.
Lefebvre, H. (1991). The Production of Space. Oxford: Blackwell.
Leicester City Council. (2000). A Vision for Cultural Life in Leicester. Leicester City
  Council Arts & Leisure. http://www.cabinet.leicester.gov.uk/documents/s1045/cultur1.
  pdf (Accessed 06/09/19).
Lingard, B., Martino, W., & Rezai-­Rashti, G. (2013). Testing regimes, accountabilities
  and education policy: commensurate global and national developments. Journal of
  Education Policy 28(5): 539–556.
Madgin, R. (2016). The Spirit of the City: What Is Leicester’s genius loci? In R. Rodger,
  & R. Madgin (Eds.), Leicester: A Modern History (pp. 363–374). Lancaster: Carnegie.
Maldonado-­Torres, N. (2007). On the coloniality of being. Cultural Studies 21(2–3):
  240–270.
Matas, C. P., & Bridges, S. (2008). Multicultural capital in middle schooling. The
  International Journal of Diversity in Organisations, Communities and Nations
  8(2): 1–18.
McGhee, D., & Zhang, S. (2017). Nurturing resilient future citizens through value con-
  sistency vs the retreat from multiculturalism and securitisation in the promotion of
  British values in schools in the UK. Citizenship Studies 21(8): 937–950.
Miles, R. (1993). Racism after ‘Race Relations’. London: Routledge.
Murry, J., Khan, A. J., & Syal, R. (2022). ‘It feels like people want to fight’: how com-
  munal unrest flared in Leicester. The Guardian. https://www.theguardian.com/
  uk-­news/2022/sep/23/how-­communal-­unrest-­flared-­leicester-­muslim-­hindu-­tensions

Introduction
Abbas, Tahir . (2018). Implementing ‘Prevent’ in countering violent extremism in the UK: a left-
realist critique. Critical Social Policy 39(3): 396–412.
Addley, E. (2001). Side by side. In The Guardian, 01/01/2001.
https://www.theguardian.com/uk/2001/jan/01/britishidentity.features11 (Accessed 06/09/19 ).
Alam, S. (2008). Majority world: challenging the west’s rhetoric of democracy. Amerasia Journal
34(1): 88–98.
Amthor, F. R. , & Roxas, K. (2016). Multicultural education and newcomer youth: re-imagining a
more inclusive vision for immigrant and refugee students. Educational Studies 52(2): 155–176.
Apple, M. W. (2004). Ideology and Curriculum. New York: Routledge.
Apple, M. W. , Biesta, G. , Bright, D. , Giroux, H. A. , Heffernan, A. , McLaren, P. , Riddle, S. , &
Yeatman, A. (2022). Reflections on contemporary challenges and possibilities for democracy
and education. Journal of Educational Administration and History 54(3): 245–262.
Arar, K. (2020). School Leadership for Refugees’ Education– Social Justice Leadership for
Immigrants, Migrants and Refugees. London: Routledge.
Australian Bureau of Statistics . (2022). https://www.abs.gov.au/statistics/people/people-and-
communities/cultural-diversity-census/latest-release
Ball, S. (2003). The teacher’s soul and the terrors of performativity. Journal of Education Policy
18(2): 215–228.
Ball, S. (2012). Global Education INC: New Policy Networks and the Neo-liberal Imaginary
Abingdon: Routledge.
Barnard, M. (2022). Theorising the meso-level space of school ethos and cultural pedagogy in
relation to securitisation policy. Journal of Education Policy 37(6): 944–964. Available at
https://www.tandfonline.com/
Bello, V. (2022). The spiralling of the securitisation of migration in the EU: from the
management of a ‘crisis’ to a governance of human mobility? Journal of Ethnic and Migration
Studies 48(6): 1327–1344.
Bhopal, K. (2018). White Privilege: The Myth of a Post-Racial Society. Bristol: Policy Press.
Biesta, G. (2015). Resisting the seduction of the global education measurement industry: notes
on the social psychology of PISA. Ethics and Education 10(3): 348–360.
Bonnett, A. (2000). White Identities: Historical and International Perspectives. Harlow: Pearson
Education Limited.
Bourdieu, P. (1986). The Forms of Capital. In S. J. Ball (Ed.), The RoutledgeFalmer Reader in
Sociology of Education (pp. 15–29). London: Routledge Falmer.
Bourdieu, P. (1989). Social space and symbolic power. Sociological Theory 7(1): 14–25.
Bourdieu, P. (1990). In Other Words. Stanford: Stanford University Press.
Braidotti, R. (2013). Posthuman humanities. European Educational Research Journal 12(1):
1–19.
Bristol, L. (2012). Postcolonial Thought: A Theoretical and Methodological Means for Thinking
through Culturally Ethical Research. In J. Lavia , & S. Mahlomaholo (Eds.), Culture, Education,
and Community: Expressions of the Postcolonial Imagination (pp. 15–32). New York: Palgrave
Macmillan.
Campbell-Stephens, R. M. (2021). Educational Leadership and the Global Majority:
Decolonising Narratives. Switzerland: Springer Nature.
Cartwright, A. (2022). A theory of racialized cultural capital. Sociological Inquiry 92(2): 317–340.
Clayton, J. (2012). Living the multicultural city: acceptance, belonging and young identities in
the city of Leicester. England, Ethnic and Racial Studies 35(9): 1673–1693.
Department for Education . (2018). Schools, Pupils and Their Characteristics: January 2018,
Department for Education. London. Retrieved March 26, 2019.
https://assets.publishing.service.gov.uk/government/uploads/system/uploads/attachment_data/fi
le/719226/Schools_Pupils_and_their_Characteristics_2018_Main_Text.pdf
Dhondy, F. (2016) How Leicester became UK’s multicultural model. The Times of India,
08/05/16. https://timesofindia.indiatimes.com/home/sunday-times/deep-focus/How-Leicester-
became-UKs-multicultural-model/articleshow/52169078.cms
Dyer, R. (1997). White. London: Routledge.
Eacott, S. (2013). Towards a theory of school leadership practice: a Bourdieusian perspective.
Journal of Educational Administration and History 45(2): 174–188.

Eacott, S. (2016). Mobilizing Bourdieu to Think Anew about Educational Leadership Research.
In M. Murphy , & C. Costa (Eds.), Theory as Method in Research: On Bourdieu, Social Theory
and Education (pp. 117–131). Abingdon: Routledge.
Flint, K. J. , & Peim, N. (2012). Rethinking the Education Improvement Agenda: A Critical
Philosophical Approach. London: Continuum.
Flubacher, M. C. , & Busch, B. (2022). Language advocacy in times of securitization and
neoliberalization: The Network LanguageRights . Lang Policy 21: 545–560.
García-Carmona, M. , Fuentes-Mayorga, N. , & Rodríguez-García, N. (2021). Educational
leadership for social justice in multicultural contexts: the case of Melilla. Spain. Leadership and
Policy in Schools 20(1): 76–94.
Gilbert, F. (2022). The reciprocal rebellion: promoting discussion in authoritarian schools.
Changing English 29(3): 232–250.
Gilroy, P. (2005). Postcolonial Melancholia. New York: Columbia University Press.
Giroux, H. A. (2021). Race, Politics, and Pandemic Pedagogy: Education in a Time of Crisis.
London: Bloomsbury Academic.
Gun, S. and Hyde, C. (2013). Post-industrial place, multicultural space: the transformation of
Leicester, c. 1970–1990. International Journal of Reginal and Local History, 8 (2), 94–111.
Guo-Brennan, L. , & Guo-Brennan, M. (2019). Global Citizenship Education and Social Justice
for Immigrant Students: Implications for Administration, Leadership and Teaching in Schools. In
K. Arar , & K. Beycioglu (Eds.), Handbook on Promoting Social Justice in Education (pp. 1–20).
Springer International Publishing.
Guo-Brennan, L. , & Guo-Brennan, M. (2021). Leading welcoming and inclusive schools for
newcomer students: a conceptual framework. Leadership and Policy in Schools 20(1): 57–75.
Hall, S. (1997). Race, the Floating Signifier. Northampton, MA: (Transcript featuring Stuart Hall)
(Media Education Foundation). https://www.mediaed.org/transcripts/Stuart-Hall-Race-the-
Floating-Signifier-Transcript.pdf (Accessed 06/09/19 ).
Hall, S. (1999). Whose heritage? Un-settling ‘the heritage’, re-imagining the post-nation. Third
Text 13(49): 3–13.
Halstead, M. (2010). In Defence of Multiculturalism. In Y. Raley , & G. Preyer (Eds.), Philosophy
of Education in the Era of Globalization (pp. 181–197). Abingdon: Routledge.
Hammersley, M. , & Atkinson, P. (2007). Ethnography (3rd ed.). Abingdon: Routledge.
Hassan, I. , & Giovanardi, M. (2018). The difference of ‘being diverse’: city branding and
multiculturalism in the ‘Leicester model’. Cities 80(2018): 45–52.
Herbert, J. (2016). Immigration and the Emergence of Multicultural Leicester. In R. Rodger , &
R. Madgin (Eds.), Leicester: A Modern History (pp. 330–346). Lancaster: Carnegie.
Hintz, A. , & Milan, S. (2018). Through a glass, darkly: everyday acts of authoritarianism in the
liberal west. International Journal of Communication 12: 3939–3959.
Ho, C (2019). Ethnic Divides in Schooling: Discussion Paper. Centre for Policy Development.
https://cpd.org.au/wp-content/uploads/2019/05/Ethnic-Divides.pdf
Hoge, W. (2001) British city defines diversity and tolerance. The New York Times, 08/02/01.
https://www.nytimes.com/2001/02/08/world/british-city-defines-diversity-and-tolerance.html
Holloway, J. (2021). Metrics, Standards and Alignment in Teacher Policy: Critiquing
Fundamentalism and Imagining Pluralism. Singapore: Springer.
Hursh, D. (2019). The Rise of Authoritarian Neoliberalism. In J. Wilkinson R. Niesche , & S.
Eacott (Eds.), Challenges for Public Education: Reconceptualising Educational Leadership,
Policy and Social Justice as Resources for Hope (pp. 145–158). Abingdon: Routledge.
Iffath, H. (2020). ‘Miss, what’s colonialism?’: confronting the English literary heritage in the
classroom. Changing English 27(4): 369–382.
James, J. (2021). Teaching anti-terrorism: how France and England use schools to counter
radicalisation. The Conversation. https://theconversation.com/teaching-anti-terrorism-how-
france-and-england-use-schools-to-counter-radicalisation-150921 (Accessed 06/04/21 ).
Jerome, L. , Elwick, A. , & Kazim, R. (2019). The impact of the prevent duty on schools: a
review of the evidence. British Educational Research Journal 45(4): 821–837.
Jones, S. H. (2015). The ‘metropolis of dissent’: Muslim participation in Leicester and the
‘failure’ of multiculturalism in Britain. Ethnic and Racial Studies, 38(11): 1969–1985.
Joppke, C. (2017). Is Multiculturalism Dead? Cambridge: Polity Press.
Kanu, Y. , Ed. (2006). Curriculum as Cultural Practice: Postcolonial Imaginations. Toronto,
Buffalo, London: University of Toronto Press.

Kapoor, N. (2013). The advancement of racial neoliberalism in Britain. Ethnic and Racial
Studies 36(6): 1028–1046.
Keddie, A. (2014). The politics of Britishness: multiculturalism, schooling and social cohesion.
British Educational Research Journal 40(3): 539–554.
Khan, K. (2016). Citizenship, Securitization and Suspicion in UK ESOL Policy. In K. S. Arnaut ,
M. Spotti , J. Blommaert , & M. Karrebæk (Eds.), Engaging Superdiversity: Recombining
Spaces, Times and Language Practices (pp. 303–320). Bristol: Multilingual Matters.
Knudsen, B. T. , Oldfield, J. , Buettner, E. , & Zabunyan, E. (2022). Introduction. In B. T.
Knudsen , J. Oldfield , E. Buettner , & E. Zabunyan (Eds.), Decolonizing Colonial Heritage: New
Agendas, Actors and Practices in and beyond Europe. Abingdon: Routledge.
Kulz, C. (2021). Everyday erosions: neoliberal political rationality, democratic decline and the
Multi-Academy Trust. British Journal of Sociology of Education 42(1): 66–81.
Kundnani, A. 2007. The End of Tolerance: Racism in 21st Century Britain. London: Pluto Press.
Lefebvre, H. (1991). The Production of Space. Oxford: Blackwell.
Leicester City Council . (2000). A Vision for Cultural Life in Leicester. Leicester City Council Arts
& Leisure. http://www.cabinet.leicester.gov.uk/documents/s1045/cultur1.pdf (Accessed 06/09/19
).
Lingard, B. , Martino, W. , & Rezai-Rashti, G. (2013). Testing regimes, accountabilities and
education policy: commensurate global and national developments. Journal of Education Policy
28(5): 539–556.
Madgin, R. (2016). The Spirit of the City: What Is Leicester’s genius loci? In R. Rodger , & R.
Madgin (Eds.), Leicester: A Modern History (pp. 363–374). Lancaster: Carnegie.
Maldonado-Torres, N. (2007). On the coloniality of being. Cultural Studies 21(2–3): 240–270.
Matas, C. P. , & Bridges, S. (2008). Multicultural capital in middle schooling. The International
Journal of Diversity in Organisations, Communities and Nations 8(2): 1–18.
McGhee, D. , & Zhang, S. (2017). Nurturing resilient future citizens through value consistency
vs the retreat from multiculturalism and securitisation in the promotion of British values in
schools in the UK. Citizenship Studies 21(8): 937–950.
Miles, R. (1993). Racism after ‘Race Relations’. London: Routledge.
Murry, J. , Khan, A. J. , & Syal, R. (2022). ‘It feels like people want to fight’: how communal
unrest flared in Leicester. The Guardian. https://www.theguardian.com/uk-
news/2022/sep/23/how-communal-unrest-flared-leicester-muslim-hindu-tensions
Myers, K. (2015). Struggles for a Past: Irish and Afro-Caribbean Histories in England,
1951–2000. Manchester: Manchester University Press.
Nagre, K. (2023). (Mis)educating England: eurocentric narratives in secondary school history
textbooks. Race Ethnicity and Education.
Nieto, S. , Bode, P. , Kang, E. , & Raible, J. (2008). Identity, Community and Diversity:
Retheorizing Multicultural Curriculum for the Postmodern Era. In F. M. Connelly , M. F. He , & J.
Phillion (Eds.), The Sage Handbook of Curriculum and Instruction (pp. 176–197). Thousand
Oaks, CA: Sage.
Office for National Statistics . (2022).
https://www.ons.gov.uk/peoplepopulationandcommunity/populationandmigration/internationalmi
gration/bulletins/internationalmigrationenglandandwales/census2021
Ogden, C. (2022). The thin end of the wedge: The UK and escalating global authoritarianism.
The Foreign Policy Centre. https://fpc.org.uk/the-thin-end-of-the-wedge-the-uk-and-escalating-
global-authoritarianism/
Pak, K. , & Ravitch, S. (2021). Critical Leadership Praxis for Educational and Social Change.
Peker, E. (2021). Right-wing populism and the Securitisation of Laïcité narratives in French
education policy. Social Policy & Society 20(2): 326–339.
Peterson, A. , & Bentley, B. (2016). Securitisation and/or Westernisation: dominant discourses
of Australian values and the implications for teacher education. Journal of Education for
Teaching 42(2): 239–251.
Popham, P. (2013). We’re all in this together: how Leicester became a model of multiculturalism
(even if that was never the plan…). In The Independent, 28/07/19.
https://www.independent.co.uk/news/uk/this-britain/were-all-in-this-together-how-leicester-
became-a-model-of-multiculturalism-even-if-that-was-never-8732691.html (Accessed 06/09/19
).

Richards, B. N. , Ceron-Anaya, H. , Dumais, S. A. , Mueller, J. C. , Sánchez-Connally, P. , &
Wallace, D. (2023). What’s race got to do with it? disrupting whiteness in cultural capital
research. Sociology of Race and Ethnicity 9(3): 279–294.
Said, E. W. (2003). Orientalism. London: Penguin.
Schwarz, B. (1996). The Expansion of England: Race, Ethnicity and Cultural History. London:
Routledge.
Shakeir, R. Y. , Odendaal, R. T. , & Rosado-Viurques, A. (2021). Decolonizing Educational
Mindsets. In K. Pak , & S. Ravitch (Eds.), Critical Leadership Praxis for Educational and Social
Change (pp. 1–26). New York: Teachers College Press.
Shapiro, S. , & MacDonald, M. T. (2017). From deficit to asset: locating discursive resistance in
a refugee-background student’s written and oral narrative. Journal of Language, Identity &
Education 16(2): 80–93.
Shields, C. M. (2011). Transformative leadership: an introduction. Counterpoints 409: 1–17.
Shields, C. M. , & Warke, A. (2010). The invisible crisis: connecting schools with homeless
families. Journal of School Leadership 20(6): 789–819.
Singh, E. G. (2003). Multiculturalism in contemporary Britain: reflections on the ‘Leicester
model’. International Journal on Multicultural Societies 5(1): 40–54.
Smith, H. J. (2016). Britishness as racist nativism: A case of the unnamed ‘other’. Journal of
Education for Teaching 42(3): 298–313.
Spillett, R (2016). Britain’s most multicultural high street: The city centre parade that has
shopkeepers from twenty-three different countries. In Mail Online, 03/02/16.
https://www.dailymail.co.uk/news/article-3429838/Most-multi-national-high-street-Britain-boasts-
business-owners-23-different-countries.html (Accessed 06/09/19 )
Stats New Zealand . (2018). https://www.stats.govt.nz/news/ethnic-group-summaries-reveal-
new-zealands-multicultural-make-up/
Subedi, B. (2013). Decolonizing the curriculum for global perspectives. Educational Theory
63(6): 621–638.
Thomson, P. (2017). Educational Leadership and Pierre Bourdieu. Abingdon: Routledge.
Thomson, P. (2019). Oh to be in England: The Production of an Un-Public State System. In J.
Wilkinson R. Niesche , & S. Eacott (Eds.), Challenges for Public Education: Reconceptualising
Educational Leadership, Policy and Social Justice as Resources for Hope (pp. 101–115).
Abingdon: Routledge.
Tomlinson, S. (2019). Education and Race: From Empire to Brexit. Bristol: Policy Press.
Walker, A. , Dimmock, C. , Stevenson, H. , Bignold, B. , Shan, S. , & Middlewood, D. (2005).
Effective Leadership in Multi-Ethnic Schools. Nottingham: National College for School
Leadership.
Warmington, P. (2014). Black British Intellectuals and Education: Multiculturalism’s Hidden
History. London: Routledge.
Welply, O. (2023). English as an additional language (EAL): Decolonising provision and
practice. The Curriculum Journal 34: 62–82.
Wemyss, G. (2016). The Invisible Empire: White Discourse, Tolerance and Belonging. London:
Routledge.
Winter, C. (2018). Disrupting colonial discourses in the geography curriculum during the
introduction of British Values policy in schools. Journal of Curriculum Studies 50(4): 456–475.
Winter, C. , & Mills, C. (2020). The Psy-Security-Curriculum ensemble: British Values curriculum
policy in English schools. Journal of Education Policy 35(1): 46–67.
Yancy, G. (2017) Black Bodies, White Gazes: The Continuing Significance of Race in America,
Second Edition. Lanham: Rowman & Littlefield.




The Colonial Metanarrative
Ahlquist, A. (2017). Disrupting U.S. Empire: Creating Subjects to Expand the “Commons” and
the Public Good. In D. Ness , & S. J. Farenga (Eds.), Alternatives to Privatizing Public
Education and Curriculum: Festschrift in Honour of Dale D. Johnson (pp. 59–77). New York:
Routledge.

Ahmed, K. (2017). Schooling the Enemy within: Politics and Pedagogy. In M. M. Ghaill , & C.
Haywood (Eds.), Muslim Students, Education and Neoliberalism (pp. 115–130). London:
Palgrave Macmillan.
Alam, S. (2008). Majority world: challenging the west’s rhetoric of democracy. Amerasia Journal
34(1): 88–98.
Ballantyne, T. (2010). Knowledge, Empire, Globalization. In S. Howe (Ed.), The New Imperial
Histories Reader (pp. 231–237). Milton Park, Abingdon, Oxon: Routledge.
Banks, J. A. (2004). Multicultural Education: Characteristics and Goals. In J. A. Banks , & C. A.
M. Banks (Eds.), Multicultural Education: Issues and Perspectives (5th edn., pp. 3–30).
Chichester: Wiley.
Bell, A. (2014). Relating Indigenous and Settler Identities: Beyond Domination. Basingstoke:
Palgrave Macmillan.
Bhambra, G. (2014). Postcolonial and decolonial dialogues. Postcolonial Studies 17(2):
115–121.
Bonnett, A. (2000). White Identities: Historical and International Perspectives. Harlow: Pearson
Education Limited.
Bourdieu, P. (1962). The Algerians (Boston, MA: Beacon Press).
Bourdieu, P. (1986). The Forms of Capital. In S. J. Ball (Ed.), The RoutledgeFalmer Reader in
Sociology of Education (pp. 15–29). London: RoutledgeFalmer.
Bourdieu, P. (1990). In other Words. Stanford University Press.
Bourdieu, P. (1998) Acts of Resistance. Cambridge: Polity Press.
Bourdieu, P. , & Wacquant, L. J. D. (1992). An Invitation to Reflexive Sociology. Cambridge:
Polity Press.
Bourne, J. (2007). In defence of multiculturalism, IRR Briefing Paper No. 2, Institute of Race
Relations.
Braidotti, R. (2013). Posthuman humanities. European Educational Research Journal 12(1):
1–9.
Braidotti, R. (2019). Posthuman Knowledge. Cambridge: Polity Press.
Brimnes, Niels , Ipsen, Pernille , & Simonsen, Gunvor , Eds. (2009). Scandinavian colonialism.
Special issue, Itinerario. 33(2).
https://www.cambridge.org/core/journals/itinerario/issue/8AD3938B20096E67D560BF6609FF40
BD
Buettner, E. (2016). Europe after Empire: Decolonization, Society, and Culture. Cambridge:
Cambridge University Press.
Buettner, E. (2022). Europe and Its Entangled Colonial Pasts: Europeanizing the ‘Imperial Turn’.
In B. T. Knudsen , J. Oldfield , E. Buettner , & E. Zabunyan (Eds.), Decolonizing Colonial
Heritage: New Agendas, Actors and Practices in and Beyond Europe. Abingdon: Routledge.
Chakrabarty, D. (2000). Provincializing Europe: Postcolonial Thought and Historical Difference.
Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press.
Collard, J. (2009). Constructing Theory for Leadership in Intercultural Contexts. In J. Collard , &
A. H. Normore (Eds.), Leadership and Intercultural Dynamics (pp. 3–22). Hershey, PA:
Information Age.
Darwin, J. (2013). Unfinished Empire: The Global Expansion of Britain. London: Penguin Books.
Davies, N. (1997). Europe: A History. London: Pimlico.
Dyer, R. (1997). White. London: Routledge.
Eacott, S. (2013). Towards a theory of school leadership practice: a Bourdieusian perspective.
Journal of Educational Administration and History 45(2): 174–188.
Eacott, S. (2016). Mobilizing Bourdieu to Think Anew about Educational Leadership Research.
In M. Murphy , & C. Costa (Eds.), Theory as Method in Research: On Bourdieu, Social Theory
and Education (pp. 117–131). Abingdon: Routledge.
Engh, S. (2009). The conscience of the world? Swedish and Norwegian provision of
development aid. Itinerario 33(2): 65–82.
Featherstone, M. (2017). Planet Utopia: Utopia, Dystopia, and Globalisation. London:
Routledge.
Garner, S. (2017). Racisms: An Introduction (2nd edn.). London: Sage.
Ghaill, M. M. , & Haywood, C. , Eds. (2017). Muslim Students, Education and Neoliberalism:
Schooling a ‘Suspect Community’. London: Palgrave Macmillan.

Gilroy, P. (2005). Postcolonial Melancholia. New York: Columbia University Press.
Go, J. (2013). Decolonizing Bourdieu: colonial and postcolonial theory in Pierre Bourdieu’s early
work. Sociological Theory 31(1): 49–74.
Grenfell, M. , & James, D. (1998). Bourdieu and Education: Acts of Practical Theory. London,
Falmer Press.
Gunew, S. M. (2004). Haunted Nations: The Colonial Dimensions of Multiculturalisms. London:
Routledge.
Guo-Brennan, L. , & Guo-Brennan, M. (2021). Leading welcoming and inclusive schools for
newcomer students: a conceptual framework. Leadership and Policy in Schools 20(1): 57–75.
Hall, S. (1997). Race, the Floating Signifier. Northampton, MA: (Transcript featuring Stuart Hall)
(Media Education Foundation). https://www.mediaed.org/transcripts/Stuart-Hall-Race-the-
Floating-Signifier-Transcript.pdf (Accessed 06/09/19 ).
Hall, S. (1999). Whose heritage? un-settling ‘the heritage’, re-imagining the post-nation. Third
Text 13(49): 3–13.
Hall, S. (2003). In but not of Europe. In Luisa Passerini (Ed.), Figures d’Europe: Images and
Myths of Europe (pp. 35–46). Brussels: P.I.E.-Peter Lang.
Hall, C. , & Rose, S. O. , Eds. (2006). At Home with the Empire: Metropolitan Culture and the
Imperial World. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Halstead, M. (2010). In Defence of Multiculturalism. In Y. Raley & G. Preyer (Eds.), Philosophy
of Education in the Era of Globalization (pp. 181–197). Abingdon: Routledge.
Joppke, C. (2017). Is Multiculturalism Dead? Cambridge: Polity Press.
Lefebvre, H. (1991). The Production of Space. Oxford: Blackwell.
Lefebvre, H. (2009). Reflections on the Politics of Space. In N. Brenner , & S. Eldon (Eds.),
State, Space, World: Selected Essays (pp. 167–184). Minneapolis: University of Minnesota.
Levine, P. (2013). British Empire: Sunrise to Sunset (2nd edn.). Abingdon, Oxon: Routledge.
MacDonald, L. , & Kidman, J. (2022). Uncanny pedagogies: teaching difficult histories at sites of
colonial violence. Critical Studies in Education, 63(1): 31–46.
Maldonado-Torres, N. (2007). On the coloniality of being. Cultural Studies 21(2–3): 240–270.
Maylor, U. (2010). Notions of diversity, British identities and citizenship belonging. Race
Ethnicity and Education 13(2): 233–252.
Mazower, M. (1999). Dark continent: Europe's Twentieth Century. London: Penguin Books.
Meghji, A. (2022). The Racialized Social System. Cambridge: Polity.
Miles, R. (1993). Racism after ‘Race Relations’. London: Routledge.
Modood, T. (2005). A defence of multiculturalism. Soundings 29: 62–71.
Nava, M. (2014). Sometimes antagonistic, sometimes ardently sympathetic: contradictory
responses to migrants in postwar Britain. Ethnicities 14(3): 458–480.
Pak, K. , & Ravitch, S. (2021). Critical Leadership Praxis for Educational and Social Change.
New York: Teachers College Press.
Porter, B. (2004). The Absent-Minded Imperialists. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Rampersad, R. (2016). Operationalizing Bourdieu, Interrogating Intersectionality and the
Underachievement of Primary Level Afro-Trinidadian Boys. In M. Murphy , & C. Costa (Eds.),
Theory as Method in Research: On Bourdieu, Social Theory and Education (pp. 65–82).
Abingdon: Routledge.
Reay, D. , Hollingworth, S. , Williams, K. , et al. (2007). ‘A darker shade of pale?’ whiteness, the
middle classes and multi-ethnic inner city schooling. Sociology 41(6): 1041–1060.
Regmi, K. D. (2022). Decolonizing epistemologies of the global South: Perspectives from
Canada. Multicultural Education Review 14(4): 258–276.
Richards, B. N. , Ceron-Anaya, H. , Dumais, S. A. , Mueller, J. C. , Sánchez-Connally, P. , &
Wallace, D. (2023). What’s race got to do with it? disrupting whiteness in cultural capital
research. Sociology of Race and Ethnicity 9(3): 279–294.
Said, E. W. (2003). Orientalism. London: Penguin.
Schwarz, B. (1996). The Expansion of England: Race, Ethnicity and Cultural History. London:
Routledge.
Schwarz, B. (2011). Memories of Empire, Volume I: The White Man’s World. Oxford: Oxford
University Press.
Shapiro, S. , & MacDonald, M. T. (2017). From deficit to asset: locating discursive resistance in
a refugee-background student’s written and oral narrative. Journal of Language, Identity &

Education 16(2): 80–93.
Shields, C. M. (2011). Transformative leadership: an introduction. Counterpoints 409: 1–17.
Sriprakash, A. , Rudolph, S. , & Gerrard, J. (2022). Whiteness and the Pedagogies of the State.
In Learning Whiteness: Education and the Settler Colonial State (pp. 14–28). London: Pluto
Press.
Stewart, L. (1994). Bodies, visions, and spatial politics: a review essay on Henri Lefebvre’s the
production of space. Environment and Planning D: Society and Space 13: 609–618.
Subedi, B. (2013). Decolonizing the curriculum for global perspectives. Educational Theory
63(6): 621–638.
Tabili. L. (2006). A Homogenous Society: Britain’s Internal ‘Others’, 1800 – Present. In C. Hall ,
& S. O. Rose (Eds.), At Home with the Empire: Metropolitan Culture and the Imperial World (pp.
53–76). Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Thomson, P. (2017). Educational Leadership and Pierre Bourdieu. Abingdon: Routledge.
Tomlinson, S. (1990). Multicultural Education in White Schools. London: Batsford.
Tomlinson, S. (2019). Education and Race: from Empire to Brexit. Bristol: Policy Press.
Webster, W. (2010). There’ll Always Be an England: Representations of Colonial Wars and
Immigration, 1948–1968. In S. Howe (Ed.), The New Imperial Histories Reader (pp. 284–305).
Abingdon, Oxon: Routledge.
Werbner, P. (2013). Everyday multiculturalism: theorising the difference between
‘intersectionality’ and ‘multiple identities’. Ethnicities 13(40): 401–419.
Yacine, T. (2004). Pierre Bourdieu in Algeria at war: notes on the birth of an engaged
ethnosociology. Ethnography 5(4): 487–509.
Yosso, T. J. (2006). Whose culture has capital? a critical race theory discussion of community
cultural wealth. Race, Ethnicity and Education 8(1): 69–91.




Cultural Securitisation and the Meso-Level Space
Abbas, Tahir . (2018). Implementing ‘Prevent’ in countering violent extremism in the UK: a left-
realist critique. Critical Social Policy 39(3): 396–412.
Ahmed, K. (2017). Schooling the Enemy Within: Politics and Pedagogy. In M. M. Ghaill , & C.
Haywood (Eds.), Muslim Students, Education and Neoliberalism (pp. 115–130). London:
Palgrave Macmillan.
Amthor, F. R. , & Roxas, K. (2016). Multicultural education and newcomer youth: re-imagining a
more inclusive vision for immigrant and refugee students. Educational Studies 52(2): 155–176.
Apple, M. W. (2014). Official Knowledge: Democratic Education in a Conservative Age. Oxon:
Routledge.
Ball, S. (2012). Global Education INC: New Policy Networks and the Neo-liberal Imaginary
Abingdon: Routledge.
Barnard, M. (2021). Re(dis)covering multicultural capital in Leicester’s schools and colleges:
historical legacies and possibilities for change. British Journal of Educational Studies 69(3):
347–364.
Bhopal, K. (2018). White Privilege: The Myth of a Post-Racial Society. Bristol: Policy Press.
Biesta, G. (2015). Resisting the seduction of the global education measurement industry: notes
on the social psychology of PISA. Ethics and Education 10(3): 348–360.
Bonnett, A. (2000). White Identities: Historical and International Perspectives. Harlow: Pearson
Education Limited.
Bourdieu, P. (1985). The social space and the genesis of groups. Theory and Society 14(6):
723–744.
Bourdieu, P. (1986). The Forms of Capital. In S. J. Ball (Ed.), The RoutledgeFalmer Reader in
Sociology of Education (pp. 15–29). London: RoutledgeFalmer.
Bourdieu, P. (1989). Social space and symbolic power. Sociological Theory 7(1): 14–25.
Bourdieu, P. (1990). In Other Words. Stanford: Stanford University Press.
Bourdieu, P. (1998). Acts of Resistance. Cambridge: Polity Press.
Bourdieu, P. , & Wacquant, L. J. D. (1992). An Invitation to Reflexive Sociology. Cambridge:
Polity Press.

Buettner, E. (2016). Europe after Empire: Decolonization, Society, and Culture. Cambridge:
Cambridge University Press.
Burgess, S. (2013). http://www.integrationhub.net/module/education/ (Accessed 15/09/2020 ).
Busher, J. , Choudhury, T. , Thomas, P. , & Harris, G. (2017). What the prevent duty means for
schools and colleges in England: an analysis of educationalists’ experiences. Research Report.
Aziz Foundation and Centre for Trust, Peace and Social Relations, Coventry University.
https://pure.coventry.ac.uk/ws/portalfiles/portal/11090509 (Accessed 15/9/2020 ).
Cameron, D. (2014). British values: article by David Cameron. GOV.UK.
https://www.gov.uk/government/news/british-values-article-by-david-cameron (Accessed 14
April 2020 ).
Cartwright, A. (2022). A theory of racialized cultural capital. Sociological Inquiry 92(2): 317–340.
Chakrabarty, D. (2000). Provincializing Europe: Postcolonial Thought and Historical Difference.
Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press.
Crawford, C. E. (2017). Promoting ‘fundamental British values’ in schools: a critical race
perspective. Curriculum Perspectives 37(2): 197–204.
Cushing, I. (2022). Word rich or word poor? deficit discourses, raciolinguistic ideologies and the
resurgence of the ‘word gap’ in England’s education policy. Critical Inquiry in Language Studies
20(4): 305–331.
DfE . (2012). Teachers’ Standards. London: HMSO.
https://www.gov.uk/government/publications/teachers-standards (Accessed 15/9/2020 ).
DfE . (2014a). Improving the Spiritual, Moral, Social and Cultural (SMSC) Development of
Pupils: Supplementary Information. Departmental Advice for Independent Schools, Academies
and Free Schools. Ref DFE-00670-2014. London: Crown Copyright.
DfE . (2014b). Promoting Fundamental British Values as Part of SMSC in Schools.
Departmental Advice for Maintained Schools. DFE-00679-2014. London: Crown Copyright.
DfE . (2015). The Prevent Duty Departmental Advice for Schools and Childcare Providers. Ref
DFE-00174-2015. London: Crown Copyright.
DfES . (2005). Developing a Global Dimension in the School Curriculum. London: Department
for Education and Skills.
Dyer, R. (1997). White. London: Routledge.
Elton-Chalcraft, S. , Vini, L. , Lynn, R. , Warner, D. , & Whitworth, L. (2017). To promote, or not
to promote British values? Teachers’ standards, diversity and teacher education. British
Educational Research Journal 43(1): 29–48.
Farrell, F. (2016). ‘Why all of a sudden do we need to teach fundamental British values?’ a
critical investigation of religious education student teacher positioning within a policy discourse
of discipline and control. Journal of Education for Teaching 42(3): 280–297.
Gamble, A. (2015). Multiculturalism and the Public Sphere. In V. Uberoi , & T. Modood (Eds.),
Multiculturalism Rethought: Interpretations, Dilemmas, and New Directions (pp. 273–299).
Edinburgh: Edinburgh University Press.
García-Carmona, M. , Fuentes-Mayorga, N. , & Rodríguez-García, N. (2021). Educational
leadership for social justice in multicultural contexts: the case of Melilla, Spain. Leadership and
Policy in Schools 20(1): 76–94.
Ghaemmaghami, A. & Jabbar, N. (2023). Delegated safeguarding or surveillance by proxy?
Education: The prevent statutory duty in action. International Journal of Law, Crime and Justice
74: 1–13.
Gove, M. (2014). The Secretary of State for Education’s Oral Statement to Parliament on
Birmingham Schools. Department for education.
https://www.gov.uk/government/speeches/birmingham-schools-secretary-of-state-for-
educations-statement
Granoulhac, F. (2017). Excellence at what cost? Austerity and the reform of the school system
in England (2010–2016). The Political Quarterly 88: 434–442.
Guo-Brennan, L. , & Guo-Brennan, M. (2021). Leading welcoming and inclusive schools for
newcomer students: a conceptual framework. Leadership and Policy in Schools 20(1): 57–75.
Hall, S. (1997). Race, the Floating Signifier. Northampton, MA: (Transcript featuring Stuart Hall)
(Media Education Foundation), https://www.mediaed.org/transcripts/Stuart-Hall-Race-the-
Floating-Signifier-Transcript.pdf (Accessed 06/9/19 ).
Hall, S. (1999). Whose heritage? Un-settling ‘the heritage’, re-imagining the post-nation. Third
Text 13(49): 3–13.

Hall, S. (2007). Living with difference: Stuart Hall in conversation with Bill Schwarz. Soundings
37(37): 148–158.
Hall, C. , & Rose, S. O. , Eds. (2006). At Home with the Empire: Metropolitan Culture and the
Imperial World. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Hayden, M. , Thompson, J. , & Williams, G. (2003). Student perceptions of international
education: a comparison by course of Study Undertaken. Journal of Research in International
Education 2(2): 205–232.
Hill, D. (2007). Multicultural and international education: never the twain shall meet?
International Review of Education 53(3): 245–264.
Hill, D. , & Kumar, R. , Eds. (2009). Global Neoliberalism and Education and Its Consequences.
Abingdon: Routledge.
Hirsch, E. D. (1987). Cultural Literacy: What Every American Needs to Know. Boston: Houghton
Mifflin.
Hirsch, E. D. (1996). The Schools We Need: And Why We Don’t Have Them. New York:
Doubleday.
HM Government . (2015a). Revised Prevent Duty Guidance for England and Wales. London:
Crown Copyright. Revised 16 July 2015.
HM Government . (2015b). Counter-Terrorism and Security Act. London: Crown Copyright.
HM Government (HMG) . (2011). Prevent Strategy. London: Stationary Office.
Hursh, D. (2019). The Rise of Authoritarian Neoliberalism. In J. Wilkinson , R. Niesche , & S.
Eacott (Eds.), Challenges for Public Education: Reconceptualising Educational Leadership,
Policy and Social Justice as Resources for Hope (pp. 145–158). Abingdon: Routledge.
Iffath, H. (2020). ‘Miss, what’s colonialism?’: confronting the English literary heritage in the
classroom. Changing English 27(4): 369–382.
Jerome, L. , Elwick, A. , & Kazim, R. (2019). The impact of the prevent duty on schools: a
review of the evidence. British Educational Research Journal 45(4): 821–837.
Kanu, Y. , Ed. (2006). Curriculum as Cultural Practice: Postcolonial Imaginations. Toronto,
Buffalo, London: University of Toronto Press.
Keddie, A. (2014). The politics of Britishness: multiculturalism, schooling and social cohesion.
British Educational Research Journal 40(3): 539–554.
Kelly, A. V. (2009). The Curriculum: Theory and Practice (5th ed.). London: Sage.
Kulz, C. (2021). Everyday erosions: neoliberal political rationality, democratic decline and the
multi-academy trust. British Journal of Sociology of Education 42(1): 66–81.
Kundnani, A. (2007). The End of Tolerance: Racism in 21st Century Britain. London: Pluto
Press.
Lander, V. (2016). Introduction to fundamental British values. Journal of Education for Teaching
42(3): 274–279.
Lefebvre, H. (1991). The Production of Space. Oxford: Blackwell.
Lingard, B. , Martino, W. , & Rezai-Rashti, G. (2013). Testing regimes, accountabilities and
education policy: commensurate global and national developments. Journal of Education Policy
28(5): 539–556.
Lynch, J. (1989). Multicultural Education in a Global Society. Barcombe: The Falmer Press.
Maldonado-Torres, N. (2007). On the coloniality of being. Cultural Studies 21(2–3): 240–270.
Marshall, H. (2007). The Global Education Terminology Debate: Exploring Some of the Issues.
In M. Hayden , J. Thompson , & J. Levy (Eds.), The Sage Handbook of Research in
International Education (pp. 38–50). London: Sage.
Massey, D. (2005). For Space. London: Sage.
Matas, C. P. , & S. Bridges . (2008). Multicultural capital in middle schooling. The International
Journal of Diversity in Organisations, Communities and Nations 8(2): 1–18.
Maylor, U. (2016). ‘I’d worry about how to teach it’: British values in English classrooms. Journal
of Education for Teaching 42(3): 314–328.
McCarthy, C. (1988). The Uses of Culture: Education and the Limits of Ethnic Affiliation. Oxon:
Routledge.
McGhee, D. , & Zhang, S. (2017). Nurturing resilient future citizens through value consistency
vs. the retreat from multiculturalism and securitisation in the promotion of British values in
schools in the UK. Citizenship Studies 21(8): 937–950.
Meetoo, V. (2020). Negotiating the diversity of ‘everyday’ multiculturalism: teachers’ enactments
in an inner city secondary school. Race Ethnicity and Education 23(2): 261–279.

Merryfield, M. M. , & Subedi, B. (2001). Decolonizing the Mind for World-Centered Global
Education. In E. W. Ross (Ed.), The Social Studies Curriculum: Purposes, Problems, and
Possibilities (Revised ed., pp. 277–287). Albany, NY: State University of New York Press.
Miah, S. (2017). The Prevent Policy and the Values Discourse: Muslims and Racial
Governmentality. In M. M. Ghaill , & C. Haywood (Eds.), Muslim Students, Education and
Neoliberalism (pp. 131–144). London: Palgrave Macmillan.
Moncrieffe, M. , Asare, Y. , Dunford, R. , Harper, J. , Biggs, S. , Patel, B. , Brooks, E. , et al. ,
Eds. (2020). Decolonising the Curriculum: Teaching and Learning about Race Equality. Vol. 3.
Falmer: University of Brighton.
Myers, K. (2015). Struggles for a Past: Irish and Afro-Caribbean Histories in England,
1951–2000. Manchester: Manchester University Press.
Nagre, K. (2023). (Mis)educating England: eurocentric narratives in secondary school history
textbooks. Race Ethnicity and Education.
Ofsted . (2019). The Education Inspection Framework. Manchester: Crown Copyright
Oord, L. V. (2008). After culture: intergroup encounters in education. Journal of Research in
International Education 7(2): 131–147.
Pak, K. , & Ravitch, S. (2021). Critical Leadership Praxis for Educational and Social Change.
New York: Teachers College Press.
Panjwani, F. (2016). “Towards an overlapping consensus: Muslim teachers’ views on
fundamental British values.” Journal of Education for Teaching 42(3): 329–340.
Resnik, J. (2009). Multicultural education - good for business but not for the state? The IB
curriculum and global capitalism. British Journal of Educational Studies 57(3): 217–244.
Richardson, R. (2015). British values and British identity muddles, mixtures and ways ahead.
London Review of Education 13(2): 37–48.
Rizvi, F. , & B. Lingard . (2010). Globalizing Education Policy. London: Routledge.
Robertson, S. L. (2006). Absences and imaginings: the production of knowledge on
globalisation and education. Globalisation, Societies and Education 4(2): 303–318.
Said, E. W. (2003). Orientalism. London: Penguin.
Sant, E. , & Hanley, C. (2018). Political assumptions underlying pedagogies of national
education: the case of student teachers teaching ‘British values’ in England. British Educational
Research Journal 44(2): 319–337.
Schwarz, B. (1996). The Expansion of England: Race, Ethnicity and Cultural History. London:
Routledge.
Schwarz, B. (2011). Memories of Empire, Volume I: The White Man’s World. Oxford: Oxford
University Press.
Shackle, S. (1 September 2017). Trojan horse: the real story behind the fake ‘Islamic plot’ to
take over schools. The Guardian. https://www.theguardian.com/world/2017/sep/01/trojan-horse-
the-real-story-behind-the-fake-islamic-plot-to-take-over-schools (Accessed 15 August 2020 ).
Shah, S. (2017). Education of Muslim Students in Turbulent Times. In M. M. Ghaill , & C.
Haywood (Eds.), Muslim Students, Education and Neoliberalism (pp. 51–66). London: Palgrave
Macmillan.
Shakeir, R. Y. , Odendaal, R. T. , & Rosado-Viurques, A. (2021). Decolonizing Educational
Mindsets. In K. Pak , & S. Ravitch (Eds.), Critical Leadership Praxis for Educational and Social
Change (pp. 1–26). New York: Teachers College Press.
Shields, C. M. (2011). Transformative leadership: an introduction. Counterpoints 409: 1–17.
Smith, H. J. (2016). Britishness as racist nativism: a case of the unnamed ‘other’. Journal of
Education for Teaching 42(3): 298–313.
Sobe, N. W. (2015). All that is global is not world culture: accountability systems and
educational apparatuses. Globalisation, Societies and Education 13(1): 135–148.
Struthers, A. E. C. (2017). Teaching British values in our schools: but why not human rights
values? Social and Legal Studies 26(1): 89–110.
Subedi, B. (2013). Decolonizing the curriculum for global perspectives. Educational Theory
63(6): 621–638.
Talbot, D. (2022). From ‘our Island story’ to ‘citizens of nowhere’: culture, identity and English
literature. Changing English 29(3): 285–296.
The Challenge, SchoolDash, The iCoCo Foundation . (2017). Understanding School
Segregation in England: 2011 to 2016.
https://www.belongnetwork.co.uk/resources/understanding-school-segregation-in-england-

2011-to-2016/ (Accessed 15/9/2020 ).
Thomson, P. (2019). Oh to be in England: The Production of an Un-Public State System. In J.
Wilkinson , R. Niesche , & S. Eacott (Eds.), Challenges for Public Education: Reconceptualising
Educational Leadership, Policy and Social Justice as Resources for Hope (pp. 101–115).
Abingdon, Routledge.
Tomlinson, S. (2018). Enoch Powell, empires, immigrants and education. Race Ethnicity and
Education 21(1): 1–14.
Tomlinson, S. (2019). Education and Race: from Empire to Brexit. Bristol: Policy Press.
Tröhler, D. (2020). National literacies, or modern education and the art of fabricating national
minds. Journal of Curriculum Studies 52(5): 620–635.
Vincent, C. (2019). Tea and the Queen? Fundamental British Values, Schools and Citizenship.
Bristol: Policy Press.
Virdee, S. , & McGeever, B. (2018). Racism, crisis, Brexit. Ethnic and Racial Studies 41(10):
1802–1819.
Winter, C. (2018). Disrupting colonial discourses in the geography curriculum during the
introduction of British Values policy in schools. Journal of Curriculum Studies. 50(4): 456–475.
Winter, C. (2023). The geography GCSE curriculum in England: a white curriculum of deceit.
Whiteness and Education 8(2): 313–331.
Winter, C. , & Mills, C. (2020). The Psy-security-curriculum ensemble: British values curriculum
policy in English schools. Journal of Education Policy 35(1): 46–67.
Young, M. (2014). What is a curriculum and what can it do? The Curriculum Journal 25(1):
7–13.




An Empirical Study of Leadership, Ethos and Cultural Capital in
Institution A
Allcott, T. (1992). Anti-Racism in Education: The Search for Policy in Practice. In D. Gill , B.
Maylor , & M. Blair (Eds.), Racism and Education: Structures and Strategies (pp. 169–182).
London: Sage.
Amthor, F. R. , & Roxas, K. (2016). Multicultural education and newcomer youth: re-imagining a
more inclusive vision for immigrant and refugee students. Educational Studies 52(2): 155–176.
Apple, M. W. (2013). Official Knowledge: Democratic Education in a Conservative Age (2nd
ed.). New York: Routledge.
Arar, K. (2020). School Leadership for Refugees’ Education– Social Justice Leadership for
Immigrants, Migrants and Refugees. London: Routledge.
Ball, S. (2003). The teacher's soul and the terrors of performativity. Journal of Education Policy
18(2): 215–228.
Barnard, M. (2021). Re(dis)covering multicultural capital in Leicester’s schools and colleges:
historical legacies and possibilities for change. British Journal of Educational Studies 69(3):
347–364.
Bhopal, K. (2018). White Privilege: The Myth of a Post-Racial Society. Bristol: Policy Press.
Billig, M. (1995). Banal Nationalism. London: Sage Publications.
Bonnett, A. (2000). White Identities: Historical and International Perspectives. Harlow: Pearson
Education Limited.
Bourdieu, P. (1986). The Forms of Capital. In S. J. Ball (Ed.), The RoutledgeFalmer Reader in
Sociology of Education (pp. 15–29). London: RoutledgeFalmer.
Bourdieu, P. (1989). Social space and symbolic power. Sociological Theory 7(1): 14–25.
Bourdieu, P. , & Wacquant, L. J. D. (1992). An Invitation to Reflexive Sociology. Cambridge:
Polity Press.
Braidotti, R. (2013). Posthuman humanities. European Educational Research Journal 12(1):
1–19.
Chakrabarty, D. (2000). Provincializing Europe: Postcolonial Thought and Historical Difference.
Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press.
Clarke, M. , & Lyon, C. H. (2023). The evil of authoritarian education: banality and compliance in
the neoliberal era. FORUM 65(1): 130–139.

Cushing, I. (2022). Word rich or word poor? Deficit discourses, raciolinguistic ideologies and the
resurgence of the ‘word gap’ in England’s education policy. Critical Inquiry in Language Studies
20(4): 305–331.
DfE . (2014). Promoting Fundamental British Values as Part of SMSC in Schools. Departmental
Advice for Maintained Schools. DFE-00679-2014. London: Crown Copyright.
Dyer, R. (1997). White. London: Routledge.
Elton-Chalcraft, S. , Vini, L. , Lynn, R. , Warner, D. , & Whitworth, L. (2017). To promote, or not
to promote British values? Teachers’ standards, diversity and teacher education. British
Educational Research Journal 43(1): 29–48.
García-Carmona, M. , Fuentes-Mayorga, N. , & Rodríguez-García, N. (2021). Educational
leadership for social justice in multicultural contexts: the case of Melilla, Spain. Leadership and
Policy in Schools 20(1): 76–94.
Ghaill, M. M. , & Haywood, C. , Eds. (2017). Muslim Students, Education and Neoliberalism:
Schooling a ‘Suspect Community’. London: Palgrave Macmillan.
Guo-Brennan, L. , & Guo-Brennan, M. (2019). Global Citizenship Education and Social Justice
for Immigrant Students: Implications for Administration, Leadership and Teaching in Schools. In
K. Arar , & K. Beycioglu (Eds.), Handbook on Promoting Social Justice in Education (pp. 1–20).
Springer International Publishing.
Guo-Brennan, L. , & Guo-Brennan, M. (2021). Leading welcoming and inclusive schools for
newcomer students: a conceptual framework. Leadership and Policy in Schools 20(1): 57–75.
Hall, S. (1999). Whose heritage? Un-settling ‘the heritage’, re-imagining the post-nation. Third
Text 13(49): 3–13.
Joppke, C. (2017). Is Multiculturalism Dead? Cambridge: Polity Press.
Kulz, C. (2021). Everyday erosions: neoliberal political rationality, democratic decline and the
Multi-Academy Trust. British Journal of Sociology of Education 42(1): 66–81.
Lander, V. (2016). Introduction to fundamental British values. Journal of Education for Teaching
42(3): 274–279.
Lefebvre, H. (1991). The Production of Space. Oxford: Blackwell.
Leicestershire, L. E. A. (1985). Report of the Working Party on Multicultural Education.
Maldonado-Torres, N. (2007). On the coloniality of being. Cultural Studies 21(2–3): 240–270.
Maylor, U. (2010). Notions of diversity, British identities and citizenship belonging. Race
Ethnicity and Education 13(2): 233–252.
McCartney, H. B. , & Morgan-Owen, D. G. (2017). Commemorating the centenary of the first
world war: national and trans-national perspectives. War & Society 36(4): 235–238.
Meghji, A. (2019). Encoding and decoding black and white cultural capitals: black middle-class
experiences. Cultural Sociology 13(1): 3–19.
Myers, K. (2015). Struggles for a Past: Irish and Afro-Caribbean Histories in England,
1951–2000. Manchester: Manchester University Press.
Nieto, S. , Bode, P. , Kang, E. , & Raible, J. (2008). Identity, Community and Diversity:
Retheorizing Multicultural Curriculum for the Postmodern Era. In F. M. Connelly , M. F. He , & J.
Phillion (Eds.), The Sage Handbook of Curriculum and Instruction (pp. 176–197). Thousand
Oaks, CA: Sage.
Pak, K. , & Ravitch, S. (2021). Critical Leadership Praxis for Educational and Social Change.
New York: Teachers College Press.
Panjwani, F. (2016). Towards an overlapping consensus: Muslim teachers’ views on
fundamental British values. Journal of Education for Teaching 42(3): 329–340.
Reay, D. (2022). The slide to authoritarianism in English schools. FORUM 64(3): 126–139.
Richardson, R. (2015). British values and British identity muddles, mixtures and ways ahead.
London Review of Education 13(2): 37–48.
Said, E. W. (2003). Orientalism. London: Penguin.
Schwarz, B. (1996). The Expansion of England: Race, Ethnicity and Cultural History. London:
Routledge.
Serendipity . (n.d.). https://www.serendipity-uk.com
Shapiro, S. , & MacDonald, M. T. (2017). From deficit to asset: locating discursive resistance in
a refugee-background student’s written and oral narrative. Journal of Language, Identity &
Education 16(2): 80–93.
Shields, C. M. (2011). Transformative leadership: an introduction. Counterpoints 409: 1–17

Smith, L. (2009) Class, Heritage and the negotiation of place. Conference paper presented to
the Missing Out on Heritage: socio-economic Status and Heritage Participation Conference,
English Heritage, March 2009.
https://www.researchgate.net/profile/Laurajane_Smith/publication/299410856_Class_Heritage_
and_the_Negotiation_of_Place/links/56f4e17508ae7c1fda2d7afc/Class-Heritage-and-the-
Negotiation-of-Place.pdf
Sriprakash, A. , Rudolph, S. , & Gerrard, J. (2022). Whiteness and the Pedagogies of the State.
In Learning Whiteness: Education and the Settler Colonial State (pp. 14–28). London: Pluto
Press.
Struthers, A. E. C. (2017). Teaching British values in our schools: but why not human rights
values? Social and Legal Studies 26(1): 89–110.
Subedi, B. (2013). Decolonizing the curriculum for global perspectives. Educational Theory
63(6): 621–638.
Tomlinson, S. (2005). Race, ethnicity and education under New Labour, Oxford Review of
Education 31(1): 153–171.
Tröhler, D. (2020). National literacies, or modern education and the art of fabricating national
minds. Journal of Curriculum Studies 52(5): 620–635.
Wallace, D. (2020). The diversity trap? Critical explorations of black male teachers’ negotiations
of leadership and learning in London state schools. Race Ethnicity and Education 23(3):
345–366.
Welply, O. (2023). English as an additional language (EAL): Decolonising provision and
practice. The Curriculum Journal 34: 62–82.
Winter, J. (2008). Foreword: historical remembrance in the twenty-first century. The annals of
the American Academy of Political and Social Science 617: 6–13.
Winter, C. , & Mills, C. (2020). The Psy-security-curriculum ensemble: British values curriculum
policy in English schools. Journal of Education Policy 35(1): 46–67.
Yosso, T. J. (2006). Whose culture has capital? a critical race theory discussion of community
cultural wealth. Race, Ethnicity and Education 8(1): 69–91.




An Empirical Study of Leadership, Ethos and Cultural Capital in
Institution B
Addai-Sebo, A. (2012). New African, London, issue 521: 8–9.
Amthor, F. R. , & Roxas, K. (2016). Multicultural education and newcomer youth: re-imagining a
more inclusive vision for immigrant and refugee students. Educational Studies, 52(2), 155–176.
Apple, M. W. (2013). Official Knowledge: Democratic Education in a Conservative Age (2nd
ed.). New York: Routledge.
Arar, K. (2020). School Leadership for Refugees’ Education– Social Justice Leadership for
Immigrants, Migrants and Refugees. London: Routledge.
Audit Commission . (2012). Building Schools for the Future (3): Leicester City Council, Audit
2011/12. London: Audit Commission Publishing Team.
http://www.cabinet.leicester.gov.uk/(S(4qabzrbatpcasl33xdvy4v2a))/documents/s48889/
(Accessed 06/09/23 ).
Barnard, M. (2021). Re(dis)covering multicultural capital in Leicester’s schools and colleges:
historical legacies and possibilities for change. British Journal of Educational Studies 69(3):
347–364.
Bhopal, K. (2018). White Privilege: The Myth of a Post-Racial Society. Bristol: Policy Press.
Billig, M. (1995). Banal Nationalism. London: Sage Publications.
Bourdieu, P. (1986). The Forms of Capital. In S. J. Ball (Ed.), The RoutledgeFalmer Reader in
Sociology of Education (pp. 15–29). London: RoutledgeFalmer.
Bourdieu, P. (1990). In Other Words. Stanford: Stanford University Press.
Bourdieu, P. & Wacquant, L. J. D. (1992). An Invitation to Reflexive Sociology. Cambridge:
Polity Press.
Cameron, D. (2014). British values: article by David Cameron.
https://www.gov.uk/government/news/british-values-article-by-david-cameron (Accessed

14/4/2020 )
Cartwright, A. (2022). A theory of racialized cultural capital. Sociological Inquiry 92(2): 317–340.
Chakrabarty, D. (2000). Provincializing Europe: Postcolonial Thought and Historical Difference.
Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press.
Dyer, R. (1997). White. London: Routledge.
García-Carmona, M. , Fuentes-Mayorga, N. , & Rodríguez-García, N. (2021). Educational
leadership for social justice in multicultural contexts: the case of Melilla, Spain. Leadership and
Policy in Schools 20(1): 76–94.
Ghelani, T. (2002). Performing ‘Blackness’: the appropriation of commodified African-American
culture by South Asian youth in Britain. The University of Birmingham, M.Phil.
Gilroy, P. (2005). Postcolonial Melancholia. New York: Columbia University Press.
Hall, S. (1997). Race, the Floating Signifier. Northampton, MA: (Transcript featuring Stuart Hall)
(Media Education Foundation). https://www.mediaed.org/transcripts/Stuart-Hall-Race-the-
Floating-Signifier-Transcript.pdf (Accessed 06/09/19 ).
Hall, S. (1999). Whose heritage? Un-settling ‘the heritage’, re-imagining the post-nation. Third
Text 13(49): 3–13.
Iffath, H. (2020). ‘Miss, what’s colonialism?’: confronting the English literary heritage in the
classroom. Changing English 27(4): 369–382.
Jerome, L. , Elwick, A. , & Kazim, R. (2019). The impact of the prevent duty on schools: a
review of the evidence. British Educational Research Journal 45(4): 821–837.
Joppke, C. (2017). Is Multiculturalism Dead? Cambridge: Polity Press.
Kanu, Y. , Ed. (2006). Curriculum as Cultural Practice: Postcolonial Imaginations. Toronto,
Buffalo, London: University of Toronto Press.
Lander, V. (2016). Introduction to fundamental British values. Journal of Education for Teaching
42(3): 274–279.
Lefebvre, H. (1991). The Production of Space. Oxford: Blackwell.
Maldonado-Torres, N. (2007). On the coloniality of being. Cultural Studies 21(2–3): 240–270.
Meetoo, V. (2020). Negotiating the diversity of ‘everyday’ multiculturalism: teachers’ enactments
in an inner city secondary school. Race Ethnicity and Education 23(2): 261–279.
Meghji, A. (2019). Encoding and decoding black and white cultural capitals: Black middle-class
experiences. Cultural Sociology, 13(1): 3–19.
Modood, T. (1994). Political blackness and British Asians. Sociology 28(4): 859–876.
Nagre, K. (2023). (Mis)educating England: eurocentric narratives in secondary school history
textbooks. Race Ethnicity and Education.
Pak, K. , & Ravitch, S. (2021). Critical Leadership Praxis for Educational and Social Change.
New York: Teachers College Press.
Said, E. W. (2003). Orientalism. London: Penguin.
Schwarz, B. (2011). Memories of Empire, Volume I: The White Man’s World. Oxford: Oxford
University Press.
Shapiro, S. , & MacDonald, M. T. (2017). From deficit to asset: locating discursive resistance in
a refugee-background student’s written and oral narrative. Journal of Language, Identity &
Education 16(2): 80–93.
Shields, C. M. (2011). Transformative leadership: an introduction. Counterpoints 409: 1–17.
Smith, L. (2009). Class, heritage and the negotiation of place. Conference paper presented to
the Missing Out on Heritage: Socio-Economic Status and Heritage Participation Conference,
English Heritage, March 2009.
https://www.researchgate.net/profile/Laurajane_Smith/publication/299410856_Class_Heritage_
and_the_Negotiation_of_Place/links/56f4e17508ae7c1fda2d7afc/Class-Heritage-and-the-
Negotiation-of-Place.pdf (Accessed 28/07/23 ).
Subedi, B. (2013). Decolonizing the curriculum for global perspectives. Educational Theory
63(6): 621–638.
Talbot, D. (2022). From ‘our Island story’ to ‘citizens of nowhere’: culture, identity and English
literature. Changing English 29(3): 285–296.
Thomson, P. (2019). Oh to be in England: The Production of an Un-Public State System. In J.
Wilkinson , R. Niesche , & S. Eacott (Eds.), Challenges for Public Education: Reconceptualising
Educational Leadership, Policy and Social Justice as Resources for Hope (pp. 101–115),
Abingdon: Routledge.

Tomlinson, S. (2005). Race, ethnicity and education under new labour, Oxford Review of
Education 31(1): 153–171.
Tomlinson, S. (2019). Education and Race: from Empire to Brexit. Bristol: Policy Press.
Tröhler, D. (2020). National literacies, or modern education and the art of fabricating national
minds. Journal of Curriculum Studies 52(5): 620–635.
Vincent, C. (2019). Tea and the Queen? Fundamental British Values, Schools and Citizenship.
Bristol: Policy Press.
Welply, O. (2023). English as an additional language (EAL): decolonising provision and
practice. The Curriculum Journal 34: 62–82.
Williams, M. T. , Skinta, M. D. , & Martin-Willett, R. (2021). After pierce and sue: a revised racial
microaggressions taxonomy. Perspectives on Psychological Science 16(5): 991–1007.
Winter, J. (2008). Foreword: historical remembrance in the twenty-first century. The annals of
the American Academy of Political and Social Science 617: 6–13.
Winter, C. (2018). Disrupting colonial discourses in the geography curriculum during the
introduction of British Values policy in schools. Journal of Curriculum Studies 50(4): 456–475.
Winter, C. , & Mills, C. (2020). The Psy-security-curriculum ensemble: British values curriculum
policy in English schools. Journal of Education Policy 35(1): 46–67.




An Empirical Study of Leadership, Ethos and Cultural Capital in
Institution C
Ahmed, K. (2017). Schooling the Enemy Within: Politics and Pedagogy. In M. M. Ghaill and C.
Haywood (Eds.), Muslim Students, Education and Neoliberalism (pp. 115–130). London:
Palgrave Macmillan.
Amthor, F. R. , & Roxas, K. (2016). Multicultural education and newcomer youth: re-imagining a
more inclusive vision for immigrant and refugee students. Educational Studies 52(2): 155–176.
Apple, M. W. , Biesta, G. , Bright, D. , Giroux, H. A. , Heffernan, A. , McLaren, P. , Riddle, S. , &
Yeatman, A. (2022). Reflections on contemporary challenges and possibilities for democracy
and education. Journal of Educational Administration and History 54(3): 245–262.
Ball, S. (2003). The teacher’s soul and the terrors of performativity. Journal of Education Policy
18(2): 215–228.
Bhopal, K. 2018. White Privilege: The Myth of a Post-Racial Society. Bristol: Policy Press.
Billig, M. (1995). Banal Nationalism. London: Sage Publications.
Blyth, M. (2013). Austerity: The History of a Dangerous Idea. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Bourdieu, P. (1985). The social space and the genesis of groups. Theory and Society 14(6):
723–744.
Bourdieu, P. (1986). The Forms of Capital. In S. J. Ball (Ed.), The RoutledgeFalmer Reader in
Sociology of Education (pp. 15–29). London: RoutledgeFalmer.
Bourdieu, P. (1989). Social space and symbolic power. Sociological Theory 7(1): 14–25.
Bourdieu, P. (1990). In Other Words. Stanford: Stanford University Press.
Bourdieu, P. , & Wacquant, L. J. D. (1992). An Invitation to Reflexive Sociology. Cambridge:
Polity Press.
Bourdieu, P. (1998). Acts of Resistance. Cambridge: Polity Press.
Braidotti, R. (2013). Posthuman humanities. European Educational Research Journal 12(1),
1–19.
Cameron, D. (2014). British values: article by David Cameron. GOV.UK.
https://www.gov.uk/government/news/british-values-article-by-david-cameron (Accessed
14/04/2020 )
Chakrabarty, D. (2000). Provincializing Europe: Postcolonial Thought and Historical Difference.
Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press.
Department for Education . (2019). School workforce in England: November 2018. London:
Department for Education. https://www.gov.uk/government/statistics/school-workforce-in-
england-november-2018
Dyer, R. (1997). White. London: Routledge.

Eacott, S. (2013). Towards a theory of school leadership practice: a Bourdieusian perspective.
Journal of Educational Administration and History 45(2): 174–188.
EduCare . (n.d.). Equality & diversity training. https://www.educare.co.uk/courses/equality-and-
diversity
Granoulhac, F. (2017). Excellence at what cost? austerity and the reform of the school system
in England (2010–2016). The Political Quarterly 88: 434–442.
Guo-Brennan, L. , & Guo-Brennan, M. (2019). Global Citizenship Education and Social Justice
for Immigrant Students: Implications for Administration, Leadership and Teaching in Schools. In
K. Arar & K. Beycioglu (Eds.), Handbook on Promoting Social Justice in Education (pp. 1–20).
Springer International Publishing.
Guo-Brennan, L. , & Guo-Brennan, M. (2021). Leading welcoming and inclusive schools for
newcomer students: a conceptual framework. Leadership and Policy in Schools 20(1): 57–75.
Hall, S. (1999). Whose heritage? Un-settling ‘the heritage’, re-imagining the post-nation. Third
Text 13(49): 3–13.
Haque, Z. 2017. Visible Minorities, Invisible Teachers: BME Teachers in the Education System
in England. London. https://www.nasuwt.org.uk/uploads/assets/uploaded/6576a736-87d3-4a21-
837fd1a1ea4aa2c5.pdf
Jerome, L. , Elwick, A. , & Kazim, R. (2019). The impact of the prevent duty on schools: a
review of the evidence. British Educational Research Journal 45(4): 821–837.
Joppke, C. (2017). Is Multiculturalism Dead? Cambridge: Polity Press.
Lefebvre, H. (1991). The Production of Space. Oxford: Blackwell.
Leicestershire, L.E.A. (1985). Report of the Working Party on Multicultural Education.
Maldonado-Torres, N. (2007). On the coloniality of being. Cultural Studies 21(2–3): 240–270.
Massey, D. (2005). For Space. London: Sage.
Meir, D. (2018). Further education and inclusive practice: past experiences, current issues and
future concerns. Research in Post-Compulsory Education 23(3): 328–347.
Moncrieffe, M. , Asare, Y. , Dunford, R. , Harper, J. , Biggs, S. , Patel, B. , Brooks, E. , et al. ,
Eds. (2020). Decolonising the Curriculum: Teaching and Learning about Race-Equality. Vol. 3.
Falmer: University of Brighton.
O'Leary, M. & Rami, J. (2017). The Impact of Austerity in Further Education: Cross-Cultural
Perspectives from England and Ireland. In B. Bartram (Ed.), International and Comparative
Education: Contemporary Issues and Debates (1st ed., pp. 74–86). Abingdon: Routledge.
Pak, K. , & Ravitch, S. (2021). Critical Leadership Praxis for Educational and Social Change.
New York: Teachers College Press.
Reay, D. , Hollingworth, S. , Williams, K. , et al. (2007). ‘A darker shade of pale?’ Whiteness, the
middle classes and multi-ethnic inner city schooling. Sociology 41(6): 1041–1060.
Said, E. W. (2003). Orientalism. London: Penguin.
Schwarz, B. (1996). The Expansion of England: Race, Ethnicity and Cultural History. London:
Routledge.
Shapiro, S. & MacDonald, M.T. (2017). From deficit to asset: locating discursive resistance in a
refugee-background student’s written and oral narrative. Journal of Language, Identity &
Education 16(2): 80–93.
Shields, C. M. (2011). Transformative leadership: an introduction. Counterpoints 409: 1–17.
Subedi, B. (2013). Decolonizing the curriculum for global perspectives. Educational Theory
63(6): 621–638.
Talbot, D. (2022). From ‘our island story’ to ‘citizens of nowhere’: culture, identity and English
literature. Changing English 29(3): 285–296.
Tomlinson, S. (2005). Education in a Post-welfare Society (2nd edn.). Maidenhead: Open
University Press.
Tröhler, D. (2020). National literacies, or modern education and the art of fabricating national
minds. Journal of Curriculum Studies 52(5): 620–635.
Vieler-Porter, C.G. (2020). The Under-Representation of Black and Minority Ethnic Educators in
Education: Chance, Coincidence or Design? Abingdon: Routledge.
Wallace, D. (2020). The diversity trap? Critical explorations of black male teachers’ negotiations
of leadership and learning in London state schools. Race Ethnicity and Education 23(3):
345–366.
Welply, O. (2023). English as an additional language (EAL): Decolonising provision and
practice. The Curriculum Journal 34: 62–82.

What is Prevent? (2019). https://www.ltai.info/what-is-prevent/
Winter, C & Mills, C . (2020). The Psy-security-curriculum ensemble: British values curriculum
policy in English schools. Journal of Education Policy 35(1): 46–67.




Cultural Emancipation
Apple, M.W. (2013). Official Knowledge: Democratic Education in a Conservative Age (2nd ed.).
New York: Routledge.
Apple, M. W. , Biesta, G. , Bright, D. , Giroux, H. A. , Heffernan, A. , McLaren, P. , Riddle, S. , &
Yeatman, A. (2022). Reflections on contemporary challenges and possibilities for democracy
and education. Journal of Educational Administration and History 54(3): 245–262.
Bhopal, K. (2018). White Privilege: The Myth of a Post-Racial Society. Bristol: Policy Press.
Bonnett, A. (2000). White Identities: Historical and International Perspectives. Harlow: Pearson
Education Limited.
Bourdieu, P. (1986). The Forms of Capital. In S. J. Ball (Ed.), The RoutledgeFalmer Reader in
Sociology of Education (pp. 15–29). London: RoutledgeFalmer.
Bourdieu, P. (1990). In Other Words. Stanford: Stanford University Press.
Bourdieu, P. , & Wacquant, L. J. D. (1992). An Invitation to Reflexive Sociology. Cambridge:
Polity Press.
Bristol, L. (2012). Postcolonial Thought: A Theoretical and Methodological Means for Thinking
through Culturally Ethical Research. In J. Lavia , & S. Mahlomaholo (Eds.), Culture, Education,
and Community: Expressions of the Postcolonial Imagination (pp. 15–32). New York: Palgrave
Macmillan.
Chakrabarty, D. (2000). Provincializing Europe: Postcolonial Thought and Historical Difference.
Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press.
Dyer, R. (1997). White. London: Routledge.
Gilroy, P. (2005). Postcolonial Melancholia. New York: Columbia University Press.
Hall, S. (1997). Race, the Floating Signifier. Northampton, MA: (Transcript featuring Stuart Hall)
(Media Education Foundation). https://www.mediaed.org/transcripts/Stuart-Hall-Race-the-
Floating-Signifier-Transcript.pdf (Accessed 06/09/19 ).
Hall, S. (1999). Whose heritage? Un-settling ‘the heritage’, re-imagining the post-nation. Third
Text 13(49): 3–13.
Hursh, D. (2019). The Rise of Authoritarian Neoliberalism. In J. Wilkinson R. Niesche , & S.
Eacott (Eds.), Challenges for Public Education: Reconceptualising Educational Leadership,
Policy and Social Justice as Resources for Hope (pp. 145–158). Abingdon: Routledge.
Kulz, C. (2021). Everyday erosions: neoliberal political rationality, democratic decline and the
Multi-Academy Trust. British Journal of Sociology of Education 42(1): 66–81.
Lefebvre, H. (1991). The Production of Space. Oxford: Blackwell.
Maldonado-Torres, N. (2007). On the coloniality of being. Cultural Studies 21(2–3): 240–270.
Meetoo, V. (2020). Negotiating the diversity of ‘everyday’ multiculturalism: Teachers’
enactments in an inner city secondary school. Race Ethnicity and Education 23(2): 261–279.
Meghji, A. (2019). Encoding and decoding black and white cultural capitals: black middle-class
experiences. Cultural Sociology 13(1): 3–19.
Reay, D. (2022). The slide to authoritarianism in English schools. FORUM 64(3): 126–139.
Said, E. W. (2003). Orientalism. London: Penguin.
Schwarz, B. (1996). The Expansion of England: Race, Ethnicity and Cultural History. London:
Routledge.
Shields, C. M. (2011). Transformative leadership: an introduction. Counterpoints 409: 1–17.
Sriprakash, A. , Rudolph, S. , & Gerrard, J. (2022). Whiteness and the Pedagogies of the State.
In Learning Whiteness: Education and the Settler Colonial State (pp. 14–28). London: Pluto
Press.
Subedi, B. (2013). Decolonizing the curriculum for global perspectives. Educational Theory
63(6): 621–638.
Tomlinson, S. 2019. Education and Race: From Empire to Brexit. Bristol: Policy Press.

Werbner, P. (2013). Everyday multiculturalism: theorising the difference between
‘intersectionality’ and ‘multiple identities’. Ethnicities 13(40): 401–419.
Winter, C. , & Mills, C. (2020). The Psy-security-curriculum ensemble: British values curriculum
policy in English schools. Journal of Education Policy 35(1): 46–67.
Yancy, G. (2017). Black Bodies, White Gazes: The Continuing Significance of Race in America
(2nd ed.). Lanham: Rowman & Littlefield.