Pakistan Social Sciences Review                        P-ISSN 2664-0422
    October-December 2021, Vol. 5, No. 4 [484-498]                O-ISSN 2664-0430




RESEARCH PAPER
   A Comparative Analysis of Gender and Educational Leadership in
                 Pakistan and the United Kingdom
       Yousra Ashraf 1 Syed M. Jaffer Hassan Gardezi* 2 Farheen Saeed 3

 1. MS Scholar, Department of Humanities, Comsats University Islamabad (Lahore
    Campus), Punjab, Pakistan
 2. Lecturer, Department of Education, Forman Christian College (A Chartered
    University), Lahore, Punjab, Pakistan
 3. Assistant Professor, Writing and Communication Program, Forman Christian College
    (A Chartered University), Lahore, Punjab, Pakistan
 PAPER INFO          ABSTRACT
 Received:           This paper considers gender differences in educational
 July 18, 2021       leadership theory and practice in two countries: Pakistan and
 Accepted:           United Kingdom. The differences are highlighted and explored
 November 20, 2021   through a comparative analysis of gender roles and its multitude
 Online:
                     effects on women. By undertaking the analysis, the research
 November 24, 2021
                     brings forth the different issues that are hampering the progress
 Keywords:
                     of women in educational leadership roles; the exacting demands
Education and
Leadership,          of the developed world that still favor men over women and the
Educational          societal frameworks in developing countries like Pakistan. The
Attainment,          research repeatedly delves into the issue of differential treatment
Gender               by including statistics and other insights to further inform the
Differences          main hypothesis of the present research. The breadth of issues
 *Corresponding      faced by women from both countries paint two stark but
 Author              different realities. Moreover, the paper offers solutions in terms
 syedjaffergardezi   of what work needs to be done towards a more thoughtful
 @gmail.com          understanding of leadership, in both countries.
Introduction

        This paper attempts to investigate the significance of gender and leadership
in the field of education at a global level. It also looks at gender differences and its
effects in the representation of women in educational leadership. For this purpose,
two countries Pakistan and the United Kingdom, have been selected as case studies.

         Pakistan and United Kingdom are two different countries with former being
a developing country whereas the latter being a developed country. Not just this,
Pakistan and the UK have religious, cultural, social, and economic differences. The
educational system is different too and both these countries have different problems
in the field of education. However, in this paper we try not only to draw differences

 Pakistan Social Sciences Review (PSSR)            October-December, 2021 Volume 5, Issue 4

but also find the similarities in areas of gender and educational leadership and how
gender plays a role in leadership roles in Pakistan and the UK.

        If we look at the statistics of the two countries, Pakistan has a total population
of 207,684,626 with 51% males and 49% females (National Census, 2017). UK on the
other hand has a population of 67,215,293 with 51% females and 49% males (The
World Bank, 2020). The statistics indicate that almost half of the population in both
countries is female however there are huge differences among these two countries in
educational context. The UK being a first world country is making advances in the
field of education, whereas Pakistan, on the other hand, hosts the highest out of
school children in the world, with about 22.8 million children without access to
education (UNICEF, n.d.). Out of these 22.8 million, 12 million are girls. Females who
manage to go to school, only 13% of them reach grade 9 (Malala Fund, n.d.). There
are various reasons for this, and some of them have been discussed later in this essay.

       In the upcoming sections, let’s try to investigate the connection between
education and cultural change and how gender plays a role in determining
leadership roles in Pakistan and the UK.

Education and Cultural Change

        The promise of educational return and the ability to turn the academic success
into the societal outcomes such as a steady and substantial income along with a status
in the social setup has provided women with the incentive for this rapid
improvement in various areas of academic research. In the latter half of the twentieth
century feminists (both liberal and radical) were seen challenging these traditional
and established gender roles which had a significantly influenced women’s
ambitions and self-esteem and breaking away from the circle of inhibition. Angela
McRobbie conducted a longitudinal study where she compared a women/ girl’s
magazine and she found out a stark difference of expectations that the women of two
different decades had for themselves. In her book The Aftermath of Feminism,
McRobbie further adds how this desire for freedom and zest for education was seen
as leading the women towards “non- heterosexual lifestyle…a subculture”
(McRobbie , 2009) and ambitious women were written off at every turn so as to
hamper their efforts to challenge “heterosexist logics” (McRobbie, Feminism and
Youth Culture: From Jackie to Just 17., 1991). However, this cultural change is yet to
be realized in its complete form in Pakistan.

Gender Issues and Educational leadership in Pakistan

       Robust patriarchal practices in Pakistan have considerably hindered the
progress of women in the education sector, and especially in the leadership cadre
(Khokhar, 2018). According to a report issued in recent years by Academy of
                                             485

    A Comparative Analysis of Gender and Educational Leadership in Pakistan and the United Kingdom

Educational Planning and Management, an organization that works and comes
under the wing of Ministry of Federal Education and Professional Training, about
59% of the teaching staff, up to the degree college level happen to be women, as
compared to male teachers that make up 46% (Pakistan Education Statistics 2016-17,
2017).

        71.5 per cent of the women in Pakistan happen to be young, with age bracket
that ranges from 15-35 years age (National Census, 2017) . Ever since the country’s
independence from British imperialism in 1947, the status and overall standing of
females in Pakistan has changed significantly and are generally found to be enjoying
a much better status but the constancy of female oppression cannot be denied. Only
39 per cent of the total Pakistani woman contribute the labor force participation rate
with, “0.63 in literacy rate of females, 26 per cent female presence in parliament (that
too on reserved seats, very few women in Pakistan are directly elected to the
parliament) and 5 years of female leadership in state out of the last 50 years”
(Manzoor, 2015). Besides these significant figures, Pakistan currently holds 141st
position out of 142 when it comes to female participation to economic development,
132nd overall position in equal educational attainment. Along with that, the country
occupies 119th in health and survival of females and scored the 85th place when it
came political empowerment. These prospects paint a grim picture as Pakistan scored
141 out of 142 countries. (Manzoor, 2015).

        There is a divide between the male and female students’ enrollment rates as
observed in the degree colleges i.e., 56% male students and 44% female students.
(Pakistan Education Statistics 2016-17, 2017). This curve changes and takes a
downward turn when it comes to women assuming leadership roles in Higher
Educational Institutions, where a scarcity of women leaders and role models has been
observed, especially in STEM, engineering and technological sciences related fields,
and a female representation is mostly seen in the departments of natural sciences,
arts, and humanities. The ratio of female workforce to male workforce in Pakistan is
22% to 67.8%, which paints an alarming picture as far as the use of human resource
capital is concerned (Patchamuthu & Grown, 2017).

Education leadership trends in the UK

       Comparing it to the educational leadership trends in the UK, at least one in
five professors has been reported to be a woman (Yousaf & Schmiede, 2017). UK
currently deals with different sets of issues with more than 50% of the country’s non-
professorial academic work muscle constituted by the female populace i.e., 46.8%.
With only 19.8% women assuming the professorial position, it bends the odds of
representation in the favor of male faculty members. A document released by the
University College Union (UCU) looked critically at the current practices in
educational leadership and the accompanied changes, with one of the caveats
concerned with the slower pace of this transition to equalize the ratio and reducing
                                                   486

 Pakistan Social Sciences Review (PSSR)           October-December, 2021 Volume 5, Issue 4

the gap between male and female professor recruitment in Higher Education
institutions, which could easily take up to 40 years (University and College Union,
2013) . Just like in Pakistan, female representation in top-tier educational positions
(Vice Chancellors, Directors, Heads of Departments) becomes significantly lower in
UK than their representation at all other academic level. Many universities in UK
have been found struggling in keeping up with this compromised standard of one in
five professors being female (Yousaf & Schmiede, 2017).

Misalignment between education policy and cultural practices

         Education Policies given and implemented by past governments and present
body of governance in Pakistan have largely contributed to this notion of differential
access to educational leadership positions for men and women. Age old ideologies
are still very much intact, and women are still propelled to sacrifice their jobs to
strengthen their familial roles and are allowed to enter the areas of professions that
are not looked down upon traditionally and are considered as women-oriented jobs
by the larger society, mainly teaching and medicine professions (nursing courses and
MBBS doctors). Many of these young women never get to see their goals come to
fruition as they are married off quiet early after the completion of their baccalaureate
level degrees (Ashraf, 2010). However, modifications were made in 1998 and 2009
education policies to promote gender parity by offering equal opportunities and
same treatment to men and women. It somehow contributed towards opening new
doors for women when it comes to building a career in education and academia
(Farah & Shera, 2007).

        The research carried out by (Hofstede, 2001) sheds a light on the influence of
cultural context on its leader and those he is supposed to be leading. This relationship
informs the practices on the macro, miso and micro education levels as the style and
orientation of a leader and his reflections are highly influential when it comes to
formation of societal beliefs. According to an article in The News, Pakistan’s political
leadership and its citizenry have often dismissed the idea women in positions of
power, hence, marring the confidence of women in the private spheres of life. This
situation of compromised self-confidence is further mirrored in public spheres as
well, where taking orders or letting women have a say in matters of importance is
considered a mortal sin (Khan , 2020). Studies highlight those social, religious, and
cultural conventions and stereotypical role in the larger societal framework impact
the overall representation of women in the education setup. Mobility issues, family
constraints (on who to associate with), career hiatus, childcare duties, sexual
preferences, gender disparity, identity, and cultural politics. Notion around
motherhood which is perceived as the highest achievement for a woman in South
Asian societies, women’s association with the ethics of care, experiences of passive
racism and marginalisation of ethnic minorities are some of the contributing factors
that result in reduced representation. Scarcity of opportunities, lack of leadership
                                            487

    A Comparative Analysis of Gender and Educational Leadership in Pakistan and the United Kingdom

training and negative connotations attached to acquiescence towards the leadership
position of a woman in a professional setting also shape up the representation of
woman in school leadership roles and positions (Mythili, 2017).

System’s preference for men

        The partiality of selection committees when it comes to hiring women in the
fields of science and technology has taken a form of a phenomena that exists and
persists worldwide. Women in Pakistan are more likely to attain jobs in the
humanities, social sciences, or arts departments (Khokhar, 2018). The recruitment
procedures and the hiring processes of the selection panels make it evident that they
find the women’s ability to perform questionable and hold their male counterparts in
a higher regard. Existing cultural biases and ideologies promote these behaviors,
explicitly or implicitly hampering the job prospects of women (Moss-Racusin &
Corrine, 2012). Women are turned down for promotions because according to these
hiring committees they are not highly published (Fox, 2010). Consistency of male
authors is considerably high thereby, providing them an edge when it comes to
landing higher managerial positions that their female counterparts covet (Javin,
2013). It is pertinent to note that science, engineering, and technological education
precincts happen to highly male dominated research zones in Pakistan, and this
could be attributed to the fact that there is not a single distinguished woman scientist
or esteemed researcher of these fields in the country. The journals regarding these
subject areas are handled by the editorial boards, which happen to be heavily
dominated by a male presence too. Beaten by the number game, women working in
these research fields often have to navigate their way in an all-male organizational
setup with role models (that range from none or few and far between). This leaves
them in a precarious position career-wise with no one to look up to professionally or
someone who can offer relevant and sage advice regarding how to climb up the
structures that are based on gendered approaches; favoring one male gender over the
female one (Nazemi, Mortazavi, & Borjalilou, 2012).

Gender Pay Gap in Educational Sector in UK and Pakistan

        However, the gender pay divide across academia continues to grow wider in
the UK and unveils truth of the dismal situation. In 2019, nine out of ten institutions
were reported to be paying their male employees a lot more than their female
counterpart, taking the average median pay divide of 13.7% which 4.6% higher than
the figure of 9.1% reported in 2018 (Amery, 2019). Moreover, recent research data
reveals that 75% of all women Vice-Chancellors (from Higher Education Institutions)
were placed in the last two gross income quartiles, that translate into further problem
related to the gender pay divide (National Education Union, 2018). In UK, women
face professional barriers in the way of their advancement into leadership at the onset
of their careers e.g. by holding a professorship. According to a BBC 2016 report, on
average only one in four professors in the UK Higher Education Institutions were
                                                   488

 Pakistan Social Sciences Review (PSSR)           October-December, 2021 Volume 5, Issue 4

female, when ironically half of the lecturers happen in these universities happen to
be women (Coughlan, 2016). According to an article published by the Diversity and
Inclusion website (2020), Male faculty members happen to be a lot more ambitious
and show willingness towards enlisting and applying for jobs that are hardly ready
for at times whereas the opposite is true for female faculty members. Many
researchers in the UK are of the view that hindrances to woman’s success can be
attributed to biased attitude, lack of ambition (on the woman’s part), multiplicity of
cultural factors, lack of a guidance and support mechanism which leave them in a
position where they lose the power to negotiate. When it comes to education in
Pakistan, the ever-increasing gender pay gaps depict a stark reality. Most concerning
and worrisome are the facts that these divides were seen to be the widest at lower
levels of the educational hierarchy and have seen to be much reduced for secondary
and tertiary education levels (Ahmed A. , 2021). Another news report showcased
economic opportunities and options for females in the country happen to be minimal
when it is struggling to manage and sustain mere 32.7 per cent of the wage inequality
that exists and strongly persists between men and women in the workplaces of all
fields (Ahmed A. , 2019), which is a direct consequence of male dominance within
the subcontinent society, females are regularly discriminated against, resulting in
poor representation, specifically when it comes to their place within entrepreneurial
ventures and professional positions (Manzoor, 2015). Over the years, many women
come to accept their powerlessness. Also, there are those who are not motivated to
pursue a job or prosper in a workspace and prefer their domestic roles, including
responsibility of childcare, household chores etc. (Side & Robbins, 2007).

The Issue of Representation

         Gender equity has always shown to have a positive effect on economic growth
in all the department namely; education, health care and provision of the basic rights
to both gender categories (UNSECO, 2009). The World Bank Organization has
rigorously emphasized upon making hefty investments in education of women. It
will serve as a technique for further development and poverty eradication in the third
world nations as this gives way to improved rates of economic returns and profits
(Oxaal, 1997). Empowerment of female population can only be made possible in all
domains of life when they are allowed to have their most basic right fulfilled i.e., the
right to education (Lopez-Carlos & Zahidi , 2005). In the last century, more countries
have come to realize education as way to build a better world for themselves and are
treating it as a priority. Western countries and some other developed countries have
made great strides and it shows because many women in these areas affirm the fact
that they have attained parity, or at least a semblance of it. However, there are areas
of higher education where minimal participation of women is resulting in under-
representation. To counter it efforts should be made to address the issue on every
scale; policy renewal and research wise (Jacobs, 1996). In most of the developed
countries women are seeing the aftermath of attaining gender parity as their
                                            489

    A Comparative Analysis of Gender and Educational Leadership in Pakistan and the United Kingdom

accessibility to higher education has vastly improved, with more and more numbers
of female students entering in the departments of tertiary students. Enrolled female
proportion in tertiary education stands at 52% while it remains remarkably low in
third world countries and the proportion barely manages to touch 27% (UNESCO,
2002). According to a recent UNESCO released report, women formed a slightly
larger proportion i.e., 53% of students graduating with Bachelors' and Masters'
degrees in 2014. The pace of change remains slow, nearly stagnant and the proportion
of female enrollment rate in PhD programs was reported to drop down to 44 %
(Bastidas, 2021). Of all the researchers in the world, only 30% university researchers
happen to be women. There is an overabundance of female teaching staff at lower
education levels; this overrepresentation stands at 66% in primary education, 54% in
secondary education and presence in tertiary education sector remains markedly
lower with 43% (Bastidas, 2021).

        Men have an overrepresentation in most of the faculty positions in higher
education institutes globally. UNESCO reported the female representation in tertiary
institutions in developing countries to be as lower as 10% for Ghana and 18%
for Pakistan (UNESCO, 2002). The gender disparity tends to be higher in the
developing countries because all the managerial job posts come under the jurisdiction
of males, that guarantees power across the board hence, all the decision-making lies
with them and they are given more opportunities of network building (Gracia, 2009).

Recent Shift in Women Participation

       A recent manifestation of this was noticed in the Coronavirus induced
lockdown period. According to a news report in The Guardian, women research
plummeted to an all-time low. The number of article submissions made from the
female members of the academia took a hit and a dramatic drop was seen whereas,
men were seen to be thriving as their article submission rate and eventually the
acceptance rate increased. Women in Britain have struggled to juggle their workload;
domestically and professionally. Their duties with respect to homemaking, childcare
and family care has pushed them to walk out on research projects, collaborations or
a complete abandonment of research work on their part, thereby slowing their rate
of progress compared to their male colleagues who do not have to bear the brunt of
these additional duties like for instance, homeschooling their children (Fazackerley,
2020). According to Anna Fazackerley, job promotion in universities necessitates
getting published in academic journals and is a crucial measure of determining the
successful outcome rate of researchers in the state's standardized Research Excellence
Framework, which annually gives a funding of around £2bn to these universities
(Fazackerley, 2020).




                                                   490

 Pakistan Social Sciences Review (PSSR)          October-December, 2021 Volume 5, Issue 4

Personal and professional barriers to women’s progress in Pakistan

         Gender disparity in education has put many women at a disadvantaged
position in the countries of South Asia (UNESCO, 2002). World Economic Forum
gave (Lopez-Carlos & Zahidi , 2005) Pakistan 56th slot out of 58 countries showing
propensity towards reducing gender inequality. Gender equality policies exist on
paper and in legislation, extending both genders the similar rights related to
professional environments (NAP, 2004). This mirrors and reflects the socio-cultural
premise of major chunk of the South Asian region and the indigenous culture there.
Elaborating the continuing assumption of gender role in the country, Khalid (2011)
differentiates between two groups; first being the Conservatives, who are in favor of
the marginalization of females, and second group; the Liberals, who harbor a firm
belief in provision of a democratic role and female freedom.

        Quraishi and Kaleem discuss the experiences of female faculty who face
gender discrimination as a daily occurrence and consequently suffer in the process
with lower job satisfaction rates. Women are hardly ever consulted on matters related
to policy and are ousted in decision making processes on regular basis because of
sporadic representation on committees and very few of them come to acquire the
position of chair (Quraishi & Kaleem, 2008) These circumstances are a sign of
undervaluation of female faculty members, but together with this they impede the
sufficient conduit of information towards them. Consequently, female faculty
members in the country learn to be content or drop out of their jobs because they are
overwhelmed by the personal and professional barriers. All these factors constitute a
hierarchical gender inequality model; formed by an extremely conservative national
culture, internal familial dynamics, and external structures of the institutions (Bond,
1996).

The Question of Female Representation in Pakistan

       When it comes to higher education workplace, international research
performed in relation to decision making, which is characterized by the overall
contribution and input of faculty members within the instructional, teaching, and
curricular educational arenas and managerial circles (Keung, 2008), indicate a
shortage of women as authoritative figures seen in the workspace. Within the current
work cultures and scenarios in the world, women are thought of as “not as
ambitious” as men and the lack of capability is held responsible for their grim job
prospects (Goheer, 2003). Constancy of expectations to become homemakers or
house-managers haunt them throughout their lives. Decision making therefore,
becomes an all-male domain, and women are not allowed to give their input in policy
devising, or in other professional institutions besides higher educational
departments, where most of the hired teaching staff happens to be women (Lang,
2010).
                                           491

    A Comparative Analysis of Gender and Educational Leadership in Pakistan and the United Kingdom

        Differential access to training workshops and limited professional
development opportunities for women are other roadblocks. (UNSECO, 2009).
Women are not allowed to venture into the world of opportunities to develop an
insight, regarding knowledge which is acquired formally via professional meet-ups,
networking and giving input within these workshops and conferences. It happens
largely because security issues and restricted mobility rules imposed on women in
general and hence, female faculty members in Pakistan have to slow down and
restrict their professional growth as the nature of the customs within the society
render it difficult to network socially (Shaukat, Siddiquah, & Pell, 2014).

Women under-representation; a Global Practice?

       Gender discrimination has also been a regular occurrence in first world
countries where biased allocation and unequal distribution of resources is not an
uncommon practice (Greenhouse, 2004). In higher education, women's access to
resources is largely compromised, albeit if the access is made available to them, then
the evidence strongly suggests that females utilize the chances (UNESCO, 2002).
Though, the female members

         Even though women have experienced successes and have scored major wins
in department of higher education in the first world countries, the problem of being
under-represented within academic and administrative affairs, particularly in the top
tiers of institutions remains an issue that is still ignored (Bond, 1996). Job satisfaction
is regarded as a valid indicator of judging the general individual’s satisfaction with
the job. (Diaz-Serrano & Cabral, Vieira, 2005). Gender discrimination can reduce the
rates of job satisfaction. In the sectors of education, there is a proof of an existence of
a direct link between assumed autonomy extended in the work environments and
the overall feeling of job contentment. Within Pakistan, radical changes need to be
implemented in working environments for females to experience job satisfaction and
contentment (Shaukat, Siddiquah, & Pell, 2014).

Unlearning the Learnt Behavioral Patterns

        Gender gaps in educational achievement have always existed and they persist
today in many spheres of academia. They still have their roots intact in the third
world countries where much needs to be done when it comes to empowering and
educating a girl child. Social class, one’s ethnic background and gender go on to
exercise a key role in determining the kind of educational experience one goes
through. Overall, the levels of academic achievement of both genders have been on a
steady rise after World War II and a significant change was seen among women’s
priorities in the last decade of the twentieth century; the 90s where they came to see
educational opportunities as the ladder to the realization of their independence,
financial freedom/ security and overall subjective freedom (Shaukat, Siddiquah, &
Pell, 2014). However, there are behavioral patterns specifically in the academic
                                                   492

 Pakistan Social Sciences Review (PSSR)          October-December, 2021 Volume 5, Issue 4

achievement domain that have withstood these changes and continue to hold out as
they restrict interactions that need to happen. According to Aletha C. Huston not
much change has occurred with regards to the subject choice which she has referred
to as “sex typing” (Huston, 1985) which means that society has segregated between
what subjects are feminine and those that it deems to be masculine where only men
would be able to perform. The debate about women’s surging motivation rates when
it comes to the attainment of higher education has been going on since the end of the
last century when a trend of prioritizing their educational aspirations over the
prospect of landing a wealthy husband was seen. Andreas Hajdar talks about it in his
book Gender and Educational Achievement and discusses how female life-prospects,
ambitions and goals saw a reversal during the recent decades, caused mostly by the
needs and demands of modernization. Particularly, the reduced social and economic
significance of the institution of marriage and the rising demand of labor force
participation gave them opportunities to have a vocation to be something other than
housewives and house helpers. The demand and will to earn one’s own bread and
butter, coupled with the institutional change of the educational and social framework
that made education all the more appealing to both women and men (Hajdar, 2014).

Conclusion

       Gender plays a major role in determining leadership roles both in Pakistan
and the UK and there’s a long way to reach the point of equality in both countries.
Both Pakistan and the UK continue to face different challenges not just in their
educational systems but in general, and it is the need of the hour to have equal
opportunities especially in leadership positions.

        Pakistan being a patriarchal society has its own challenges to overcome. It is
very unfortunate that there still are areas where girls are not allowed to attend
schools especially in the tribal areas. Not just education, but in such areas, women
are not even allowed to exercise their other democratic and constitutional rights.
Voting in elections and filing for divorce are two examples of this. Although the
situation is very different in the rest of the country, but women continue to face
oppression and resistance in every walk of life. Men are given priority and that is
major part of the reason as to why there are lesser women seen holding the leadership
positions in Pakistan. Gender discrimination is present in the UK too and women
continue to face resistance.

       It is the need of the hour that we think above aur gender differences and work
together to create an environment where there are equal opportunities for everyone,
irrespective of gender and social classes. Pay gap is another issue that needs to be
addressed. Societal norms also need to be changed and challenged and we should
normalize having women on higher positions. Every individual should be assessed
on this basis of his/ her skills and not based on his/ her gender or social class or
                                           493

    A Comparative Analysis of Gender and Educational Leadership in Pakistan and the United Kingdom

religious affiliation (which continues to be a serious problem in Pakistan where
people judge you based on which sect you belong to or which faith you follow). We
should all aim to work together and play our role in making this world a peaceful
place to live – a world free from inequality, injustice, resistance, and oppression.




                                                   494

 Pakistan Social Sciences Review (PSSR)            October-December, 2021 Volume 5, Issue 4

References

Ahmed, A. (2019, December 17). Pakistan ranks 151 out of 153 on global gender parity
  index: World Economic Forum report. DAWN

Ahmed, A. (2021, March 31). Pakistan loses two spots on Global Gender Gap Index, slides
  into ranks of worst four countries. DAWN

Amery, F. (2019, April 25). Why Do Uk Universities Have Such Large Gender Pay Gaps?
  Political Studies Association.

Ashraf, D. (2010). Women Teaching and Leading in Pakistan: Exploring the
   Challenges and Possibilities. More and Better Teacher for Quality Education for All:
   Identity and Motivation, Systems and support, 165-73. Brighton: Collaborative
   Works.

Bastidas, Y. (2021, March 8). Unesco Iesalc Report Asserts That Gender Inequality In
   Higher Education Remains A Universal Issue. UNESCO

Bond, S. (1996). Women in leadership positions in higher education: Strategies for change.
   Management development for women in higher education.

Coughlan, S. (2016, September 21). Are universities secretly sexist? BBC News

Diaz-Serrano, & Cabral, Vieira. (2005). Low pay, higher pay and job satisfaction within the
   European Union: Empirical evidence from fourteen countries. IZA Discussion Papers
   No.1558, Institute for the Study of Labour (IZA).

Farah, I., & Shera, S. (2007). Female education in Pakistan: A review. Gender and
   education in Pakistan, 03-42.

Fazackerley, A. (2020, May 12). Women's research plummets during lockdown - but
   articles from men increase. The Guardian

Fox, M. F. (2010). Women and men faculty in academic science and engineering:
   Social-organizational indicators and implications. American Behavioral Scientist,
   997-1012.

Goheer, N. (2003). Women entrepreneurs in Pakistan: How to improve their bargaining
   power. Geneva: International Labour Organization.

Gracia, L. (2009). Employability and higher education: contextualizing female
   students’ workplace experiences to enhance understanding of employability
   development, Journal of Education and Work, 22 (4), 301-318
                                             495

    A Comparative Analysis of Gender and Educational Leadership in Pakistan and the United Kingdom

Greenhouse, S. (2004, August, 18). Woman sues Costco, claiming sex bias in
   promotions. The New York Times

Hajdar, A. (2014). Gender and educational achievement. Educational Research, 117-
   125.

Hofstede, G. (2001). Culture's consequences: Comparing values, behaviors, institutions and
   organizations across nations. Sage Publications

Huston, A. (1985). The development of sex typing: Themes from recent research.
  Developmental Review, 1-17.

Jacobs, J. A. (1996). Gender inequality and higher education. Annual Review of
    Sociology, 153-85.

Javin, W. (2013). The role of gender in scholarly authorship. PloS one 8.7.

Keung, C. (2008). The effect of shared decision-making on the improvement in
   teachers’ job development. New Horizons in Education.

Khalid, R. (2011). Changes in Perception of Gender Roles: Returned Migrants.
   Pakistan Journal of Social and Clinical Psychology, 16-20.

Khan, T. (2020, May 5). Women in Power. The News International

Khokhar, A. J. (2018). Women Academic Leaders in Higher Education in Pakistan:
   Perspectives of Female Students Enrolled in Higher Education Degrees. Department of
   Education Forman Christian College University, Lahore

Lang, S. (2010). A gender perspective on educational facilities.

Lopez-Carlos, A., & Zahidi, S. (2005). Women’s empowerment: Measuring the global
   gender gap. Geneva: World Economic Forum.

Manzoor, S. (2015). The impact of indigenous culture on female leadership in
  Pakistan. International Journal of Organizational Leadership. Volume 4, Issue 4, 414-
  429

McRobbie, A. (2009). The Aftermath of Feminism: Gender, Culture, and Social
  Change. SAGE, 184.

McRobbie, A. (1991). Feminism and Youth Culture: From Jackie to Just 17. Macmillan:
  London.



                                                   496

 Pakistan Social Sciences Review (PSSR)             October-December, 2021 Volume 5, Issue 4

Moss-Racusin, & Corrine, A. (2012). Science faculty’s subtle gender biases favor male
  students. Proceedings of the national academy of sciences.

Mythili, N. (2017). Representation of Women in School Leadership Positions in India. Dehli:
  National University of Educational Planning and Administration.

NAP. (2004). The Constitution of the Islamic Republic of Pakistan. Islamabad: National
  Assembly of Pakistan. NAP.

National Census. (2017).         Retrieved   from    Pakistan     Bureau      of    Statistics:
   www.pbs.gov.pk

National Education Union. (2018, December                     18).   Gender        Pay   Gap.
   https://neu.org.uk/policy/gender-pay-gap

Nazemi, S., Mortazavi, S., & Borjalilou, S. (2012). Investigating factors influencing
   women’s inclination in adopting managerial positions in Iranian higher
   education. Interdisciplinary Journal of Contemporary Research in Business, 722-732.

Oxaal, Z. (1997). Education and poverty: A gender analysis. Report prepared for the Gender
   Equality Unit, Swedish International Development Cooperation Agency (SIDA).
   Retrieved from http://www.bridge.ids.ac.uk/reports/re53.pdf

GOP.(2017). Pakistan Education Statistics 2016-17. Islamabad: Academy of Educational
  Planning and Management.

Patchamuthu, I., & Grown, C. (2017). Women in the Workfoce. Business Recorder.

Quraishi, U., & Kaleem, R. (2008). Gender based faculty development model for
   higher education. Oxford Business & Economics Conference, June 22-24, Oxford:
   Oxford University.

Shaukat, S., Siddiquah, A., & Pell, A. W. (2014). Gender discrimination in higher
   education in Pakistan: A survey of university faculty. Eurasian Journal of
   Educational Research, 109-126.

Side, K., & Robbins, W. (2007). Institutionalizing inequalities in Canadian
   universities: The Canada research chairs program. NWSA Journal, 163-181.

UNESCO. (2002). Women and management in higher education: A good practice
  handbook Follow-up to the World Conference on Higher Education (Paris 5-9 October
  1998).



                                             497

    A Comparative Analysis of Gender and Educational Leadership in Pakistan and the United Kingdom

University and College Union. (2013). The Position of Women and BME Staff in
   Professorial Roles in UK HEIS.

UNSECO. (2009). World conference on higher education: The new dynamics of higher
  education and research for societal change and development. UNSECO.

Yousaf, R., & Schmiede, R. (2017). Barriers to women’s representation in academic
   excellence and positions of power. Asian Journal of German and European Studies.
   2, 2 (2017). https://doi.org/10.1186/s40856-017-0013-6




                                                   498