Geopolitical, Social Security and Freedom Journal, Volume 5 Issue 1, 2022




Educational leadership across cultures

Maurizio Esposito
PhD, Associate Professor, University of Cassino and Lazio Meridionale
e-mail: m.esposito@unicas.it
Sara Petroccia
PhD, Adjunct Professor, University of Cassino and Lazio Meridionale
e-mail: sara.petroccia@unicas.it


Doi: 10.2478/gssfj-2022-0002


Abstract

The goal of this article is to introduce a reflection on leadership in the educational context. Our reasoning will start
from the concept of group in its sociological meaning, from Donati (2021) to Goffman (1959) passing through
Tuckman’s five stages of group development (1977). In this way, we will argue about the idea of leadership, more in
detail on an important element in which the educational leader acts: the culture at all its different levels:, that of the
school and then that of the community, which represents a crucial junction for its influence on the way of conceiving
educational systems (paragraph 2), the term used to designate the holder of leadership is educational leader, meaning
the one who coordinates and manages tasks within an educational context (paragraph 3). The choice that inspires our
approach to leadership concept is, from one hand to frame the theme in its transcultural perspective, we believe that any
educational context today can only be conceived as an international and global theater, regardless of the origin of the
actors and the audience that are there. In addition to people and the objects, the way of formulating concepts of use that
have multiform tonalities, origins, and heritages, often far from the context in which they appear and act, they are
hybrids. On the other hand, schools often experience internationality and globalization very concretely: they host foreign
students and participate in international projects of cooperation with other countries (paragraph 4). In our final
remarks, we will affirm and demonstrate that the reflections proposed in this pathway on the topic of leadership are
intended to signal the importance of laying the foundation for an international content orientation on which the
knowledge of the educational leader is based. Therefore, using the concepts that describe intercultural communication,
we assume that sociology can undertake a more incisive analysis of the meaning of multicultural societies.



Keywords: leadership, education, education leader, culture, intercultural communication




                                                                                                                       16

                            Geopolitical, Social Security and Freedom Journal, Volume 5 Issue 1, 2022



    1. Effective intergroup communication

People are in continuous relationship with the other, and it is precisely the ties and their
own relationship to mark their life and no one could exist without them. Social relations are
the fundamental elements for people’s life in the group as they help them to behave in a
worthy and acceptable way and to ensure stability within society (Donati 2021). They play a
fundamental role in the development of the person and the ability to live with others, help
one to be aware of and grow in self-control, empathy, listening, dialogue, conflict resolution
and cooperation.
The term Social Group -originated in sociology- is seen as a set of people who interact in an
orderly manner according to expectations regarding their respective behavior (Donati 2021),
it derived from the Germanic Kruppa (Mattioli 2016: 23) and stands for a collection of people
(or things) linked by common characteristics or close relationships that make them
distinguishable.
U.S. sociologist Robert K. Merton defines a social group as a set of individuals who interact
according to certain patterns, have feelings of belonging to the group, and are considered
part of the group by other members (Merton 1949).
According to Canadian sociologist Erving Goffman’s definition, aggregates are assemblages
of individuals in unfocused interaction (Goffman 1961), and his presentation of self (Goffman
1959) refers to the possibility for an individual to present himself or herself in an interaction
with different faces, emphasizing the individual’s ability to move between categories and
highlight different aspects of identity that depends by the contexts and interactional needs
he or she encounters. As a result, the people who make up the aggregate remain strangers
to each other; in fact, social relations within it are very limited and mostly of a temporary
nature, since individuals can move in and out of an aggregate without substantially changing
their lifestyle and social position. The aggregate is distinguished from the group by its
randomness, lack of structure, and especially by the qualitative difference in interpersonal
relationships that the group makes possible. One must distinguish the social group from
other forms of human groupings such as aggregates and social categories. A group consists
of human beings characterized by a specific collective identity that creates a social unit (an
examples might be the family, or a group of friends). Aggregates consist of a collection of
people who share a physical space at the same time but are not united by ties (an example
of an aggregate may be the crowd).
There are many similarities between the concept of group and that of community. The latter
is understood as a collectivity united by ethnic, parental, or historical ties that cause the
individual to feel an integral and active part of it. In the sociological understanding, the term
community tends to represent the type of prevalent’ bonding in a collective organization,
rather than a restricted set of individuals who can interact with each other. Thus, these are
two forms of association that offer the individual a different degree of participation,
especially in terms of their dimension. Generally, groups can be divided into two categories:
primary groups and secondary groups. Primary groups are the smallest; its members are




                                                                                              17

                                 Geopolitical, Social Security and Freedom Journal, Volume 5 Issue 1, 2022



close-knit and have intimate face-to-face interactions. Individuals in primary groups regard
the group as an important part of their lives.
They through an interpersonal affective relationship develop a strong feeling of collective
identification. Cooley argued that primary groups were essential for integrating individuals
into their society, as this is often their first experience with a group. Individuals can be born
into a primary group; however, primary groups can also form when individuals interact for
long periods in a meaningful way (See Jetten J. et alii 2015). Secondary groups are the
largest, the relationships within them are colder and depersonalized in fact, and the bonds
are weak. Members do not know each other very well and their impact on other members
is generally not strong. In this type of group, the relationships between the individual and
other group members are instrumental, that is, functional in achieving a purpose.
Individuals are important for the function they perform and not as persons as such they are
(examples of secondary groups are businesses, schools, and government departments).
The group is a dynamic concept; it follows a development process divided into distinct
stages.
The most widely used model because it is simple and rational, though not adequately verified
scientifically, is that of American researcher Bruce Tuckman (Tuckman 1965: 384-399). In
1965, he developed a model of the evolution of group relations. The model introduced as
the result of a careful analysis of many small groups, initially included four stages: forming,
storming, norming, performing, which were later increased to five with the addition of the
adjourning stage in 1977 (Tuckman and Jensen 1977: 419-427).

Figure 1- Tuckman’s five stages of group development




Source: Authors elaboration based on Tuckman Model (Tuckman and Jensen, 1977: 419-427)


Stages characterize the evolutionary process by which members of a group can equip
themselves with appropriate tools to best approach their task. Tuckman argued that these




                                                                                              18

                            Geopolitical, Social Security and Freedom Journal, Volume 5 Issue 1, 2022



stages are all necessary and inevitable in order to grow with the team, to deal with challenges
and problems, to find solutions, to plan work, and to achieve results.
The course of single man/woman’s life is marked by group memberships, the first being
that of the family, but later it is joined by friends, classmates, team, or work colleagues.
Group membership is an innate need for human beings, and that is why people tend to get
together each other’s. Belonging to a community, feeling part of a movement or club helps
human beings to live better because it makes the individual grow and often makes them
achieve things they would not achieve individually. A lot of research also shows that people
who try to achieve a goal with the help of a group usually succeed better than if they work
individually. This happens because people who work together within a cohesive group can
bring out the best in themselves, and that is precisely the strength of the group.
Members of a cohesive group feel that they are similar, sharing experiences and emotions
but also rules and responsibilities.
In the group, everyone can experience the benefits of cooperation and support, they feel
gratified to be recognized as members of it for their own role, whether it is leadership or
not. Feeling the importance of one’s role, one’s contribution to the group can only increase
self-esteem allowing the individual to grow and evolve. A social group is also the flow of
communication that passes within it; it is the possibility of exchanging meanings, of
constructing common sense. If these communication flows were to fail, each member
would find himself isolated and the group could no longer exist. Through uninterrupted
communication among its members, the group creates a common purpose; its members
acquire common attitudes and strengthen the group internally, creating a greater cohesion.
For many authors, it is possible to study all group dynamics through the analysis of group
communication and its networks.
At the basis of communicating is indispensable discussion, considered almost like a
mandatory ritual of communication that brings together and periodically the members of a
group in a suitable place. This occurs according to prescribed rules and conversation by
which it assigns them a definite place in the real world according to a continuous, coherent,
and unbroken apparatus. Through the multiplicity of opinions, exchanges of ideas and
points of view, social reality is created, constructed within the group, leading the members,
according to Festinger’s lesson (Festinger 1954: 117-140) to share a common reality. It is
therefore possible to say that without communication the group does not exist.
Moreover, to exist it needs communication to be possible and concretely active. One
therefore needs a communication network and structure. It is possible to distinguish
between various ways of communicating within the group, to distinguish between warm
and cold communication, spontaneous and constrained by procedures and timing, mediated
and immediate, hierarchical and nonhierarchical, etc. Bavelas (1948: 16-30) and Leavitt
(1951: 38-50), as e.g., have analyzed communication networks in groups with experimental
methodology and concluded that not all groups act the same way in the communication
networks they may have. In particular, they investigated four types of networks:




                                                                                            19

                            Geopolitical, Social Security and Freedom Journal, Volume 5 Issue 1, 2022



1) the centralized or wheeled network;
2) the chain network;
3) the Y-shaped network;
4) the circular or circle network.
Through these types of networks, they studied the distance index and established
correlations between a network’s centrality index and certain manifestations of group work.
The more centralized the network, the faster the performance if the task is simple, while if
the task is complex, a less centralized network appears favored.
And just on this one we focus this work, so in addition to emphasizing the importance for
the individual to belong to a group for the reasons mentioned above, it is essential to know
how to communicate effectively within groups with a less centralized network, with a view
to exchanging one’s knowledge, sharing one’s cultural capital in order to support an
intercultural communication.
The goal is to understand the relevance of the intercultural communication and
communication effectiveness for educational leader preparedness in a multicultural
environment. Greater knowledge of cultural differences provides leaders with behavioral
flexibility and motivates them to engage with culturally different partners because “culture
also has an important bearing on the way people communicate” (Gudykunst, Ting-Toomey,
Chua, 1988 p.247). The educational leader needs cultural sensitivity to avoid
miscommunication and ensure sharing success. Communication effectiveness provide
appropriate leadership to multicultural teams is also impacted by uncertainty and ambiguity.
To support our study now we aim to introduce the Gudykunst’s “Anxiety/Uncertainty
Management theory” (2005, 298) and focusing on “cultural ingroup and outgroup”
(Gudykunst, 2004 pp.255). Communication, according with the scholar just citated, is
effective when the person interpreting the message join a meaning to the message that is
relatively similar to what was intended by the person who transmitting it. When a person
lacks confidence on account of anxiety, it is difficult to remain motivated towards adaptive
action. Gudykunst assumes that -at least- one person in an intercultural encounter is always
a stranger, resulting in "Uncertainty and anxiety are the twin threats which need to be
managed to achieve effective communication” (2004 pp.256).
Furthermore “through a series of initial crises, strangers experience both anxiety and
uncertainty as they are not sure how to behave and thus feel insecure” (Ting-Toomey, S.
1988, pp. 213-235). Uncertainty and anxiety (defined as the feeling of being uneasy, tense,
worried or apprehensive about what might happen) are the "twin threats which need to be
managed to achieve effective communication” (Ibidem). We will argue on this topic in the
next paragraph, the second one.




                                                                                         20

                         Geopolitical, Social Security and Freedom Journal, Volume 5 Issue 1, 2022



2.Cross-cultural and intercultural communication


It is well-known that studies of intercultural communication originate in the theory
of cultural variability (see Gudykunst, 1997) used to explain differences and
equalities in the communicative behavior of individuals from different cultures
(meaning different groups). In intercultural communication studies the dimensions
of cultural variability are used as variable keys through which a certain level of
similarity but also diversity between cultures can be delineated (Gudykunst, 1997, p.
335). Cultural variability, therefore, can be found in a number of dimensions,
including -e.g.- individualism and collectivism (Hofstede, 2001; Gudykunst, 1997).

This perspective images all the participants in a social event as individuals who will
follow specific cultural orientations with own values based on their own group’s
provenience. Moreover, it follows that the communication is understood as an
intercultural fact in which participants will act by positioning themselves as members
of specific cultural groups (Baraldi, 2015).

Our first assumption is to consider culture as a system of values (and informal
norms), shared by a group of people, that constitute the basis of common living.
Values can be understood as shared assumptions about what a given group believes
is right and desirable by connecting this to the assumption of similarity throughout
processes of categorization and identification. Within such dynamics of interaction
are created the mechanisms of inclusion and exclusion proper to distinct groups in
which those who deserve to join the leading group represent the ingroup, while those
who must remain excluded from it constitute the outgroup. The goal is to exam the
influence of individualism-collectivism on communication in ingroup and outgroup
relationships. Differences based in ingroup, and outgroup communication are
confirmed in collectivistic cultures (see Gudykunst 2004 and Baraldi 1992: 94).

Countless are the definitions of the word communication (see Hargie, O., Saunders,
C., Dickson, D 2000; Adler 2003; Verdeber 2004) but here, we aim to proceed from
Paul Watzlawick’s well-known thesis for which we cannot but communicate (see
Watzlawick, Beavin & Jackson 1971: 75). This point of view seems to emphasize
that it is impossible for a human being not to express, not to disseminate to the
surrounding environment information about itself, almost as if the sharing of own
information seems inevitable. In some ways, communication becomes synonymous
with expression, self-telling, whether it is about states of mind that can use the
expressive forms of language or theories that use the channels of verbal language,
or again, integration, an aspect that will lead us to the communicative aspect we will
focus on in this paper: cross-cultural and intercultural communication (Hall 1959:
240), because “Culture is communication and communication is culture” ( Hall
1959: 169)




                                                                                     21

                           Geopolitical, Social Security and Freedom Journal, Volume 5 Issue 1, 2022



Our cultures have a tremendous influence on the way we communicate, whether we are
aware of it or not and “we generally are not aware of how our cultures affect our behavior.
To communicate effectively with everybody, we must understand how our cultures
influence our communication. We can use our knowledge of cultural similarities and
differences in communication to make accurate predictions of and explanations for group’
behavior” (see Aririguzoh 2002: 96).

Culture, however, “is only one of our group memberships that influences our
communication with strangers”, we have many other group memberships that also
affect our communication. And in order to understand how these group
memberships, influence our communication, “it is necessary to begin with how we
form social identities based on our memberships in ingroups” (Ibidem).

And it is from this perspective that we aim to introduce the communication’ study
of Bennett, which uses empathy as a strategic projection, meaning an approach in
which we perceive the feelings of another as if they were our own. In fact, precisely
by adopting this type of projection in interacting with the other, “we would imagine
other people’s thoughts and feelings from their perspective.” (Bennett and Stewart
1995: 159).

Therefore, the heterogeneity of human beings and different worldviews make the
empathic approach the best communicative strategy to adopt in multiple realities.
In this projective view, reality appears single, so integration is based only on the
homologating criteria of assimilation. In fact, the single reality provides for the
cancellation of differences for the benefit of a single prevailing and homologating
worldview, the one that becomes the space of action of the educational leader. It is
necessary to clarify the meaning we assign and take on from a sociological
perspective the use of the concept of intercultural communication and how such
communication will be able to supports the educational leader in its work across cultures,
that is, connecting the communication issue to multicultural societies.

Bennett and Stewart (1995) focus on the importance of developing skills to
recognize the other as an opportunity for learning through valuing diversity. Each
individual structures its own worldview that makes socialization processes and
communication modes unique will differ from individual to individual. Important
then becomes how one internalizes one’s worldview and compares it with that of
others in everyday practices. Within this perspective, Bennett formulates the theory
of the Dynamic Model of Sensitivity (MDSI)




                                                                                        22

                                Geopolitical, Social Security and Freedom Journal, Volume 5 Issue 1, 2022



Figure 2: MDSI. Dynamic Model of Sensitivity




Source: Authors elaboration based on Dynamic Model of Sensitivity (Bennet and Stewart, 1995)




In this direction, intercultural sensitivity promotes integration processes and contributes to
the building of intercultural competence. According to Bennett, intercultural competence is
essentially about not judging different situations with a single parameter but allowing the
development of systems of evaluation and observation that can change according to the
diversity of contexts.
The primary intent is to illustrate how the use of this concept, once integrated within the
framework of a sociological theory, offers important advantages for the analysis of
multicultural societies from a learning and orientation perspective.
One of the most authoritative globalization scholars, Jan Nederveen Pieterse, observes that
in the current historical phase a global sociology is “taking shape around concepts such as
social networks, rather than societies, borderlands, border crossings, global society”(2005:
100). That is, new ways of analyzing sociocultural processes are emerging, which stem from
important changes in the interpretative horizons of society related to globalization (Beck
1999). Within this framework, an increasingly large area of studies is analyzing intercultural
relations, within areas called communication studies, cultural studies, cross-cultural
sociology, and intercultural management. More in detail, an increasing number of studies
on intercultural communication are proposed and an increasing number of models are
developed and proportional to these we will focus on, we will introduce another model, that
one of Chen-Starosta’s (1998) that allows us to analyze the constituent processes of a
multicultural global society. According to the authors, intercultural competence is defined
as the ability to enact effective and appropriate communicative behaviors when interacting
across cultures. In the elaboration of their model Chen and Starosta (2000: 1-15), propose
that intercultural communicative competence is identified as a concept that acts as an
umbrella for three other specific sub-dimensions of intercultural competence: intercultural
awareness, intercultural sensitivity, and intercultural skill. Cross-cultural awareness refers to




                                                                                               23

                            Geopolitical, Social Security and Freedom Journal, Volume 5 Issue 1, 2022



the understanding of the characteristics, cognitive, cultural that influence how a given
culture thinks and behaves. Intercultural sensitivity is defined by the motivation that drives
the interactant before, during and after an intercultural exchange to understand, appreciate
and accept the cultural differences in the encounter. Finally, intercultural skill is considered
the behavioral component and is defined as the ability to achieve communicative goals
during intercultural interaction.
Cross-cultural communication, therefore, has often been studied from the comparison of
the cultures of those who enter communication, of those who are part of a community. The
lack of attention to the constructive capacity of communication is rather widespread in
sociological theories (Baraldi 1998), and there has never been a communicative turn in
sociological theory. Therefore, although cultural diversities are traceable to existing cultural
patterns, they become visible only in communicative processes (Baraldi, 2009, p. 10) since
it is in the latter that their meaning is constructed, making them intelligible.
Only social systems theory has placed the concept of communication at the basis of
sociological discussion, and it is precisely this theory that can help in understanding the
meaning of communication, which can be placed at the basis of cross-cultural approaches
(Luhmann 1989: 240). Thus, intercultural communication is communication that constructs
meanings of diversity among cultural forms. The problem is not to understand what cultures
look like when they meet, but rather how cultural diversity is constructed in the
communication of a community.
A communication is named cross-cultural when disagreement on relevant cultural
orientations is produced in its implementation process and no univocal cultural orientation
is produced. In this regard, we are supported by the Social Systems Theory that makes possible
to initiate our reflection on the relationship between communication and culture, including
proposing an analysis of the latter as a heritage of concepts and ideas produced in
communication and orienting communication itself (Luhmann 1983).
Culture is observed as a product of communication, this observation is shared by many
studies on intercultural communication. From this perspective, intercultural communication
is not the result of a meeting of individuals carrying pre-existing cultures since cultural
diversity can only be produced in communication (see Hall 1992). Thus, intercultural
communication is communication that constructs the meanings of diversity among cultural
forms. The problem is not to understand what the cultures that meet each other look like,
but rather how cultural diversity is constructed in communication. In such cases, a form of
communication that creates coordination between different cultural forms is necessary. The
construction of coordination is placed as an alternative to the construction of coherence,
which is based on the idea of cultural compatibility. The form of cross-cultural
communication that creates coordination is referred to as cosmopolitanism. The concept
of cosmopolitanism seems to us particularly appropriate for observing globalization but in
this work, specifically multiculturalism, as it evokes a global citizenship, understood as the
possibility of being open to every experience. This concept comes from the modernist
tradition of functionally differentiated society: indeed, it emphasizes openness, flexibility,
and universalism. However, cosmopolitanism veers toward a transcultural perspective: as




                                                                                             24

                            Geopolitical, Social Security and Freedom Journal, Volume 5 Issue 1, 2022



Beck writes, the cosmopolitan gaze is “a sense of the world, a sense of borderlessness”
(Beck 2006: 14).
Indeed, differentiation “produces numerous tensions and a wealth of alternatives such that,
in all spheres of society, more and more problems have to be solved by decisions”
(Luhmann 2002: 50),
but we will argue on this topic more in details in the next paragraph, the third.
This concept thus undergoes the paradoxical influence of the transcultural form. If, leaving
aside ideals, we look at cross-cultural communication, we can see that cosmopolitanism
requires “entering into an intelligent relationship of dialogue with others who start from
different assumptions” (Tomlison 1999b: 12-16). The cosmopolitan gaze is thus a dialogical
one: cosmopolitanism combines the recognition of diversity and the need for intercultural
dialogue. Pearce (1993) notes that a cosmopolitan culture avoids value distinctions between
right and wrong, true and false, posing only the problem of coordination. Ammaturo (2004:
345-356) shows the importance of the link between dialogue and identity formation, in fact
the construction of a multicultural identity that manifests itself as a competence to cross
cultural boundaries, attributing positive meaning to different cultural forms: that is, it makes
it possible for participants in communication to “maintain their cultural habits and beliefs
and at the same time integrate aspects of a new culture into their lifestyles” (Yamada and
Singelis 1999: 707). Such identity is associated with cross-cultural competence, which
includes attitudes, knowledge, interpretive, operational and interpersonal skills (Byram,
2003) and is understood as the ability to interact “in such a way that all participants feel
understood, respected and supported” (Weber 1922: 199).
Multicultural identity is also associated with cross-cultural sensitivity understood as “an
individual’s ability to perceive what behavior is appropriate in another culture and modify
one’s own behavior accordingly” (Yamada and Singelis 1999: 706). Intercultural dialogue
therefore enables the construction of a multicultural identity as it produces the conditions
for intercultural learning, so communication participants can use cultural forms other than
their own to construct knowledge and operationalize it independently from other cultural
forms, which not only allows us to understand their meaning, but also allows us to use them
to construct the meanings of communication. In this way, cross-cultural adaptation is
central: cultures are observed as open systems that exchange information and knowledge
and thereby adapt to each other. Our aim is to develop some reflections around the function
that intercultural communication can take on in training processes. It is also true for
communication, that in any group the learning process can always be, in a broad sense,
defined as intercultural: think of the number of variables that are taken into account: age,
socio-economic status, gender, nationality, religion, education. However, we believe that
communication in intercultural contexts can facilitate the learning process and be a
privileged tool to establish harmonious relationships that have as a prerequisite good
communication within the same group, thus also ensuring a cross-cultural communication.
Therefore, the goal of learning process in the cross-cultural perspective should be the
acquisition of competence in cross-cultural communication itself, that competence which




                                                                                             25

                            Geopolitical, Social Security and Freedom Journal, Volume 5 Issue 1, 2022



Kim defines as “the generic inherent ability of an individual to handle key challenging
elements of cross-cultural communication such as cultural differences and unfamiliarity,
how to position oneself within and between groups, and the related experience of stress.”
(Kim 1991: 259)
In this regard, Bennett believes that a cross-cultural perspective can offer more than one
effective way to analyze interaction and facilitate adaptation because cross-cultural
communication prospects a reality that will sustain the simultaneous existence of unity and
diversity, cooperation, and competition in the Global Village (McLuhan) and consensus in
multicultural societies.
Cross-cultural communication is synonymous with competence, listening and sharing a real
interaction with the other within the same space. More precisely, according to sociologist
Bennet (2002: 56), it is a process of negotiating meanings between two or more individuals
with different cultures who have a single goal: to construct and share individual and social
realities. So, the cultures offer various interpretations and help us to better perceive the
world around us, here difference no longer becomes synonymous with insecurity or
deviance, but a resource, that is, a tool that fosters the development of the ability to
recognize and live with differences summing up, a transcultural form of communication is
based on dialogue, which leads to the construction of a multicultural identity through
learning from other cultures, fostering intercultural adaptation with the goal of refining their
understanding and simplifying their knowledge of each other.


    3.Leader developing as an educational leader

Communication (especially the intercultural one) needs correct interpretation as well as the
acquisition of the right interpretive perspective by all the member of a specific group. As
already mentioned in paragraph 1, people cannot not communicate (Watzlawick, Beavin,
Jackson 1971). So in doing so, people improve a social product able to discipline of alien
needs to its own benefit (Marx), in the self-construction of a civil space (Elias) in which the
communication approach will be fluid (Bauman) and – in the meantime- allowing us to
imagine (Mills) and creating an habitus (Bourdieu). Such habitus will be able to develop all
those social practices related to different tastes. Thus it would seem to be safe to say that
such a social construct (Luckman) may fall within the terms of educational needs, within the
competencies of the educational leader, whose main calling seems to fall precisely within
the terms of educational needs syn particular in educational programming also in terms of
supporting the leaders themselves, to cope, e.g., with the challenges of new technologies
(Pitzalis, Porcu, De Feo, Giambona 2016).).
In the meantime, the educational leader could have perhaps a moral duty to keep open the
path of experimentation with a conscience and practice otherwise possible for an
educational leadership different from the dominant almost assuming the docile bodies
(Foucault). Moreover, it is this hypothesis to lead us to focus our discourse on goal of this
paragraph, the “portrayal” of the educational leader, and the key role it plays in
communicating and involving people in its own group.




                                                                                             26

                             Geopolitical, Social Security and Freedom Journal, Volume 5 Issue 1, 2022



To do so we shall start with a metaphor of Foucault’s (2005), more precisely by that one of
the entrepreneur of the self-connecting to the investments of each one in education, focusing
the purpose of recalling to the remoralization in the field of school education by highlighting
the leader figure, whose educational quality has become increasingly entrepreneurialized.
To some extent, the role of educational leader can be screened as a kind of litmus test well
established in organizations, in the institutions of national governments but also of
supranational bodies, as well as of individuals (e.g. students, teachers, families).
In recent decades, we have witnessed a proliferation of theoretical and empirical forms of
knowledge production on the educational field that lead us and hence the following
question: how might the value of knowledge help to chart a path to freedom, supporting
reflection for Foucault, “ethics is the considered form that freedom takes when it is
informed by reflection” (2020: 276) if resources for the development of critical thinking are
reduced? In addition, what extent can the producers of knowledge supporting the
educational leader provide support in order to understand the other and simplify cross-
cultural communication? To this last question, we still wonder whether and how a leader
satisfies, in the exercise of its own function, a broad class of needs, within which its own
are also located. Probably the understanding of certain leader research stories finds its
interpretive key in the fact that there are widespread needs that individuals are unable to
satisfy, while in parallel someone is able to satisfy a good portion of them.
For that goal, then, it was first a matter of finding typological criteria that would meet the
dual objective of classifying that knowledge both according to broader cross-cultural
inspiration and according to relevance to distinct scientific paradigms. To this end, the
Foucauldian category of discourse seemed the most appropriate to accompany us in this
perspective. The analysis of discursive formations is found to be particularly appropriate
precisely because it raises the question of the subjectivities that are constituted by the
practices of scientific knowledge to those who the objects of knowledge are (in our case,
that one of the educational leaders).
In this capacity, the leader takes on a definite scapegoat connotation, suitable for enabling
individuals’ ambivalent projections toward figures in authority. After all, each of us is deeply
ambivalent toward those who assume in our eyes the guise of something that is authority.
The leader’s task is to watch over the climate of the group of which it is a part, in order to
bring individuals to increasingly conscious processes of awareness.
Sociologists Bales and Slater (1955) have carried out a series of studies on specially created
groups that were assigned tasks requiring cooperation.
Thus, it could be seen that a leader emerges within the group. In all likelihood, the person
who talks the most and to whom others turn most often tends to become the leader of the
group.
Some social-emotional behaviors and other behaviors closely related to the task were
observed within the group. In this way, it was noted that two types of leaders could emerge.
From one hand the social-emotional leader, that has the characteristic of paying special attention




                                                                                               27

                            Geopolitical, Social Security and Freedom Journal, Volume 5 Issue 1, 2022



to affective aspects and psychological implications. It works to keep morale high, dilute
tensions, and control anxieties and emotional crises when difficulties arise. The social-
emotional leader emerges as one who smooth out conflicts, intervenes to find compromise,
and tends to ensure harmony in the group. From the other hand, the task-centered leader (task
leader) that is characterized by an instrumental specialization focused on the goals to be
achieved; it focuses on the task and its resolution, leading the group to achieve the goals.
This leader is the one who is regarded by others as the most competent in the specific task
because it often provides suggestions, opinions, and ideas, demonstrating knowledge and
organizational skills.
According to scholars, the two roles are complementary, and can hardly be performed by
the one involved both in the task than in social emotionality. These differences can be
summarized by saying that the person with the best ideas shows a concentration of activities
in problem solving, while the person who likes it best shows a concentration in both positive
and negative types of social-emotional activities.
When people work in teams, like teachers in the classroom group, they perform an activity,
a task, and at the same time activate relationships in a communication framework. Very
often, we focus only on activities and tasks, through a task-oriented leadership, and instead
we need to immediately define the rules of a team, roles, communication, through a
relational leadership.
We can, therefore, hypothesize or rather report different approaches to leadership. Lippit
and White (1943) hypothesized that the function of the leader was to create a particular
social climate in the group, and that this affected each member’s mood and efficiency.
According to these two scholars, the leader can lead the group using three different styles:
     1. Authoritarian, in which the leader makes all decisions and exercises power
          despotically. He or she does not provide explanations to group members of the
          reasons for the choices made. These are communicated to subordinates among
          whom work is distributed. This style of leadership generally allows for good
          productivity, but involves heavy dependence on the leader, forms of aggression
          among group members who feel poorly motivated because the leader manifests
          limited trust in them.
     2. Democratic, in which major decisions are made with the participation of the group.
          When a problem arises everyone’s, proposals are considered. This encourages
          everyone’s participation in decision-making and as a result the group feels more
          involved in the choices and is more motivated. The leader constitutes an active
          presence in the group and cooperates with it as do all the other members. The
          leader expresses trust in group members, supports them in carrying out their
          activities, but still remains ultimately responsible for choices. This leadership style
          fosters fair productivity, good motivation of group members, forms of
          communication among them, a capacity for self-management, and a calm and
          communicative work environment. Trust is a prerequisite for exercising leadership.
          Trust must be legitimized at the team level. Trust does not mean “friendship”, but
          it means that each team member must not feel judged and must feel free to give
          opinions, propose questions and be able to rely on the assertive climate of the class
          and school group.




                                                                                              28

                            Geopolitical, Social Security and Freedom Journal, Volume 5 Issue 1, 2022



     3. Permissive (Laissez-faire), in which there is broad autonomy of group members who
         know what their tasks are and how they are to be carried out. The leader’s
         participation is minimized even though he or she remains responsible for the
         decisions made. The leader is disinterested, does not stimulate or control, leaves
         the group free to act and intervenes only when prompted. This style can result in
         low productivity, a chaotic and convulsive climate.
Two variables were used to define these styles: productivity and social climate. According
to scholars, the best leadership style is the democratic style, both for production as there is
greater capacity for self-management, and for group efficiency as there is high motivation
within the group and a good relationship with the leader. The history of groups that, after
an initial moment of euphoria, crumble over time is usually associated with leadership
patterns that are either too authoritarian (little autonomy of individuals) or lax (complete
autonomy, but lacking guidance, of individuals).
It is not necessary to arm yourself to make a revolution. Good leadership always depends
on the context in which it is exercised. Sometimes, it may be enough to have soft skills such
as empathy, listening, understanding, helpfulness, and motivation. Hierarchy is needed
when it is time to act. First, you need a creative and democratic phase of listening to ideas
without hierarchy. Lean leadership shows the ability to create relational space between
people where one can confront each other by suspending judgments, with respect and
assertiveness, which creates trust.
At this point, we have to introduce a concept strictly related to leadership, so much so that
it influences its performance: the power is one of the means by which a leader influences
the behavior of co-workers, in its group, in its community, in its own social structure of
belonging. The concept of power within a group leads us to examine the concept of leader
and leadership, that is, of the figure of one who exercises power and the ways in which it
exercises it. The question of power, in particular, is of particular interest in an author who
more than any other has made the Foucauldian lesson his main and continuing source of
inspiration, Ball, who represents the most radical turn in the conception of educational
leadership.
From his initial treatment of leadership in terms of “micropolitics” (Ball 1987), through the
enucleating of four prevailing styles (authoritarian, managerial, interpersonal and
conflictual); through research aimed at highlighting the role of the leader as interpreter-
mediator of conflicting discourses (Gewirtz and Ball 2000). Team members have different
cultural backgrounds, different Weltanschauung, and different skills. These differences are an
asset especially in terms of creativity, but they can also be a source of social conflict.
Therefore, every team must gear up and deal with rules, relationships and conflicts right
away. To activate collaboratively, each team must ask itself: 1. The goals to be achieved. 2.
The role of each participant: what we need to do and with whom. 3. The resources needed
to achieve the goal. 4. The possible risks and obstacles.
Finally, it should be considered that the ethical-moral dimension in knowledge about
educational leadership has always been present only to be reversed in terms of the leader’s
main mission in one of the main proposals that have marked the entry into the field of
education (Leithwood, K., Chapman, J., Corson, D., Hallinger, P., Hart, A., 1996), whose
vocation would precisely be to shape culture.




                                                                                            29

                              Geopolitical, Social Security and Freedom Journal, Volume 5 Issue 1, 2022



Not all those who are called to leadership positions have equal aptitudes to lead: only those
who possess certain non-ordinary personal gifts and qualities, including what Max Weber
calls the “charisma of the leader,” are able to do so effectively. What do these capabilities
consist of?
The sociological analysis of the figure of the leader through the classification of legitimate
forms of power and the conceptualization of charisma are undoubtedly helpful in
understanding the role of leadership. In this context is the indispensable contribution in
Weber’s terminology, charisma is a particular form of power or authority.
The concept of power has often been the focus of sociological thought, but it was Max
Weber (1922) who analyzed it most comprehensively. He first distinguishes between
potency (Macht) and power (Herrschaft). Power is the ability to assert within a social
relationship, even in the face of opposition, one’s own will, as a pure capacity to impose
oneself on another. Power, on the other hand, is:


the possibility for specific commands, or for any command, to find obedience from a given group of
men, and not already any possibility of exerting power and influence over other men. Understood in
this sense, power can be based, in the individual case, on the most diverse grounds of disposition to
obey, beginning with blind habit to purely rational considerations with respect to purpose. To every
genuine power relationship inserts a minimum of willingness to obey, that is, an interest, internal
or external, in obedience (our translation from Weber 1961, Italian Translation
Economia e Società, Edizioni di Comunità, Milano: 207)


Power refers to a social relationship in which the stronger subject succeeds in asserting its
will in the meantime refers to relationships where the weaker subject accepts the decisions
of others because he or she recognizes them as valid and therefore legitimate. This type of
authority therefore presupposes the consent of subordinates, thus we can assume as leader
as one who is able to influence the other members and, more generally, the activities that
the organism carries out or is about to carry out. Accordingly, the leader does not turn out
to be the one holder of ability of influence, but rather the one who possesses the qualitatively
most relevant share. Moreover, insofar as leadership, in order to be implemented, requires
the existence of interpersonal relationships, it follows that a leader’s followers also have
toward him or her a certain mode of influence (see Demarchi, F., Ellena, A.G., Cattarinussi,
B., 1994)

The weberian perspective makes it possible to approach the problems of our time
in a highly topical way, interpreting them considering further developments in the
process of modernization and the impact it has determined on the forms of societies,
communication and integration. It is a matter of taking note of how a series of
phenomena, including globalization, processes of individualization and the transfer
of regulatory power to institutions pose challenges to which it is possible to defend
the specificity of knowledge of cultural phenomena, distancing oneself both from




                                                                                                  30

                            Geopolitical, Social Security and Freedom Journal, Volume 5 Issue 1, 2022



the positivist assimilation of the social sciences to the natural sciences and from the
Diltheian reduction of the social sciences to the world of experience.


    4.Educational leaders across cultures

In this paragraph we try to propose a circumstantial and clearly defined reflection on an
important element of the context in which the educational leader acts, we mean the culture
both at the micro level, e.g., that of the school but also that of the community, and at the
macro level that refers instead both to the societies in which the educational organization is
situated and rooted (e.g.) and to the global context.
Awareness of the differences between cultures, and especially how these affect the way an
organization is conducted, is a prerequisite for fostering a proper balance between
integrating different models and recognizing the individual specificities of individual
contexts.
The choice that inspires our proposed approach to leadership is to frame the topic
immediately in its international and trans-cultural perspective, so that this conceptual
framework forms the foundation for the proposals and reflections that will come later. The
crux of the leadership-culture relationship is emblematically introduced, e.g., by those
experiences of reflection and confrontation from an international perspective, made more
natural and richer by the possibility of using a common language with the immediacy and
expressive richness of a native speaker. Think of scholars who can communicate and debate
using a common language, english as e.g., or other language or common type of
communication, but come from different cultural backgrounds and are thus expert
experimenters with the contradictions, risks, and opportunities of globalization.
In this contribution the term used to designate the keeper of leadership is educational leader,
meaning one who is the custodian of coordinator and management tasks within an
educational context, emphasizing the importance of the leader’s role as the creator of new
visions and as the pivot around which the organization’s culture revolves. However, it is
also appropriate to consider a broader perspective, from the micro level to the macro levels
of culture: those represented in the historical and social characteristics of the national
context where the organization has its roots and foundations.
It is important to learn to pay attention to the context in which we live our lifby
distinguishing the phenomena that have long been characteristic of this context from those
that have recently emerged, identifying “the speed, force and form of what is evidently
passing through here to head elsewhere or has been elsewhere before and now arrives here”
(Appadurai 2009: 48).
To date, one of the most recurrent elements in the international educational literature is the
call for “borderless” (Bogler 2002: 665-673) leadership rooted in ethno-relative thought
processes, where all problems have a genuinely international perspective as their
background and the phenomena of globalization are the subject of increasing careful




                                                                                            31

                           Geopolitical, Social Security and Freedom Journal, Volume 5 Issue 1, 2022



awareness. This perspective brings with it some important questions, as a non-exhaustive
example, but e.g.: What does borderless really mean? How do you break the boundaries of
your own ethnocentrism? What tools can help create the conditions for the growth of an
authentic international mindset also capable of supporting cross-cultural communication in
the achievement of its goal?
Today, the mobility of students, teachers and researchers between states is also a primary
goal of the EU. Therefore, the study of leadership and educational processes from an
international perspective allows us to think about how leadership is realized in a given
educational context and how leadership and educational processes are realized in defined
normative contexts, following the priorities that the national context indicates based on its
historical political and social roots.
The way in which an educational institution is conducted is directly influenced by the way
in which the cultural traditions of a given society have been translated into norms that act
through the supporting structures of its educational system. Therefore, it is interesting to
observe the way in which these norms shape practice; to discover how, through their
interpretation, they come to interact on the one hand, with the characteristics of the
concrete contexts in which they are applied, and on the other hand, with the proposals
coming from global society.
The phenomena of globalization reveal their ambiguous and difficult to grasp nature: a
mixture of risks and opportunities, a continuous dialectical juxtaposition between the
tendency to seek generalizations and, on the other hand, to cure particularizations, a
contradictory ability to create at the same time opportunities for empowerment and
disablement (Tomlinson 1999a: 20).
The current scenario is thus presented as an interweaving of sociocultural units referred to
as global interdependencies and something that cannot be traced back to a linear causality,
but rather emerges from a complex and discontinuous causality, full of unpredictability, but
constantly evolving.
The underestimation of the impact of culture is particularly evident in some cases rather
than others, as e.g. in far eastern countries. Here it frequently happens that paradigms
conceived in the context of western thought are transported and proposed uncritically. A
scenario that raises many questions. We might (e.g.) begin by asking whether there is a body
of theoretical and practical knowledge that the educational leader should master regardless
of its country of origin? Does the effectiveness and relevance of educational leader training
methods vary systematically depending on the culture of the participants? This is a difficult
but very significant question, even if, beyond the scope of training, we extend it to models
of innovation proposal in a broader sense. We focus our attention on the knowledge
assumptions that are necessary to set up the research, the conceptualizations of leadership
that need to be adopted in order to compare current practices in different cultures (Hallinger
P. and Leithwood K., 1996: 98-116), and finally the methods that can enable us to effectively
answer the questions on which this research is based. In any case, when considering distant
territories, perhaps on other continents and in a developing situation, difference and




                                                                                           32

                            Geopolitical, Social Security and Freedom Journal, Volume 5 Issue 1, 2022



contrast between cultures are part of an almost natural expectation. However, what happens
when distances are seemingly shorter and power imbalances more nuanced, as in the case
of European countries? Are there real possibilities of a global discourse on educational
leadership? Yes, is becoming increasingly alive and we can say that the ideas are focused on
the ideas and paradigms within Europe itself. MacBeath (1998) observes that global
competition and the current climate in educational settings and society in general are
producing a growing attraction for quick fixes that lead many to believe that universal
assumptions and truths are easily found ready-made and ready-made. Then the previous
question could be updated as follows: are there common principles and good practices that
can be transferred from one country to another? To what extent are certain aspects of
leadership deeply rooted in the history and culture of different peoples?
Obviously, we are well aware that there are no universal constructs, no models that can be
learned finally and succeed in meeting all needs. There are, however, common problems,
common components: it is collaborative discussion and the opportunity to share
observations of experience that enable us to deepen and evaluate the combination of
similarities and uniqueness that arises in our operations. It would be severely limiting for an
educational leader to delude himself or herself that educational change can be addressed
with practical suggestions or strategies that are not rooted in adequate theoretical supports,
but it is also important to think about one’s own experience as a leader against the backdrop
of what is being done and thought about elsewhere. International experiences therefore are
a crucial source of knowledge, but they must be subject to selective adaptations


    5. Conclusions. A focus on Italian school management


The leadership literature, as outlined above, is based on assumptions that reflect
western and non-western culture. “Most prevailing leadership theories and the
empirical evidence supporting them are distinctly American or European ones. They
emphasize individualistic, hedonistic, and rational values over collectivistic,
altruistic, and religious ones” (Binh Ly 2020:8). Values emphasized in other cultures,
particularly those derived from religion, are ignored or little recognized. “The main
component of western and non-western theories of leadership is the separation of
individual and professional life. The key attributes of leadership are the experience,
competence, and decision-making skills needed to complete tasks, achieve goals, and
secure self-interest” (Ibidem). Little attention is paid to values and ethics in
formatting leader characteristics, which is considered by many to be at “the root of
the contemporary leadership crisis” (Ibidem). A particularly important issue in
contemporary cross-cultural research is constructed equivalence.

Social and organizational values help delineate the specific boundaries of a culture regarding
acceptable and effective leader behaviors and practices, we assume that “leaders who are
aware of a culture’s values and practices can make informed and educated decisions




                                                                                            33

                             Geopolitical, Social Security and Freedom Journal, Volume 5 Issue 1, 2022



regarding their leadership practices” (Tsai, 2011: 98) and the likely effects on daily
operations and crisis management within an organization. A leader’s recognition and
explanation to its “followers that a customary cultural practice will be violated and why can
help avoid or reduce problems and complications” (Ibidem: 11)
Since the 1990s, the Italian Ministry of Education, in accordance with European directives,
has based Italian school reform on the development of new non-disciplinary skills. The
overcoming of theoretical education, based solely on the acquisition of knowledge (know
what), was linked to the need to support the subject as a citizen, thus assigning the learner
the ability to orient and act in social life beyond its course of study (know how). In fact, within
Law No. 107/2015, known as Buona Scuola, the school-to-work alternation is established,
the project of developing “the accompanying activities and educational counseling for the
support of individual planning,” which the National Guidelines had foreseen long before.
Under the action of two governments, the arrival of the pandemic from Covid-19 not only
has the institution of school-to-work alternation been effectively superseded, but the
engagement of schools in the development of lifelong guidance has been redesigned. A key
aspect in orientation activities is the volume of information produced. This is undoubtedly
positive, as it allows opportunities for increasingly broad and diverse choices, but it makes
the use of information data increasingly problematic and difficult as the content of the
information, its duration and that of the very media on which it is recorded vary enormously.
Most of the orientation activities currently promoted by the various educational institutions
consist, in fact, in opening up to university and non-university training institutions, which
continue to present their educational offerings also through participation in video lectures;
therefore, not in line with what is expressed in the guidelines that put orientation understood
as empowerment, i.e., as the autonomous and responsible development of basic orientation
skills, first.
For us, orientation also means leaving no one behind, it means giving those from families
of low socio-economic status the chance to freely choose their life paths without
conditioning, considering the university as a vehicle for social mobility, even in Italy, where
the number of graduates is proportionately lower than in the main European countries.
Instead, it is still mostly the rich who go to university, re-proposing those forms of
hereditary leadership already identified by Max Weber more than a century ago, and well
represented by the fortunate expression coined in the 1950s by Michael Young, that of the
“lucky sperm club,” the rich children of the lucky sperm.
The world of work is constantly changing, robots will replace most of the low job profiles,
and there will be a need for excellent, cross-curricular higher education to avoid armies of
unemployed in the coming years. Research by the Martin School at Oxford University
(2013) estimated that by 2035 nearly half of the workers currently in the U.S. economy will
be entirely replaced by computers and robots. And so, we also try to exorcise the myth of
the Useful Degree: as Roger Abravanel and Luca D’Agnese (2015) remind us, the gap
between working engineers and working humanities graduates is three times as large in Italy
as in the UK.




                                                                                                34

                            Geopolitical, Social Security and Freedom Journal, Volume 5 Issue 1, 2022



There emerges a need for a model of pragmatic leadership that originates from functional
needs, related to questions of everyday governability, to short-term strategic action. What
might be the characteristic features of this model? Characteristic traits include compromise
and willingness to bargain and attenuated forms of decision-making. Rigidity and forms of
openness to dialogue, offensive and defensive strategies alternate in order to maintain a
balance between opposing forces. Intervention skills are oriented toward problem solving,
responding to specific requests. Decisions are incremental and affect existing arrangements
only marginally, following a strategy of mutual adjustments (Lindblom-Woodhouse 1993).
This model is continually subject to scrutiny by the social base. This is true both from the
point of view of a more direct relationship between leaders and group members, and from
the point of view of the benefits produced in the processes of exercising one’s leadership
when, within certain limits, a mechanism of necessary centralization of decisions and clear
identification of responsibilities is determined; but, on the other hand, it is also true that if
from the processes of participation and representation do not emerge new values and beliefs
capable, of constituting that cultural glue necessary for social cohesion and for the training
of new and authoritative leadership, lead us to our days, and we cannot overlook the fact
that the new communication technologies peculiar to the digital society (web, social media,
etc. ) have made the whole issue even more intricate.
At this point, it might be fair to ask how much of this knowledge, which comes, after all,
from worlds seemingly distant from our own in terms of cultural backgrounds, can be useful
in constructing an idea of leadership that is useful for operating within our context? How
can this knowledge help to further make sense and shape our experience and guide our
studies?
The reflections proposed in this pathway on the topic of educational leader are intended to
signal the importance of laying the foundation for an international content orientation on
which the knowledge of the educational leader is based.
As British scholar Wallace (2003) notes, echoing Bolam’s (2003) typology, “knowledge for
understanding” is a crucial starting point in a horizon of uncertainty and continuous change
such as that brought about by globalization and complexity. It would be highly limiting for
an educational leader to delude itself that educational change can be addressed by practical
suggestions or strategies that are not rooted in adequate theoretical supports. In fact,
sociological theory can benefit greatly from observing even the communicative conditions
of harmonization, coordination between different cultural forms, in social systems where
the effects of hybridization appear as inevitable as they are difficult to interpret and above
all structure. At this point, let us point out just a few more lines in our final remarks, it is
well understood that our toolbox is not complete, we aim to assume that critically using the
concepts that describe intercultural communication in a cross-cultural perspective and
supporting to reformulate them, we can undertake a more incisive analysis of the meaning
and of the possible and various interpretation of multicultural societies of its
communication, learning and orientation processes under conditions of its continuous
changes, in its own evolution.




                                                                                              35

                                  Geopolitical, Social Security and Freedom Journal, Volume 5 Issue 1, 2022



However, in the congeries of theories and data available to scholars, one thing remains
granitic: studying helps you live better and live longer; choosing what to study, and where
to study it, becomes crucial to understand how we will live in the coming years, and how
much our society will be tailored to each of us, because as Victor Hugo said “He who opens
a school door, closes a prison”.


References

Abravanel, R., D’Agnese, L. et al. (2015). La ricreazione è finita. Scegliere la scuola, trovare il lavoro, Segrate:
Rizzoli
Abruzzese, S. (2005). La Sociologia di Tocqueville. Un’introduzione. Soveria Mannelli (CZ): Rubbettino.
Adler, R.B. (2003). Understanding Human Communication, New York: Oxford University Press.
Ammaturo, N. (2004). Identità individuale e processi di globalizzazione, in Studi di sociologia, n.3,
Milano: Vita e Pensiero, pp. 345-356, doi: 10.1400/23758.
Appadurai, A. (2009). The shifting ground from which we speak, in J. Kenway, J. Fahey, Globalising
the research imagination, Routledge: New York.
Aririguzoh, S. (2022) Communication competencies, culture and SDGs: effective processes to cross-cultural
communication. In Humanit Soc Sci Communn 9, 96 (2022). https://doi.org/10.1057/s41599-022-
01109-4
Bales, R.F., Slater, P.E. (1955). Role differentiation in small decision-making groups, in Parsons T. &
Bales R.F. (ed.) (1956) Family, socialization and interaction process, New York: Free press.
Ball, S.J. (1987). The micro-politics of the school. Towards a theory of school organizations Londra: Methuen
Baraldi, C. (1992). Socializzazione e autonomia individuale. Una teoria sistemica del rapporto tra comunicazione e
pensiero, Franco Angeli: Milano.
Baraldi, C. (1998). Il concetto sociologico di comunicazione: storia e prospettive, in Bonazzi F. (ed.),
Itinerari di sociologia delle comunicazioni, Franco Angeli: Milano.
Baraldi, C. (2003). Comunicazione interculturale e diversità, Carocci: Roma.
Baraldi, C. (2009). Empowering dialogue in intercultural settings. In C. Baraldi (Ed.), Di-alogue in
Intercultural Communities: Form an Educational Point of View, (pp: 3-28). Amsterdam: John Benjamins.
Doi: 10.1075/ds.4.
Barzanò, G. (2011). Leadership educativa e autonomia scolastica: il governo dei processi formativi e gestionali nella
scuola di oggi, Roma: Armando.
Baraldi, C. (2015). Intercultural Communication Systems and Discourses of Cultural Identity. Applied
Linguistics Review, 6(1), 49–71. Doi: 10.1515/applirev-2015- 0003
Bavelas, A. (1948). A mathematical model for group structures in Applied Anthropology, 7(3), pp. 16–
30, http://www.jstor.org/stable/44135428.
Beck, U. (1999). What is globalization, Cambridge: Polity Press.
Beck, U. (2006). Cosmopolitan Vision. Cambridge: Polity Press.
Bennet, M.J., Stewart C., (1995). American cultural patterns: a cross- cultural perspective, Yarmouth: Nicholas
Breale.
Bennett, M.J. (ed.) (2002). Principi di comunicazione interculturale. Paradigmi e pratiche, Franco Angeli:
Milano.
Bernard, L. L. (1936). The Conflict Between Primary Groups. Attitudes and Derivative Group Ideals in Modern
Society, in American Journal of Sociology, 41:5, pp. 611-623, doi.org/10.1086/217258
Byram, M. (2003). On being bicultural and intercultural: intercultural experience and education. Great Britain:
Multilingual Matters Ltd.




                                                                                                                  36

                                  Geopolitical, Social Security and Freedom Journal, Volume 5 Issue 1, 2022



Binh Ly Nhung (2020) Cultural Influences on Leadership: Western-Dominated Leadership and Non-Western
Conceptualizations of Leadership in Sociology and Anthropology 8(1): 1-12, 2020
doi.10.13189/sa.2020.080101
Bolam, R. (2003). Models of Leadership Development: learning from international experience and
research, in M. Brundrett, N. Burton, R. Smith (2003), Leadership in Education, Sage Publications:
London.
Bogler, R. (2002). Two profiles of schoolteachers: a discriminate analysis of job satisfaction, Teaching
and Teacher Education, 18, pp. 665-673, doi:10.1016/S0742-051X(02)00026-4.
Chen, G. M., Starosta, W.J. (1998). Foundations of Intercultural Communication, Boston, MA: Allyn &
Bacon
Chen, G.M., Starosta, W.J. (2000). The Development and Validation of the Intercultural Sensitivity Scale,
Human Communication, vol.3 (1), pp.1-15
Cooley, C. H. (1909). Social Organization: A Study of the Larger Mind, New York: Scribner’s.
Demarchi, F., Ellena, A.G., Cattarinussi, B., (eds) (1994). Nuovo dizionario di Sociologia, Cinisello
Balsamo: San Paolo Edizioni.
Durkheim, É. (1893). De la division du travail social : étude sur l’organisation des sociétés supérieures, Paris: F.
Alcan.
Donati, P. (2021). Sociologia relazionale. Come cambiare la società, Sholé: Brescia.
Esposito M., Silvestri A., Sannella A. (2021). Higher Education for Sustainability Competences
model,        European    Proceedings     of    Social     and     Behavioural     Sciences,     pp.      173-184,
doi:10.15405/epsbs.2021.07.02.21
Ferrarotti, F. (1968). Trattato di Sociologia, Torino: UTET.
Festinger, L. (1954). A Theory of Social Comparison Processes. Human Relations, 7, pp. 117-140,
doi:10.1177/001872675400700202
Fiedler, F. E. (1967). A Theory of Leadership Effectiveness, New York: McGraw-Hill
Fourier, C. (1822). Traité de l’association domestique-agricole, Paris: Ouvres completes.
Foucault, M. (2005). La nascita della biopolitica. Corso al Collège de France (1978-1979), Milano:
Feltrinelli.
Foucault, M. (2020). Estetica dell’esistenza, etica, politica. Milano: Feltrinelli.
Galton, F. (1869). Hereditary genius: An inquiry into its laws and consequences, London: MacMillan and co.
Gewirtz, S., Ball, S. (2000). From ‘Welfarism’ to ‘New Managerialism’: shifting discourses of school
headship in the education marketplace. In Discourse: studies in the cultural politics of education, 21(3): 253-
268, doi: 10.1080/71366
Gibb, C. A. (1969). Leadership, in Lindzey G., Aronson E., The Handbook of Social Psychology, Reading,
Mass: Addison-Wesley Pub. Co.
Goffman, E. (1959). The Presentation of Self in Everyday Life, New York: Doubleday & Co.
Goffman, E. (1961). Asylums: Essays on the Social Situation of Mental Patients and Other Inmates, Chicago:
Aldine Publishing Company.
Goleman, D. Boyatzis, R., McKee, A. (2002). Primal Leadership: Realizing the Power of Emotional
Intelligence, Boston, MA: Harvard business school press.
Gudykunst, W. B., Nishida, T., & Chua, E (1986). Uncertainty reduction in Japanese-North
American dyads. Communication Research Reports, 3: 39-46.
Gudykunst WB, Gao G, Schmidt KL, et al. (1992) The Influence of Individualism Collectivism, Self-
Monitoring, and Predicted-Outcome Value on Communication in Ingroup and Outgroup
Relationships. Journal of Cross-Cultural Psychology. 23(2):196-213. doi:10.1177/0022022192232005
Gudykunst, W. B. (1997). Cultural variability in communication an introduction. Communication
research, 24 (4), 327-348. doi:10.1177/009365097024004001.
Gudykunst, W. B. (2003). Cross-Cultural and Intercultural Communication, SAGE Publications, London.




                                                                                                                 37

                                   Geopolitical, Social Security and Freedom Journal, Volume 5 Issue 1, 2022



Gudykunst, W. B. (2004). Bridging differences: Effective intergroup communication. SAGE Publications, Inc., London. doi:
10.4135/9781452229706
Gudykunst, W.B (2005). An anxiety/uncertainty management (AUM) theory of effective
communication: Making the mesh of the net finer, in W. B. Gudykunst, ed., Theorizing about
Intercultural Communication (Thousand Oaks, CA: SAGE 2005), 298
Habermas, J. Taylor, C. (1998). Multiculturalismo. Lotte per il riconoscimento, Feltrinelli: Milano.
Hall, E.T. (1959). The silent language, Garden City, N.Y.: Doubleday.
Hall, S. (1992). The Question of Cultural Identity, in: S. Hall, D. Held and T. McGrew (eds.), Modernity
and Its Futures. Milton Keynes. Cambridge: Open University Press.
Hallinger, P., & Leithwood, K. (1996). Culture and educational administration: A case of finding out
what you don’t know you don’t know, in Journal of educational administration, Vol. 34 No. 5, pp. 98-116,
doi:10.1108/09578239610148296.
Hargie, O., Saunders, C., Dickson, D. (2000). Social Skills in Interpersonal Communication, New York:
Routledge.
Hare, A. P., Borgatta, E. F., Bales, R. F. (1955). Small groups: studies in social interaction, New York:
Knopf.
Hofstede, G. (2001). Culture’s consequences: Comparing Values, Behaviours, Institutions and Organisation
across Nations. London: Sage. doi: 10.1016/S0005- 7967(02)00184-5.
Jetten J, Branscombe NR, Haslam SA, Haslam C, Cruwys T, Jones JM, Cui L, Dingle G, Liu J,
Murphy SC, Thai A, Walter Z, Zhang A. (2015) Having a lot of a good thing: multiple important
group memberships as a source of self-esteem. PLoS One;10(6): e0131035.
doi:10.1371/journal.pone.0124609.
Kellerman, B. (2004). Bad leadership: What it is, how it happens, why it matters, Boston: Harvard Business
School Press.
Kendall, D., Murray, J. L., Linden, R. (2012). Sociology in Our Times: The Essentials. Toronto: Nelson
Education.
Kim, Y. Y. (1991). Intercultural Communication Competence: A Systems-Theoretic View, in Ting-
Toomey, S., Korzenny, R. (eds.) (1991), Cross-Cultural Interpersonal Communication. Newbury Park, CA:
Sage, p. 259, doi:10.4236/chnstd.2018.72014.
Yamada, A.M., Singelis, T.M. (1999). Biculturalism and self-construal in International Journal of
Intercultural Relations, Volume 23, Issue 5, pp. 706-707, doi.org/10.1016/S0147-1767(99)00016-4.
Kreitner, R., Knicki, A. (2013). Comportamento organizzativo, Milano: Apogeo-Maggioli.
Leithwood, K., Chapman, J., Corson, D., Hallinger, P., Hart, A. (1996). International Handbook of
Educational Leadership and Administration, Dordrecht: Kluwer.
Leavitt, H. J. (1951). Some effects of certain communication patterns on group performance. The
Journal of Abnormal and Social Psychology, 46(1), pp. 38–50, doi:10.1037/h0057189.
Lewin, K. (1948). Resolving social conflicts: Selected Papers on Group Dynamics, New York: Harper &
Lindblom, C., Woodhouse, E. (1993). The Policy-making Process, Prentice Hall: New Jersey.
Lippit, R., White, R. (1943). The Social Climate of Children’s Groups, in Barker R.G., Kounin J.,
Wright H. (eds.) Child Behaviour and Development, New York: McGraw-Hill.
Losito, G. (1998). Sociologia: un’introduzione alla teoria e alla ricerca social, Roma: Carocci
Luhmann, N. (1983). Struttura della società e semantica, Laterza: Roma.
Luhmann, N. (1989). L’autopoiesi dei sistemi sociali, in Genovese R., C. Benedetto., P. Garbolino,
(eds.), Modi di attibuzione, Liguori: Napoli.
Luhmann, N. (2002). I diritti fondamentali come istituzioni, edizioni Dedalo: Bari.
MacBeath, J. (ed.) (1998). Effective school leadership: Responding to change, Thousand Oaks: SAGE
Publications Ltd.
Mattioli, F. (2016). Sociologia dei gruppi, Acireale-Roma: Bonanno.




                                                                                                                    38

                                Geopolitical, Social Security and Freedom Journal, Volume 5 Issue 1, 2022



Merton, R. K. (1949). Social Theory and Social Structure, New York: The Free Press.
Michels, R. (1911). Zur Soziologie des Parteiwesens in der modernen Demokratie. Untersuchungen über die
oligarchischen Tendenzen des Gruppenlebens, Leipzig: Verlag von W. Klinkhardt.
Moreno, J. L. (1934). Who Shall Survive? A New Approach to the Problem of Human Interrelations, New
York: Nervous and Mental Disease Publishing Co.
Moreno, J. L. (1951). Sociometry, Experimental Method and the Science of Society. An Approach to a New
Political Orientation, New York, Beacon House.
Nederveen Pieterse, J. (2005). Mélange globale. Ibridazioni e diversità culturali. Carocci: Roma, p. 100.
Northouse, P. G. (2007). Leadership: Theory and Practice, Thousand Oaks: SAGE Publications.
Pearce, B. (1993). Comunicazione e condizione umana, F. Angeli: Milano.
Pitzalis, M., Porcu, M., De Feo ,A., Giambona, F. (2016). Innovare a scuola. Insegnanti, studenti e tecnologie
digitali, Bologna: il Mulino.
Roberts, C. (1998). Awareness in intercultural communication, London: Centre for Applied Linguistic
Research Print.
Sumner, W. G. (1906). Folkways: a study of the sociological importance of usages, manners, customs, mores, and
morals, Boston: Ginn & Co.
de Tocqueville, A. (1848). De la démocratie en Amérique (1835-1840), Paris : Pagnerre.
Ting-Toomey, S. (1988). Intercultural conflict style: A face-negotiation theory. In Y. Y Kim, & W.
B. Gudykunst, (Eds.), Theories in Intercultural Communication, 213-235. Newsbury Park, CA: Sage.
Tomlinson, J. (1999a). Globalization and Culture, Oxford: Polity Press.
Tomlinson, C. A. (1999b). Mapping a route toward differentiated instruction. Educational leadership, n.
57 (1), pp. 12-16.
Tönnies, F. (1887). Gemeinschaft und Gesellschaft, Leipzig: Fues Verlag.
Tsai, Y. (2011). Relationship between Organizational Culture, Leadership Behavior and Job
Satisfaction. BMC Health Serv Res pp.11, 98. doi.org/10.1186/1472-6963-11-98
Tuckman, B. W. (1965). Developmental sequence in small groups, Psychological Bulletin, pp. 384-39,
doi:10.1037/h0022100.
Tuckman, B. W., Jensen M. A. (1977). Stages of Small-Group Development Revisited in Group &
Organization Studies, 2(4):419-427, doi:10.1177/105960117700200404.
Verdeber, K.S. (2004). Interact: Interpersonal Communication Concepts, Skills and Contexts, New York:
Oxford University Press.
Wallace, M. (2003). Managing the unmanageable? Coping with Complex Educational Change in
Educational management and Administration, 31 (1), 9-29, doi 10.1177/0263211X030311002.
Watzlawick, P., Beavin, J. H., Jackson, D. D. (1971). Pragmatica della comunicazione umana. Astrolabio:
Roma.
Weber, M. (1922). Wirtschaft und Gesellschaft, Tübingen: Mohr Siebeck GmbH & Co.
Weber M, (1961). Economia e società, Edizioni di comunità, Milano




                                                                                                           39