Research in Educational Administration & Leadership
                                            Volume: 6, Issue: 3/September 2021


        A Multilateral Model for Decolonising African

       Educational Leadership: Addressing Conceptual

             Problems and Integrating the Past-Present

              Continuum across the Local-Global Axis
                                      Colleen Loomis
      Balsillie School of International Affairs and Wilfrid Laurier University,
                                        Canada

                                  Abdeljalil Akkari
                       University of Geneva, Geneva, Switzerland

           Abstract                                                           Article Info
    In studies on educational leadership across African countries,
                                                                            Article History:
    researchers are using different concepts that do not have the
                                                                                    Received
    same meanings or similar histories, including variations in            September 3, 2020
    involvement by local, national, and international leaders. In the
                                                                                    Accepted
    first part of this article, we problematize conceptualizing               April 26, 2021
    globally minded school leadership in Africa and attempt to
    understand the way local and global actors apply these concepts
    to and from within African contexts. In the second part, we                  Keywords:
    present research working at the intersection of the NGO-                     Educational
    Postcolonial border working with educational leaders in Leadership Practices;
    Madagascar. The findings show that early childhood education African-led educational
                                                                                  innovation;
    makes a difference on school readiness and that quality matters.
                                                                             multilateralism;
    In the third part, we propose a multilateral model for
                                                                      African early childhood
    decolonising educational leadership in Africa by working on the education; Decolonized
    past-present continuum and holding the tension between                   systems-change
    “border-specific” and “cross-border” perspectives.

                        Research in Educational Administration & Leadership
                                   6(3), September 2021, 625-660


Cited as:
Loomis, C. & Akkari, A. (2021). A multilateral model for decolonising
       African educational leadership: Addressing conceptual
       problems and integrating the past-present continuum across
       the local-global axis. Research in Educational Administration &
       Leadership, 6(3), 625-660. DOI: 10.30828/real/2021.3.4
                             Introduction
Problematizing Conceptualisations for Globally Minded School
Leadership in Africa
       How to decolonise education in African countries is one of the
most pressing questions in educational leadership. Border-specific
approaches or cross-border approaches seem to stand at odds, forcing
leaders to choose one over the other. Embracing border-specific tactics
has the promise of rendering educational processes and outcomes
immediately accessible and relevant to learners but with the likelihood
of closing off opportunities to participate in and benefit from social,
political and economic resources mobilizing globally. Border-specific
education is also insufficient to contribute to development and
sustainable solutions that have global impact such as on quality
education, poverty, gender equality, and the environment. Cross-
border leadership practices address global concerns through
multilateral agreements of exchange of human and material resources
for the purpose of advancing educational outcomes for more than one
nation. Cross-border leadership has been criticized for not valuing and
incorporating local languages and traditions and for extracting
individuals from resource poor regions (see also brain drain) (Serpell,
2010). Despite tensions between the two approaches, we think that
border-specific and cross-border perspectives can coexist and
Africanize education, developing quality education and contributing
to reaching some of the Sustainable Development Goals set by the




                                                                              626

             Loomis & Akkari (2021). A Multilateral Model for Decolonising...



United Nations (2015) to achieve by 2030. However, transforming
educational leadership in Africa by considering both border-specific
and cross-border perspectives requires addressing certain conceptual
struggles.
Conceptualizations of Educational Leadership across African
Countries
       The old version of Western schooling in colonial times: The
establishment of schooling in Africa can be situated between the rise
of the slave trade and the beginning of the domination and colonial
exploration of the African continent. Two important remarks about
colonial schooling: it is intimately linked to power and control meant
to create docile and non-subversive colonies. Colonisation has an
ancient and modern history with a multitude of actors who imposed
value systems, languages, education and more on African peoples.
According to the famous expression of Cheikh Hamidou Kane
published in 1961, the African's contact with Western modernity,
especially in schools, can be qualified as an ambiguous adventure.
Adventure in the sense that the Western school opens up new
perspectives in terms of knowledge, skills and therefore power. But at
the same time, as the African ventures into this Western modernity, he
loses his soul, he is lost, he is only a shadow of himself. He no longer
has the opportunity to have leadership.
      The contemporary version of Western schooling in Africa—
international organizations and imported/imposed solutions: From 1950s to
1970s, most African countries became independent. The fall of the
apartheid regime in South Africa ended the European colonisation of
the African continent. Can we, therefore, say that African countries
have regained leadership in their education and schools? Not really.
On the one hand, decolonisation was not an opportunity to rethink the



      627

                         Research in Educational Administration & Leadership
                                    6(3), September 2021, 625-660


colonial school. The latter has been maintained with superficial
(cosmetic) modifications. Colonial languages of instruction were now
in most countries. The most painful episode was arguably the period
when the IMF (International Monetary Fund) and the World Bank
(World Bank) put in place budgetary austerity policies, which resulted
in the weakening of African education systems (Van de Walle, 1991).
More recently, we can observe that the orientations and the reforms
undertaken in the African education systems have most of the time an
exogenous origin and do not allow the African school to become more
relevant. Examples of this problem include reforms based on the
competency-based approach in which the competencies are imported
and   consequentially    decontextualized            (Anderson-Levitt,         2017;
Lauwerier & Akkari, 2013).
       On the other hand, international cooperation has taken up the
initiative to orient African education policies. Certainly, it can be
animated by a real commitment to help Africa build its education as
evidenced by UNESCO's campaigns in favour of literacy or the work
of Paulo Freire with a goal of consciousness raising (i.e.,
conscientization, Freire, 1970/2009) in the ex-Portuguese colonies. But
the record of international cooperation has been disastrous in terms of
African leadership. Asuga, Scevak and Eacott (2016) suggest “the lack
of African grounded theory means that while researchers may base
their work in an African context, the intellectual resources are overlaid
– a form of epistemic imperialism” (p.392-393), which could be
explained as “double decontextualization” meaning that both the
theories and the practice are from external contexts (e.g., practitioners
unaware of the colonial roots of a practice and apply it as though it is
African) (Elonga Mboyo (2016, p.79). In a way, we can say that the
colonisation by the military occupation of Africa by the European
colonial powers is a much less pernicious process than mental or



                                                                                628

           Loomis & Akkari (2021). A Multilateral Model for Decolonising...



cognitive colonisation. The latter passes through the elites and the
domination of thought.
       The colonisation of the mind remains active in many African
countries. For example, parents living in poverty in Madagascar desire
for their children to learn the French language at school so they may
gain jobs in policing and governing (Loomis & Akkari, 2012). Driven
by colonial power, French remains the official language despite the fact
that it is not spoken on a day-to-day basis among these professions
(Loomis & Akkari, 2012). De Sousa Santos (2018) believes that the
Western school form or what he calls the cognitive empire is on the
decline and we are seeing the emergence of Southern epistemologies,
particularly in the call for international organizations to base
interventions in the philosophy of Ubuntu (or communalism) (Piper,
2016). One of the cornerstones in the process of being laid in African
educational leadership and management is generating leaders with the
power to innovate from within as well as ‘from without’ colonised
minds in order to engage in conceptual blockbusting.
       As Elonga Mboyo (2016; 2019) has articulated clearly,
educational leaders and managers often find themselves at a
crossroads applying a Western conceptualisation of time that is linear
and divisible (Dixon, 1977) to recapture the precolonial African ideals
(Obiakor, 2004) or to consider chasing an exogenous postcolonial
vision. A third position, Elonga Mboyo (2016) argues, is to work from
an African sense of time fusing and feeling simultaneously pre- and
post-colonial ways of knowing with all the challenges wrought by
double-decontextualization (2016). From this perspective, African
educational leaders can work to address the imbalance of external
actors by drawing from their experiential bases while also deriving
actions for school improvement from a larger knowledge base of high-




     629

                         Research in Educational Administration & Leadership
                                    6(3), September 2021, 625-660


quality rigorous research, of which there is a dearth, conducted from
various paradigms in Africa.
       An examination of educational leadership and management
published 1960 through 2018 found that prior to the year 2000 African
literature is nearly non-existent with only 5% of publications before
that date (Hallinger, 2019). Since then, the body of research has grown
with most contributions (74%) from South Africa (Hallinger, 2019). A
narrower review on educational management and leadership during
2008 through 2014 in three prestigious international journals found
only 4.92% from Africa (36 of 731 articles) and of these 36 articles 15 (or
41.7%) were from South Africa (Asuga, et al., 2016); the remaining
studies with 2 to 6 per country represented seven countries and two
were across Africa (Asuga, et al., 2016). In addition to the need to
increase the number of studies and the regions represented in Africa,
reviews of the literature show several other aspects to develop
research. The corpus of African research needs to be broadened in
terms of ontological and epistemological assumptions, methods used
(most are qualitative), sample sizes (most are small), and concepts with
meanings that vary across contexts (Asuga, et al., 2016; Hallinger, 2018
& 2019).
Revisiting Concepts
      Gaining competency in the leadership of schools in Africa is not
something you can obtain only through training or professional
interactions without immersion into and understanding of culture,
tradition, and what empowerment means in the African context. In the
following paragraphs, we discuss these concepts in order to break
existing ambiguities in education systems in Africa and foster border-
specific and cross-border decolonising innovations when leading
schools.



                                                                               630

           Loomis & Akkari (2021). A Multilateral Model for Decolonising...



       Ubuntu (communalism) community, culture, and ethnicity. The
concept of Ubuntu is held up as a foundational pan-African
philosophy (Etieyibo, 2017). The community, the village, the ancestors
are truly the bearers of the soul and of African epistemologies.
Communal life and personhood are inextricably linked (Mkhize, 2004).
Some have defined the term as kindness and others as collectivism and
communalism. Narratives from three women educational leaders in
South Africa have identified spirituality, interdependence, and unity
as the essence of Ubuntu (Mogadime, et al., 2010). The term has varied
meanings across African contexts so taking a cross-border perspective
is critical. For example, a recent study of how Ubuntu is realized by
educational leaders in the Democratic Republic of Congo (DRC) found
a circular relationship between individual and collective needs:
“‘doing’ Ubuntu in an urban school context in Kinshasa/DRC has been
framed as following the pattern of understanding others’ needs,
negotiating and prioritising needs, assessing available resources,
attending to others’ needs, and raised expectations and commitment
to organisational goals” (Elonga Mboyo, 2019, p.218). This finding
from the DRC is from a context in which teachers’ pay is insufficient to
raise them out of poverty. Whether a context is impoverished or
plentiful in school resources, school managers and leaders practise
Ubuntu within a conceptualization of community or multiple
communities.
       In addition to the reference above, in South Africa the term
community has been applied in at least two other ways. One way is to
refer to disadvantaged groups as a community to avoid addressing
racialized privilege (Sigogo & Modipa, 2004, p. 317), though this use is
not always the case. In another use, African legal scholar Sunelle Geyer
(2010) argues that the Intellectual Property Laws Amendment Bill of 2010
proposes the following definition of indigenous community be inserted



     631

                            Research in Educational Administration & Leadership
                                       6(3), September 2021, 625-660


into four related legal acts of the Republic of South Africa: "indigenous
community" means any community of people currently living within
the borders of the Republic, or who historically lived in the geographic
area currently located within the borders of the Republic.” He criticizes
the Intellectual Property Laws Amendment Bill:
      Unregimented use of the word ‘community’ in the said definition and its
      apparent inconsistency with the meaning of the phrase ‘indigenous
      community’ in other South African legislation... [and] is further contrasted to
      the much narrower understanding and/or defining of indigenous communities
      in Malaysia and the Philippines, as well as the United Nations (Geyer, 2010,
      p. 128).

      Related terms with similar conceptual issues are culture and
ethnicity. Ironically, the representations of ‘African’ leadership and
management’ found in Western texts as well as the alternative, African
management philosophy, show a tendency to essentialize ‘African’
culture. Whether it is descriptions of Africa’s national culture in the
management literature or the alternative conceptions of ‘African’
culture by mostly African scholars, ‘African culture’ is portrayed as a
homogeneous concept (Nkomo, 2011, p. 377). In this article, we use a
pluralistic view because “Africa” is comprised of 54 countries (on the
continent and islands) with thousands of cultures and ethnic groups.
       Ethnicity     should      be    seen      as    one      of    the     important
identities/affiliations in Africa, but it is not the only one. When
relevant, educational leaders need to address the experiences of
systemic inequality by ethnicity and language in school systems while
also working with and understanding interethnic alliances in Africa.
These alliances can provide a means of resolving conflicts in which
ethnicity seems to play a role, however and importantly, not all
problems in Africa have to do with ethnicity. It is clear that more action
and research is needed to reinvent Ubuntu (Elonga Mboyo, 2019) or



                                                                                    632

            Loomis & Akkari (2021). A Multilateral Model for Decolonising...



return to various African conceptualizations of community, culture,
and ethnicity and to understand it in each and every African country.
        Tradition. While Africa is full of traditions, the concept of
tradition is often connoted as from the past, from archaism, connoted
as a brake on modernity. But modernity, including education, is not
built in a vacuum. Contemporary education has been influenced
mostly by relatively young colonial traditions (Anderson-Levitt, 2001).
The challenge facing African educational leaders is disentangling
colonial pedagogy from northern concepts of progress and
acknowledging that the African traditions have a longer history of
preserving their societies and knowledge, often this was accomplished
through spirituality that took form in many different religions and
philosophies (Mbiti, 1989). There are two further comments regarding
the notion of tradition. First of all, it is not necessary to see tradition as
the perfect opposition to modernity (i.e., development or progress).
Tradition and modernity exist in a dialectic. Second, it is impossible to
construct appropriate education systems within a vacuum, that is to
say without a link with the past and the oral tradition.
        Knowledge. To talk about knowledge, we can develop two
points: (a) the importance of orality in the transmission of knowledge
in Africa and (2) the absence of African languages at school is a major
obstacle to the transmission of knowledge. For example, oral
transmission of culture has long been an effective method for
intergenerational transmission of languages and preserving the
environment. Prior to colonialization, African languages persisted
thousands of years, whereas after it, the number of languages
decreased (Center for Applied Linguistics, 2021). Similarly, African
traditions have protected indigenous plants and species. The
extraction and destruction of African resources has mostly occurred




      633

                          Research in Educational Administration & Leadership
                                     6(3), September 2021, 625-660


through exogenous actors from the global north. We see one of the
biggest challenges facing African educational leaders is the integration
and the prioritization of African languages that provide access to
African ways of knowing. All types of knowledge (scientific, academic,
informal, social, traditional, religious, etc.) must be invested in order
to solve the problems a society faces. We note in particular that school
knowledge in Africa, however, struggles to contribute to solving the
continent’s challenges.
       Indigenous: Debating the global use of the term indigenous. We
debate the global use of the term indigenous because meanings vary
across countries. We observe that in North America (Mexico, the U.S.,
and Canada) and South America people are saying they want to use
the concept of indigenous to fight for rights; whereas in Africa after
decolonisation, the concept of indigenous was used to push
individuals into slavery-like positions (De L’Estoile, 2000; Warren &
Jackson, 2003). All African people do not feel indigenous and many
South Americans do not identify as indigenous. Some authors prefer
the terms autochthonous or endogenous (Bellier, 2012). In short, all
these terms (indigenous, autochthonous, endogenous) highlight the
need to decolonize education systems but also the need to develop the
appropriation and local production of education – in other words
ownership and empowerment.
       Empowerment through education. Empowerment is critical in the
development and growth of children and learning across the lifespan.
Educational experiences that are empowering result in students with
enhanced self-esteem, confidence, ability and motivation to succeed
(Cummins, 1986). Yet, empowerment is an ambiguous concept to the
majority of individuals as it is often used differently in numerous
contexts. This term is embedded within various institutions such as




                                                                                634

           Loomis & Akkari (2021). A Multilateral Model for Decolonising...



community development, management, political organizations,
therapeutic-wellness groups and the education system (Cummins,
1986; Perkins, 1995). When individuals consider the definition of
empowerment, it often involves the interconnection of people,
organization, and communities functioning together in order to
control or overcome certain adversities (Saegert & Winkle, 1996).
Empowerment, a multilevel construct (Rappaport, 1995), occurs
through “intertwined changes in behaviour, self-concept, and actual
improvements in the conditions of the individual, the group, and the
community” (Saegert & Winkle, 1996, p.518). Researchers argue that
the most powerful definitions and descriptions of empowerment
originate from social change movements rather than research or the
policy because empowerment is linked to concrete action rather than
theorising (Perkins, 1995). Empowerment includes actual control and
influence as well as constituents of personal control (Riger, 1993). The
goal of empowerment is to recognize and give a voice to individuals
in order to sustain their lives in an affirmative way (Rappaport, 1995).
For these reasons, we see the empowerment of administrators and
educators/teachers as a critical component of decolonising African
educational leadership.
    A Multilateral Model for Decolonising African Educational
                                    Leadership
       Existing strategies in some African countries suggest
decolonising with various actors and responsibilities that are
multilateral. As Yukl and Van Fleet (1992) suggest, leadership
influences the work goals and strategies of a group or organization. It
allows the implementation of strategies and the achievement of
objectives. Ultimately, it transforms the functioning, identity and
culture of an organization. The impact of educational leadership is




     635

                         Research in Educational Administration & Leadership
                                    6(3), September 2021, 625-660


particularly marked in African contexts, which confront educational
actors with particular challenges such as poverty, malnutrition,
alienation, violence. Educational leadership can bring actors together
to address these issues and to resolve their differences, drop their
power struggles and unite around a common project for the
development of quality education, the design and implementation of
which are coordinated by a set of capable people. Miller (2018)
suggested that school leadership has four dimensions: social (focused
towards society), personal (leader’s agency), environmental and
relational. Taken together, conceptual problems and the literature lead
us to propose that in order to decolonise African educational
leadership we need a multilateral model (see Figure 1) that describes
an organizational structure in which historically unequal powers
negotiate with each other from positions of equal power. These shift in
power require individuals to work with historical positions of
subjectivity and to assume positions when leading.
       The multilateral model for decolonising African educational
leadership works on the past-present continuum (inner most arrows)
circulating across four dynamically interacting core groups of actors
(inner quadrants) to generate and ensure several responsibilities (outer
quadrants). We resolve conceptual fights by offering suggestions for
analysing educational leadership policies and research that will
decolonise educational leadership in post-colonial African countries.
In particular, we navigate the past-present continuum across
conceptual frontiers and multiple groups of actors. We argue for
practices that hold the tension between “border-specific” and “cross-
border”   perspectives    and      by     doing       so     build      decolonised
collaborations.




                                                                                636

                 Loomis & Akkari (2021). A Multilateral Model for Decolonising...




Figure 1.
Multilateral Model of African Educational Leadership

  • National education policies &                                          • Community, local
    strategies                                                               developemnt and justice
  • Sufficient funding &                                                   • Cultural empowement
    appropriate infrastructure                                             • Participation and
  • Governance                                                               ownership
  • Alignment with international                                           • Educational traditions
    agendas
  • Advocacy                   Q.I
  • Equity
                                                     Q.II
                             Ministry of
                                                     Parents
                             Education
                                                     Community
                             International
                                                     leaders
                             NGO, Local NGO




                              Q.IV                   Q.III
                                                     Administrators
                              Researchers
                                                     Educators/
                              Universities           Teachers
  • Theoretical &                                                             • Professionnalism
    contextual knowledge                                                      • Inovation
  • Action-reseaarch                                                          • Engagement
  • Knowledge                                                                 • Pedagogies & training
    mobilization                                                              • Autonomous decision-
                                                                                making




          In quadrant I, there are six domains that a Ministry of
Education, local and national non-governmental organizations are
primarily responsible for developing and sustaining: national
education policies and strategies, sufficient funding and appropriate
infrastructure, governance, advocacy, alignment with international
agendas, and equity. In quadrant II, the four domains of parents and
community            leaders         are     development          and       justice,        cultural
empowerment, participation and ownership, and educational
traditions. In quadrant III, administrators and educators/teachers
provide educational leadership within the following five domains:



       637

                         Research in Educational Administration & Leadership
                                    6(3), September 2021, 625-660


professionalism, innovation, engagement, pedagogies and training,
and autonomous decision making. In quadrant IV, researchers and
universities contribute to educational leadership by achieving
responsibility   in   action-research,        theoretical        and      contextual
knowledge, and knowledge mobilization.
       One of the pressing issues to address is the strong geographical
imbalance in the knowledge production on educational leadership and
management with small but growing production from the Global
South (Hallinger, 2020). These contexts are very different from those in
many other parts of the world and it is important to be aware of the
dangers of ‘policy borrowing’ – applying models from Western
contexts to very different settings (Bush, 2014). Developing the
dimensions of the Multilateral Model for Decolonising African
Educational Leadership requires building on the strengths and
addressing weaknesses of African leaders. One example is the strength
of leaders to collaborate and mobilise both material and financial
resources. One threat to this strength is that within public and private
institutions corruption among African leaders is pervasive (Uzomah,
2018). There are other threats so having a risk assessment and
management plan is essential to risk identification and mitigation.
There are cases that illustrate our proposed model in varying degrees.
A Study of Early Childhood Education in Madagascar
       The present study in Madagascar used a repeated measures
research design with a purposeful sampling strategy. Data were
collected with an average of 40 weeks between assessments. Four
regions of the country were chosen by Aide et Action International
(discussed in Section 4) because of the limited number of pre-primary
education options available: Antananarivo, Tuléar, Sava, and Betioky.
Within each region, 2,304 children were assessed in 20 communities;



                                                                                 638

            Loomis & Akkari (2021). A Multilateral Model for Decolonising...



children attending preschool on the days data were collected were
randomly selected.
       Students were assessed on school readiness, numeracy and
literacy. All assessments were administered in the Malagasy language
and adapted to the cultural context. School readiness was assessed
using the School Readiness Index (SRI) a tool used previously in India
with children ages 5 to 6 (Early Childhood Education Program
Evaluation Package, The World Bank India, not dated). The SRI is
based on the following 10 concepts: pre-number, space, sequential
thinking, classification of fruits and vegetables, following instructions,
number/object matching, reading readiness (identifies beginning
sounds), pattern making, sentence meaning, and relative comparison
(number – greater/lesser). This measure is representative of a global
assessment. Items were scored and summed ranging from 0 to 40 with
higher scores reflecting greater school readiness.
       To explore literacy exclusively, the following two concepts of
the SRI were used: reading readiness and sentence meaning. Reading
readiness was assessed by a child’s ability to identify beginning
sounds and to indicate pictures with a similar beginning sound.
Children’s knowledge in speaking meaningful sentences was tested by
asking a child to describe two pictures, and scores reflected the
correctness and completeness of a sentence that was also a test of active
vocabulary. Item scores were summed and the literacy raw score
ranges from 0 to 12.
       A separate assessment of numeracy was conducted. This test
was based on a student's ability to count from 1 to 10 and 1 to 20,
combined with performance on seven addition tests of magnitude
comparison (Lee & Schell, unpublished). Children had to distinguish
between two piles of physical objects separated by different magnitude



      639

                        Research in Educational Administration & Leadership
                                   6(3), September 2021, 625-660


(e.g., showing a pile of 3 objects and a second pile of 8 objects and
asking students which pile has a greater number of objects in it).
Children received a score of 1 for correctly counting from 1 to 10 and 1
to 20 respectively, and one point was scored for each correct response
on the seven items of magnitude comparison for a maximum
numeracy score of 9 with a possible score range of 0 to 9. For ease of
comparison across all three measures all scores were converted to 100
percentage scores.
Study 1 Findings: A Snapshot of Children’s Abilities
       Results. Summary information for all 2,304 children who were
assessed in the four regions of Madagascar is reported in Table 1.
Information is presented by educational level.
Table 1.
Demographics and Assessment Scores by Educational Level for all Children
(N = 2,304) Assessed in Antananarivo, Tuléar, Sava, and Betioky,
Madagascar
    Educational Level      Not Attending             Preschool                Grade 1
                              School
 Gender
 Girl                             234                    465                   434
 Boy                              251                    461                   459
 Total                            485                    926                   893




                                                                                     640

                Loomis & Akkari (2021). A Multilateral Model for Decolonising...




Table 1. (continued)
Demographics and Assessment Scores by Educational Level for all Children
(N = 2,304) Assessed in Antananarivo, Tuléar, Sava, and Betioky,
Madagascar
  Average Age or Score,                 Mean (SD)               Mean (SD)           Mean (SD)
  (Standard Deviation)                     N                       N                   N
 and Number of children
 Age                                5.58 (1.86)               4.70 (.85)           6.74 (1.32)
                                    N = 485                   N = 742              N = 582
 School Readiness                   24.42 (17.08)             37.80 (20.71)        53.18 (21.65)
                                    N = 478                   N = 923              N = 893
 Literacy                           25.50 (22.23)             36.54 (25.74)        47.18 (29.09)
                                    N = 463                   N = 920              N = 893
 Numeracy                           42.72 (40.00)             55.47 (44.28)        84.04 (22.72)
                                    N = 471                   N = 918              N = 893
* Sample sizes vary because of missing information. For example, age was not obtained for all
children tested in schools.

        Does attending preschool make a difference on Grade 1 Outcomes? In
all four regions 893 students in Grade 1 were tested and 761 of these
students had an indication of attending preschool (public or private).
For this research question, students who had attended a public or
private preschool attendance were analysed together. Across all four
regions on average 35 % of students previously attended school before
entering Grade 1. The percentage of students who had attended
preschool was similar in 3 of the 4 regions (ranging from 36 – 44
percent), but only 13 % of Grade 1 students in the region of Tuléar had
attended preschool.
          Does preschool attendance reduce the likelihood of repeating first
grade? Of the 761 children tested in Grade 1, 21.6% (n = 164) repeated
Grade 1. Of these students 4.5% (12 of the 266) had attended preschool
whereas 30.7% (152 of the 495) had not attended preschool. It is clear



        641

                                     Research in Educational Administration & Leadership
                                                6(3), September 2021, 625-660


that attending preschool acts as a protective factor and decreases the
likelihood of repeating Grade 11.
           What is the impact of preschool attendance on course grade, school
readiness, literacy and numeracy in Grade 1? Of the 761 children tested in
Grade 1, comparing the 266 children who had attended preschool
(public or private) with the 495 who had not attended showed
attending preschool is significantly positively related to teacher rated
report card grade in Grade 1 and school readiness. No significant
differences were found on scores of literacy and numeracy. Although
statistically significant differences were found on two indicators,
course grade and school readiness, it is important to consider what the
practical significance of these differences is. Specifically, how
meaningful is a 0.35 difference in course grade on a scale of 0 to 10?
What is the practical meaning of a 3.3% difference on school readiness?
The mean scores are reported on a 10-point scale and the other three
measures are on a scale of 100 percent. Concerning Teacher Assigned
Course Grade, those with no attendance at Preschool had a M = 6.05, n
= 355, SD = 1.67, whereas attendance at Preschool was observed with a
M = 6.35, n = 266, SD = 1.83 (F = 3.76, p = .053). On School Readiness: No
attendance at Preschool; M = 51.13, n = 495, SD = 21.78, whereas
Attendance at Preschool; M = 54.50, n = 266, SD = 22.01 (F = 4.10, p =
.043).
           Do scores of Grade 1 students differ by whether they attended a
private or public preschool? This analysis tested the effect of attending a
private preschool. This information was gathered from 78 students in
Grade 1, 29 who had attended public preschool and 49 who had

         1 A chi-square test of independence was performed to examine the relation between

preschool attendance and repeating Grade 1. The relation between these variables was
significant, χ2 (1, N = 761) = 70.23, p < .01.




                                                                                           642

                  Loomis & Akkari (2021). A Multilateral Model for Decolonising...



attended a private preschool. All three measures were statistically
significant. Scores on school readiness, literacy and numeracy differ by
type of preschool attended; those who attended a private preschool
score significantly higher than those who attended a public preschool.
            Do children in preschool score higher than non-schooled
counterparts? This analysis tested whether children attending
preschool score higher on learning tests than non-schooled children?
This two-group design required the use of all cases across all regions,
excepting children in Grade 1. The age of children ranged from 3 to 82.
In a test of more than 1,000 children on average the nearly 730 pre-
schoolers scored higher on all three measures tested than the 425
children who do not attend any school. (Note: the numbers of students
vary slightly depending upon the test because of some missing test
scores—e.g., SRI 1,179, Literacy 1,162, and Numeracy 1,169). All three
measures were statistically significant. Children attending preschool
score higher than children not attending school on school readiness,
literacy and numeracy. Statistical notation:
School Readiness: No-Schooling: Mean = 22.53, n = 439, SD = 15.08; Pre-
schoolers: mean = 36.96, n = 740, SD = 20.84 (F = 159.76, p = .000).
Literacy: No-Schooling: Mean = 23.94, n = 425, SD = 22.72; Pre-
schoolers: Mean = 35.95, n = 737, SD = 25.55 (F = 66.21, p = .000)
Numeracy: No-Schooling: Mean = 39.47, n = 433, SD = 38.94; Pre-
schoolers: Mean = 54.98, n = 736, SD = 38.94 (F = 34.19, p = .000)


        2   The pre-school sample (N = 742) age ranged from 3 to 8, with a Mean = 4.70 (Standard
Deviation = .85), Mode = 5, Median = 5. In the pre-school sample 184 children did not have an age
indicated so they were excluded from this analysis.
            The non-schooled sample (N = 485) age ranged from 3 to 13, so it was restricted to 3 to
8 for this statistical test. The measures of central tendency for this group follow: Mean = 5.21
(Standard Deviation = 1.39), Mode = 4, Median = 5.




        643

                         Research in Educational Administration & Leadership
                                    6(3), September 2021, 625-660


       How do scores of students in Grade 1 attending a school that is
partnered with Aide et Action compare to those attending a school not
affiliated with AEA? This analysis tested the effect of attending a school
affiliated with Aide et Action (AEA). This information was gathered
from 817 students in Grade 1, 323 students in an AEA school and 494
a school not indicated as being connected with AEA. Students differed
on the measure of School Readiness, but not on literacy and numeracy.
       Tests for Regional Differences. Regional differences were
examined on all three tests, school readiness, literacy, and numeracy
across three cohorts. The first cohort tested was comprised of children
who were not currently attending school. The second and third cohorts
were preschool and Grade 1 students, respectively.
       Regional differences exist among children not attending school.
Children aged 3 to 8 years who were not attending school showed
regional differences on test scores. On school readiness Betioky
(average score, M = 17, n = 81) scored significantly lower than Tuléar
(M = 25, n = 198). Even though the score in SAVA (M = 25, n = 35) was
that same as Tuléar, this difference was not statistically significant,
most likely due to the differences in sample sizes. Children not
attending school in SAVA scored significantly higher on numeracy
compared to non-schooled children in all the three other regions.
Among this group of children, literacy scores in Betioky were
significantly lower than in Tuléar.
       Regional differences were found among preschool students.
Preschool children in the region of SAVA scored significantly lower on
school readiness and literacy than all three other regions. Among this
group numeracy scores were similar across regions (i.e., differences
were not statistically significant): statistical notation – the Tukey HSD,
p < .01. Regional differences were also found in Grade 1. Grade 1



                                                                               644

            Loomis & Akkari (2021). A Multilateral Model for Decolonising...



children in SAVA score lower than children in the three other regions
on all three measures. Statistical notation for regional tests is that the
Tukey HSD, p < .01
       Test for Gender Differences. No gender differences were found
among children not attending school. Testing for gender differences
among children who do not attend school can inform us about between
gender socialization outside of school and scores on school readiness,
literacy, and numeracy. No significant gender differences were found
among children not attending school on assessments of school
readiness, literacy and numeracy. No gender differences were found
among preschool students. This test compared the scores of 464 girls
to 459 boys, from all regions on school readiness, literacy and
numeracy. On average for literacy scores calculated with a maximum
of 100% boys scored 38% and girls scored 35%. This difference of three
percentage points is not statistically significant. Girls, on average,
scored three percentage points higher than boys on measures of
numeracy, which was not statistically significant. In preschool, there
were no significant differences in boys and girls score on school
readiness, literacy, or numeracy. No gender differences were found
among children in Grade 1? Another analysis was conducted to test
whether gender differences were observed in Grade 1. Scores on
assessments of children in Grade 1 do not vary systematically by
gender.
Study 2 Findings: Progress of Pre-schoolers Over Time
       Case study 2 reports on lessons learned from assessing 242
children two consecutive years from nine schools across all four
regions researched. Of these 242 preschool students 140 students were
promoted to Grade 1 and 102 remained in preschool. Overall, the
changes in scores on all three outcomes increased significantly from



      645

                          Research in Educational Administration & Leadership
                                     6(3), September 2021, 625-660


Time 1 testing to Time 2 testing, but there are some important
differences. School readiness was positively impacted more so than
numeracy and literacy. Statistical notation: Among children who were
not attending school the change in numeracy and literacy scores from
Time 1 to Times 2 were not statistically significant. The 10% change in
literacy scores was not beyond the level of chance for this sample,
although it was approaching significance with p = .06 (statistical
significance is determined at p < .05). There are several factors that
affect statistical significance – e.g., sample size, standard deviation.
       Study limitations. Every study has limitations and strengths.
One limitation of this study is that the test of literacy is comprised of
two items from the measure of school readiness. Any measure with
few items is subject to criticism in terms of construct validity, meaning
that too few questions may not accurately (or fully) reflect what be
measured (Glenn, 2021). Interpretations related to literacy outcomes
should be made cautiously. Future research will lead to stronger
findings by using a more in-depth assessment of literacy that will
require more questions (e.g., speaking, reading, and writing as defined
by the local school and relevant education governance).
       Discussion and directions for future interventions and research. The
overall finding is that preschool contributes to higher levels of school
readiness. It also makes a difference in some cases on numeracy and
literacy. The rate of preschool attendance observed in 3 of the 4 regions
studied (Antananarivo, Tuléar, Sava, & Betioky) is approximately 35%;
notably only 13% of children in Tuléar have attended preschool. Given
these numbers, investing in outreach to families and making pre-
primary education accessible is needed. At the same time, attention is
needed for the quality of pre-primary education. Children in private
preschools are scoring significantly higher than children from public




                                                                                646

            Loomis & Akkari (2021). A Multilateral Model for Decolonising...



preschools. That finding withstanding, public schools are making a
positive impact. In this study, children attending pre-primary
education score higher on school readiness, literacy and numeracy
compared to children not attending school. Importantly, attending
preschool is related to greater success in Grade 1. Findings show that
95.5 percent of children who attended preschool do not repeat Grade
1, whereas only 30.7 percent of children who did not attend preschool
are successful in completing Grade 1 the first time around. In other
words, 69.3 percent of children who did not attend preschool repeat
Grade 1 and only 4.5 percent of those who attended preschool repeat
it.
       A standard in educational testing is to examine gender
differences. In looking at a snapshot of children’s learning among
those in all four regions combined, no gender differences exist on
school readiness, literacy, and numeracy. Fairly even numbers of girls
and boys were tested in all regions, though there are more boys in the
sample from Antananarivo. Future research may want to examine if
there are gender differences within these regions.
       Finally, a rigorous way to examine change is to assess the same
group of children at two points in time. In this study we found that
overall pre-primary education in Madagascar is increasing children’s
readiness for school, literacy and numeracy. All children in pre-
primary education who were promoted to Grade 1 show higher scores
on all three tests. Among children who stayed in pre-primary
education (probably because of age), across schools they have
increased scores on school readiness, whereas differences on literacy
and numeracy vary by school. It may be possible that the lack of
change in some cases was related to age or school curriculum and
teaching methods. Future research may consider examining these




      647

                         Research in Educational Administration & Leadership
                                    6(3), September 2021, 625-660


factors more closely. From this research in Madagascar, an important
question is whether the observed effects will endure. Will children
who attended pre-school continue to outperform those who did not in
Grades 2 and 3? Following children from pre-primary through Grade
3, at a minimum, will be important to understanding the impact of pre-
school education in Madagascar; providing comparable international
data is also needed.
       In closing this section, pre-primary education in Madagascar is
showing a positive difference on some outcomes for children and
shows promise for further development of early childhood education
by educational leaders from many sectors. The finding that literacy
and numeracy were not different by a school supported by Aide et
Action suggests that more work is needed on curriculum development
and teacher education for Aide et Action schools in particular, and for
all schools in general. This study’s finding that schools affiliated with
Aide et Action had a more positive effect on children’s school
readiness than unaffiliated schools lead us to consider ideas for
educational leaders to partner with non-government organizations,
managing border-specific and cross-border practices.

 Ideas for School Administrators’ Practice within the Multilateral
             Model for Decolonising African Leadership

       In this section, we explore how school administrators can
enhance their practices by re-considering key concepts (presented in
section 1) by using the model multilateral model for decolonising
African educational leadership (presented in section 2). We illustrate
the complexity of these practices with the case studies of Madagascar
and Ghana.




                                                                               648

            Loomis & Akkari (2021). A Multilateral Model for Decolonising...



       A cross-border issue is that many African countries rely on
financing from external powers that may create a dependence not only
on funds but also on knowledge (Eacott & Asuga, 2014). School
administrators have to choose carefully which organizations to engage
with and determine if a potential partner is working from a neo-
colonial or decolonising framework. Referring to our proposed model,
this is a point in quadrant 3 where educational leaders and
administrators execute autonomous decision-making. Key indicators
of neo-colonialism are imposing decontextualized competencies or
providing curriculum materials in colonial languages. Local African
administrators need to hold on to the understanding that their ability
to work in the colonial language is simultaneously privileging and
oppressing. It is providing the privilege of bringing in from the outside
much needed resources. It is oppressing because the next generation
of teachers and administrators witness the power the colonial
language has with outsiders and desires to retain it and the
conceptualisations        inherent        to      the     language,            further   de-
contextualizing education. School leaders can stop the cycle of
decontextualization by embracing international partners who do not
come with ready-made solutions but rather rely on the leaders to
provide them.
       In the case of Madagascar, the research reported herein was
initiated and funded by UBS Optimus Foundation when it decided to
fund an NGO, Aide et Action International, for the development of
formal preschools in Madagascar. Aide et Action International grew
from a French non-governmental organization Aide et Action founded
in 1981 with a mission of supporting access to education for children
in India. Since then, the organization has continued its focus on
education, broadened its reach to 25 countries, and implemented an
approach that mobilizes and develops human and financial resources.



      649

                         Research in Educational Administration & Leadership
                                    6(3), September 2021, 625-660


This shift in approach to “horizontal solidarity” came in 2007 when
Aide et Action International was established and UNESCO published
a report “Strong foundations Early childhood care and education”
(2007). Aide et Action International works with local governments,
community stakeholders and parents “at the service of the great cause
of education for all” (Aide et Action International, 2014). The focus of
the approach used was on capacity building.
       In the case of Aide-et-Action International, the approach is to
create initiatives for, with and by local governments, school
administrators, parents, external funders and researchers is an
exemplar of collective effort in the multilateral model. Hence,
decolonising educational leadership cannot be the business of school
administrators only. The international organisation attempts to engage
educational leaders at all levels of government and to provide funding
and share the international knowledge on the effects of investing in
early childhood education. This is where the ‘engagement’ domain in
quadrant III is critical. The goal is for school administrators to
determine what, if any, of that knowledges and resources will resolve
educational challenges that leaders face. In the case of Madagascar, the
educational leadership and management literature show only one
study published from this country that is indexed in SCOPUS from
1960 to 2018 (Hallinger, 2018); the study that student test scores do not
vary by whether a teacher is on a limited term contract or fully
employed (Glewwe & Maïga, 2011). The dearth of literature means that
leaders must engage researchers (quadrant IV) to rely on and generate
contextual knowledge.
       Ultimately, educational leadership is about ensuring quality
education for students (Bush, 2020). In the study of Madagascar
presented above, educational leadership in developing early




                                                                               650

           Loomis & Akkari (2021). A Multilateral Model for Decolonising...



childhood education may be defined as the influence on a commitment
of any educational actor in a decision-making situation in the
education system concerned with developing or stimulating
knowledge and practices in the early childhood sector. Here again,
leaders’ decision-making is a critical. The intervention and study on
child outcomes illustrate a fusing of global north resources with
present local-centric interventions in the global south. Working from a
model to empower local schools, Aide-et-Action International, with
support from the Union Bank of Switzerland (UBS) Optimus
Foundation, invested in and evaluated a pre-primary initiative in
Madagascar to better prepare children for school. One of the
limitations of the initiative in Madagascar is that the partnership
mostly addressed quadrants I and IV of our models to decolonise
leadership practices. Also, it was only three years, which is not enough
time to make a lasting impact. The decolonisation of African
educational leadership can be realized through multi-year, multi-
sectoral partnerships.
       Another      example         of    decolonized           African       educational
leadership that approaches realising the work on the past-present
continuum with language (quadrant II) and teacher training (quadrant
III) is evidenced in Ghana’s national education strategy for
establishing literacy in a mother-tongue language before receiving
instruction to read in the English language. To accomplish this goal,
the government, specifically the Ghana Education Service, partnered
with two international organizations (the Centre for Applied
Linguistics (CAL) and the Education Development Centre) with
funding from USAID and developed the project, Education Quality for
All (EQUALL). Informed by the Ghana Education Service, CAL
developed milestones and standards for teaching and assessing
children as they learn to read 1 of 13 Ghanaian languages illustrating



     651

                          Research in Educational Administration & Leadership
                                     6(3), September 2021, 625-660


how innovation and training can lead to professionalism as important
components of quadrant III. The success of this program relied on the
leadership from the Ghana Education Service working with school
administrators and teachers, and then schools working with parents to
reverse cultural norms that privileged English over the mother-tongue
language. Following EQUALL which operated in 20 districts, Ghana
Education Service with funding from USAID developed the National
Literacy Acceleration Program (NALAP) that now supports children
nationwide in learning to read in 1 of 11 Ghanaian languages (Khepera,
2020).
         Globally, the context of the COVID- 19 pandemic places new
pressures on educational leaders, and particularly in already poorly
functioning corrupt African states (Arowosegbe, 2021). School
administrators working within these systems can find strength in
working from a social justice framework particularly when working
with international and non-governmental partners. Within an already
stressed educational system in which leaders have developed the skills
to mobilize resources from government and non-governmental
organizations, they must now attend to health risks.
         Another critical issue for educational leadership in African is
the need to develop progressive policy frameworks and induce culture
shifts conducive to women leaders thriving. Educational leadership is
impacted by government policies. For example, the South African
Employment Equity Act 55 of 1998 prohibits discrimination by race
and gender and other social characteristics (Republic of South Africa
1998), and as a result, more women have been appointed as school
principals in post-apartheid compared to before. This progress
brought cultural resistance into schools with women principals




                                                                                652

           Loomis & Akkari (2021). A Multilateral Model for Decolonising...



reporting experiencing insubordination and sexual harassment by
male colleagues (Khumalo, 2021).
       Our proposed multilateral model still needs to be tested and we
invite readers to conduct research on it in Africa from perspectives
valuing the importance of rethinking leadership from a marginal
perspective (Bertrand & Rodela, 2018). We agree with Nkomo (2011)
that “Instead of searching for or imagining ‘African’ leadership and
management, it may be worth-while to engage in more descriptive
research that examines how leaders and managers in schools and the
ministries of education in Africa are responding to the dual pressures
of globalization and local needs” (p.377). Conducting research on
educational leadership in Africa is critically needed and must be done
in ways that are very careful with the use of concepts and
epistemologies using a comparative approach because knowledge
generated in this way will move educational (leadership) practice in
Africa from slavery-like positions to cross-border perspectives.
       In Africa, school administrators and managers have (or may
develop) the competencies that render them specialists of the
complexities inherent in decolonising leadership approaches. They are
uniquely positioned to work with all agents in both a top-down and a
bottom-up manner within and across borders to fulfil their
responsibilities in an open system in which communication and
collaboration flows easily along the past and present continuum.




     653

                         Research in Educational Administration & Leadership
                                    6(3), September 2021, 625-660


                                References
Aide-et-Action (2014). About us. Retrieved from http://www.aide-et-
       action.org/about-us/.
Anderson-Levitt, K. M. (2001). Ambivalences: La transformation d'une
      rénovation pédagogique dans un contexte postcolonial.
      Éducation et Sociétés, (1), 151-168.
Anderson-Levitt, K. (2017). Global flows of competence-based
      approaches in primary and secondary education. Cahiers de la
      recherche sur l’éducation et les savoirs, (16), 47-72.
Arowosegbe, J. O. (2021). Covid-19 and political modernity in Africa:
     Citizens' engagements and states' responses. The Psychological
     Studies of Social Issues, 24(1), 113-122.
Asuga, G. N., Scevak, J., & Eacott, S. (2016). Educational leadership,
      management and administration in Africa: an analysis of
      contemporary literature. School Leadership & Management, 36(4),
      381-400.
Bellier, I. (2012). Les peuples autochtones aux Nations unies: Un
        nouvel acteur dans la fabrique des normes internationales.
        Critique Internationale, (1), 61-80.
Bertrand, M., & Rodela, K. C. (2018). A framework for rethinking
       educational leadership in the margins: Implications for social
       justice leadership preparation. Journal of Research on Leadership
       Education, 13(1), 10-37.
Bush, T. (2014). Educational leadership and leadership development in
       Africa: Building the knowledge base. Educational Management
       Administration & Leadership, 42(6).
Bush, T. (2020). Managing a crisis: A contemporary challenge for all
       educational leaders. Educational Management, Administration &
       Leadership,                   48(6),                959–963.
       https://doi.org/10.1177/1741143220951885
de Sousa Santos, B. (2018). The end of the cognitive empire: The coming of
       age of epistemologies of the South. Duke University Press.



                                                                               654

            Loomis & Akkari (2021). A Multilateral Model for Decolonising...



Center for Applied Linguistics (2021). Home areas of impact language
       planning & policy global language policy. Retrieved from
       https://www.cal.org/areas-of-impact/language-planning-
       policy/global-language-policy
Cummins, J. (1986). Empowering minority students: A framework for
     intervention. Harvard Educational Review, 56(1) 18-36.
De L'Estoile, B. (2000). Science de l'homme et «domination rationnelle»
       savoir ethnologique et politique indigène en Afrique coloniale
       française. Revue de Synthèse, 121(3), 291-323.
Eacott, S., & Asuga, G. (2014). School leadership preparation and
        development in Africa: A critical insight. Educational
        Management Administration & Leadership, 42(6), 919–934.
        https://doi.org/10.1177/1741143214523013
Elonga Mboyo, J. P. (2016). Africa through structuration theory:
      Outline of the FS (Fear and Self-scrutiny) methodology of
      Ubuntu. In Africa Through Structuration Theory. Bamenda,
      Cameroon: Langaa RPCIG.
Elonga Mboyo, J. P. (2019). Reimagining Ubuntu in schools: A
      perspective from two primary school leaders in the Democratic
      Republic of Congo. Educational Management Administration &
      Leadership, 47(2), 206-223.
Etieyibo, E. (2017) Moral education, ubuntu and ubuntu-inspired
       communities, South African Journal of Philosophy, 36(3), 311-325,
       DOI: 10.1080/02580136.2017.1269995
Friere, P. (1970/2009). Pedagogy of the oppressed. New York, NY:
        Continuum.
Glen, S. (2021). Construct validity: Simple definition, statistics used in
       StatisticsHowTo.com: Elementary Statistics for the rest of us!
       Retreived from https://www.statisticshowto.com/construct-
       validity/




      655

                         Research in Educational Administration & Leadership
                                    6(3), September 2021, 625-660


Glewwe, P. & Maïga, E. W. (2011). The impacts of school management
     reforms in Madagascar: Do the impacts vary by teacher type?
     Journal of Development Effectiveness 3(4): 435–469.
Hallinger, P. (2018). Surfacing a hidden literature: A systematic review
       of research on educational leadership and management in
       Africa. Educational Management Administration & Leadership,
       46(3), 362-384. doi:10.1177/1741143217694895
Hallinger, P. (2019). Science mapping the knowledge base on
       educational leadership and management in Africa, 1960–
       2018. School Leadership & Management, 39(5), 537-560.
       doi:10.1080/13632434.2018.1545117
Hallinger, P. (2020). Science mapping the knowledge base on
       educational leadership and management from the emerging
       regions of Asia, Africa and Latin America, 1965–2018.
       Educational Management Administration & Leadership, 48(2), 209-
       230.
Kamwangamalu, N. M. (1999). Ubuntu in South Africa: a
     sociolinguistic perspective to a Pan-African concept. Critical
     Art: South-North Cultural and Media Studies 13(2), 24–41.
Kane, C. H. (1961). L'Aventure ambiguë. Paris: Julliard.
Khepera, K. (2020). Language policy and decolonizing African
      education. Journal of Management Policy and Practice, 21(2), 110–
      118.
Khumalo, S. S. (2021). Analyzing the experiences of women principals
     in primary schools in Limpopo province, South Africa through
     social justice theory. Problems of Education in the 21st Century,
     79(1), 47-59. https://doi.org/10.33225/pec/21.79.47
Lauwerier, T., & Akkari, A. (2013). Quelles approches pour réformer le
      curriculum et l’école en Afrique? Constats et controverses.
      Revue africaine de recherche en éducation, (5), 55-64.




                                                                               656

           Loomis & Akkari (2021). A Multilateral Model for Decolonising...



Loomis, C. & Akkari, A. (2012). From the will to the field: Parent
      participation in early childhood education in Madagascar.
      Africa Development, Volume XXXVII(3), 87-99.
Mbiti, J. (1989). African religions and philosophy. London:
       Heinemann.
Miller, P. W. (2018). The Nature of School Leadership. In The Nature of
        School Leadership (pp. 165-185). Palgrave Macmillan, Cham.
Mkhize, N. (2004). Psychology: An African perspective. In D. Hook
      (Ed.), Introduction to Critical Psychology (pp. 24–52). Lansdowne:
      UCT Press.
Mogadime, D., Mentz, P., Armstrong, D., & Holtam, B. (2010).
     Constructing self as leader: Case studies of women who are
     change agents in South Africa. Urban Education (Beverly Hills,
     Calif.),                      45(6),                    797–
     821.https://doi.org/10.1177/0042085910384203
Nkomo, S. M. (2011). A postcolonial and anti-colonial reading of
     ‘African’ leadership and management in organization studies:
     Tensions, contradictions and possibilities. Organization, 18(3),
     365-386.
Obiakor, E. F. (2004). Building patriotic African leadership through
      African-centred education. Journal of Black Studies, 34(3), 402-
      420.
Perkins, D.D. (1995). Speaking truth to power: Empowerment ideology
       as social intervention and policy. American Journal of Community
       Psychology, 23, 765-794
Piper, B. (2016). International education is a broken field: Can Ubuntu
        education bring solutions? International Review of Education,
        62(1), 101-111. doi:10.1007/s11159-016-9544-y
Rappaport, J. (1995). Empowerment meets narrative: Listening to
      stories and creating settings. American Journal of Community
      Psychology, 23, 795-807.




     657

                           Research in Educational Administration & Leadership
                                      6(3), September 2021, 625-660


Republic of South Africa, (1998). Employment equity Act no 55 of 1998.
      Government Printers.
Riger, S. (1993). What’s wrong with empowerment. American Journal of
        Community Psychology, 21, 279-292.
Saegert, S., & Winkel, G. (1996). Paths to community empowerment:
       Organizing at home. American Journal of Community Psychology,
       24, 517-550.
Serpell, R. (2010). The significance of schooling: Life-journeys in an African
        society. Cambridge University Press.
Sigogo, T.N.K., & Modipa, O.T. (2004). Critical reflections on
       community and psychology in South Africa. In D. Hook (Ed.),
       Introduction to Critical Psychology (pp. 316–334). Lansdowne:
       UCT Press.
United Nations (2015). Transforming our World: The 2030 Agenda for
      Sustainable Development, General Assembly Resolution A/Res/70/1,
      Sustainable Development Knowledge Platform, available at:
      https://sustainabledevelopment.un.org/post2015/transforming
      ourworld [site accessed 10 November 2018].
UNESCO (2007). Strong foundations: Early childhood care and education.
     Education for All Global Monitoring Report 2007.
Uzomah, H. (2018). Decolonizing African educational system as a
     panacea for Africa’s educational advancement in the 21st
     century. African Renaissance, 15(1)
Van de Walle, N. (1991). The decline of the Franc zone: Monetary
      politics in francophone Africa. African Affairs, 90(360), 383-405.
      Retrieved         February         10,         2021,         from
      http://www.jstor.org/stable/722938
Warren, K. B., & Jackson, J. E. (2003). Indigenous movements, self-
      representation, and the state in Latin America. University of Texas
      Press.
World Bank (n.d.). Early childhood education program evaluation package.
      New York: Dover. The World Bank.



                                                                                 658

            Loomis & Akkari (2021). A Multilateral Model for Decolonising...



Yukl, G. & Van Fleet, D.D. (1992). Theory and research on leadership
       in organizations. In M.D. Dunette et L. Hough (Ed.), Handbook
       of Industrial and Organizational Psychology (pp. 147-197). Palo
       Alto (USA): Consulting Psychologists Press, Inc.
About the Authors:
Colleen Loomis is faculty at the Balsillie School of International Affairs
and Wilfrid Laurier University (Canada). She joined Laurier’s School
of International Policy & Governance in April 2018, coming from the
Department of Psychology, where she worked for 15 years in various
roles as an associate professor, program coordinator, and associate
dean of the Faculty of Science. She was a Postdoctoral Scholar at
Stanford University Medical Center and Veterans Affairs and has
previously taught and conducted research at the University of the
District of Columbia, a historically black college and university. Her
research focuses on quality education, gender equality, poverty
reduction, and health and well-being, identified by the United Nations
as Sustainable Development Goals 4, 5, 1, and 3, respectively (UN2030
Agenda). She collaborates with government and non-government
organizations in the United States, Canada, Africa and Europe. Colleen
holds a Ph.D. and an M.A. in Human Services Psychology from the
University of Maryland Baltimore County and is a Magna cum laude
graduate of the University of Tulsa.
Email: cloomis@wlu.ca
Abdeljalil Akkari is Professor of "International Dimensions of
Education" at the University of Geneva (Switzerland). He previously
taught at the University of Friborg (Switzerland) and the University of
Maryland (United States). He also headed the research section of the
Haute École Pédagogique Berne-Jura-Neuchâtel (Switzerland). His
main research interests concern intercultural education, the analysis of
educational inequalities, teacher training and the internationalization



      659

                        Research in Educational Administration & Leadership
                                   6(3), September 2021, 625-660


of educational policies. Abdeljalil Akkari regularly collaborates with
many international organizations (UNESCO, Council of Europe,
World Bank). He regularly carries out cooperation missions in Africa
and Latin America. He is currently leading two research projects on
early childhood education and on culturally diverse teachers. Abeljalil
holds a Ph.D. in Education and an M.A. in Development Studies from
the University of Geneva and an MA in Social Sciences and in
Education, University of Lyon II (France).




                                                                              660