International Perspectives on Ethical Educational
                   Leadership

         Brandy Yee • Dianne Yee


     International
Perspectives on Ethical
      Educational
      Leadership
Lessons from Workplace Cultures That Have Lost
            (and Found) Their Way

Brandy Yee                                       Dianne Yee
Liberal Studies in Education                     Faculty of Education
California Lutheran University                   Western University
Thousand Oaks, CA, USA                           London, ON, Canada




ISBN 978-3-031-70838-1    ISBN 978-3-031-70839-8                            (eBook)
https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-031-70839-8

© The Editor(s) (if applicable) and The Author(s), under exclusive license to Springer Nature
Switzerland AG 2024

This work is subject to copyright. All rights are solely and exclusively licensed by the
Publisher, whether the whole or part of the material is concerned, specifically the rights of
translation, reprinting, reuse of illustrations, recitation, broadcasting, reproduction on
microfilms or in any other physical way, and transmission or information storage and retrieval,
electronic adaptation, computer software, or by similar or dissimilar methodology now
known or hereafter developed.
The use of general descriptive names, registered names, trademarks, service marks, etc. in this
publication does not imply, even in the absence of a specific statement, that such names are
exempt from the relevant protective laws and regulations and therefore free for general use.
The publisher, the authors and the editors are safe to assume that the advice and information
in this book are believed to be true and accurate at the date of publication. Neither the
publisher nor the authors or the editors give a warranty, expressed or implied, with respect to
the material contained herein or for any errors or omissions that may have been made. The
publisher remains neutral with regard to jurisdictional claims in published maps and
institutional affiliations.

Cover credit: Pattern © Melisa Hasan

This Palgrave Macmillan imprint is published by the registered company Springer Nature
Switzerland AG.
The registered company address is: Gewerbestrasse 11, 6330 Cham, Switzerland

If disposing of this product, please recycle the paper.

 This book is dedicated to those ethical educational leaders who serve as the
moral compasses of schools and school districts in so many places around the
globe. Your unwavering commitment to honesty, fairness, and empathy not
  only shapes the culture of our educational institutions but also molds the
 character of generations to come. You are the architects that champion the
  well-being and academic success of every student and the well-being and
professional growth of each of your staff members, guiding decisions with an
      ethical clarity that resonates through the communities you serve.
 Your integrity and personal courage in the face of so many challenges in
 your daily work inspire us. We hope this book serves as a reflection of your
 positive impact and a celebration of the ethical path you continue to pave
                      for school leaders of tomorrow.
   At the very core of all we do is our family. Your unwavering support,
patience, and love have allowed us to chase our dreams—paving the way for
         you far surpasses anything we have ever done. We love you.
                            With sincere respect,
                            Brandy and Dianne

                        Contents




1 Ethical
         Leadership in Education Systems  1
  Introduction: Our “Why”   2
  Purpose and Structure of the Book   3
  Theoretical Foundations and Perspectives   6
  Ethical Educational Leadership Paradigms   9
  Ethical Instructional Leadership  12
  Vignettes of Leadership Practice and the Voices of Impacted
  Educators  14
  References  15

2 Healthy
         and Toxic Workplace and School Cultures 19
  Workplace Culture  20
  Healthy and Toxic Workplace Cultures  23
  Healthy and Toxic School Cultures  28
  School District Employee Engagement: A Canadian Vignette  37
  References  39

3 The
     Influence of Trustees, School Boards, and the
  Ministry: “Tricky Politics?” 43
  The Influence of School Boards  45
  Ethical School Board Leadership in the United States  47
  Ethical School Board Leadership in Canada  54
  Ethical School Board Leadership in Finland  61



                                                             vii

viii    Contents


       Ethical School Board Leadership in Germany  69
       The Ethical Dilemma of an American School Board Member  77
       References  78

4 The
     Role of Directors and Superintendents: “Lead Learner
  or CYA/Teflon?” 83
  Ethical Leadership Standards for Directors and Superintendents
  in Canada  84
  Ethical Leadership Standards for Directors and Superintendents
  in the United States  91
  Ethical Leadership Standards for Directors and Superintendents
  in Finland  96
  Ethical Leadership Standards for Directors and Superintendents
  in Germany 101
  An American Assistant Superintendent’s Ethical Dilemma 108
  References 111

5 The
     Work of School Principals: “Where the Buck Stops!”115
  Ethical Leadership Standards for Principals in Canada 116
  Ethical Leadership Standards for Principals in the United States 122
  Ethical Leadership Standards for Principals in Germany 124
  Ethical Leadership Standards for Principals in Finland 127
  “Where the Buck Stops”: The Principal’s Office 131
  References 137

6 Leadership
             Lessons from Toxic Educational Workplace
  Cultures141
  Toxic Workplace Cultures 142
  Toxic School and School District Cultures 144
  One Teacher’s Experience 147
  One Principal’s Experience 151
  One Associate Director’s Experience 157
  References 161

7 Leadership
            Lessons from Healthy Educational Workplace
  Cultures163
  Healthy Workplace Cultures 164
  Healthy School and School District Cultures 165

                                Contents    ix

One Teacher’s Experience 166
One Principal’s Experience 170
One Superintendent’s Experience 174
Next Steps and Future Considerations 178
References 180


Index181

                     About the Authors




Brandy Yee holds her PhD from Universität Heidelberg in Germany,
studying middle years learning, teaching, and leadership in Germany,
Finland, and Canada. At the K-12 level, she has worked for two school
boards in Canada as a teacher, district specialist, assistant principal, and
principal. Currently she is Associate Dean, Director, and Assistant Professor
of Pedagogy and Educational Leadership at California Lutheran University,
working with undergraduate and graduate education students. Yee always
considers her role to be that of “chief learner” in any educational institu-
tion she has worked in and hopes her students and staff have learned as
much from her as she has from them.
Dianne Yee holds her PhD from the University of Calgary in Canada,
studying ICT learning, teaching, and leadership in New Zealand, the
United States, and Canada. At the K-12 level, she has worked for five
school boards in Canada as a teacher, counsellor, assistant principal, prin-
cipal, director, and superintendent. Currently she works with graduate
educational leadership students at Western University as an assistant pro-
fessor and at Royal Roads University as an associate faculty member. Yee is
very thankful to her unique and diverse learners for teaching her the most
valuable lessons about learning, teaching, and leadership.




                                                                           xi