Educational Leadership for Equality, Diversity and
Inclusion in Curricula Design

Enock Tinashe TSAPAYI1, Abneer E SAMUEL2
1   Lancaster University, Bailrigg, LA1 4YW Lancaster, UK; tsapayi@lancaster.ac.uk
(corresponding author)                                                                                         Received: June 23, 2023
2   University of Bolton, Deane Road, BL3 5AB Bolton, UK; aes1res@bolton.ac.uk                            Revised: September 15, 2023
                                                                                                         Accepted: September 20, 2023
                                                                                                        Published: September 24, 2023




    Abstract: This paper dissected the role of leaders in implementing equality, diversity and
    inclusion in UK higher education. Since most Higher Education Institutes are now monitored on
    their graduate outcomes, it is important that they are inclusive within planning curriculum design
    so as to give their students better chances and outcomes at completing their studies and being
    competitive in the global jobs market. The UK law and legislation worldwide is stepping up to
    value inclusion and now moving away from passive social exclusion. The research used
    ethnographical research in order to find out if equality, diversity and inclusion is being effectively
    implemented in curricula design. The results are based on one organisation in the Northwest of
    England using data collected over a 4-year period. A mixed method research design was also
    devised to use in-depth unstructured interviews to tutors of HND and degree programmes
    regarding curriculum design on their programmes. The findings show that there has been
    significant changes based on social and political influences, such that leaders are therefore
    working within standardised frameworks as a result of legislation. The primary research
    confirms that leaders have more understanding of equality, diversity and inclusion and it has the
    potential to self-sustain the UK higher education system.

    Keywords: widening participation; equality; diversity; inclusion.




Introduction

Kauffman (2020) states that inclusive practice in Education is a ‘hot topic’ in modern times.
This has shown within various social policies, and particularly education policies. The ideas and
language in this case have been popularised worldwide by advocates for/ and individuals with
disabilities worldwide including The United Nations Convention on the Rights of Persons with
Disabilities (CRPD). In the USA, major aspects of education for children with disabilities are
separately governed by a federal law known as ‘The Individuals with Disabilities Education
Act’ (IDEA). This requires that every individual, despite disability and other diverse qualities
should be entitled to right to education in least restrictive environments and having individual
learning plans where applicable. This is where equality and equity are implemented to ensure
every individual has equal rights to access education within Higher Education.

This study looks at how important the aspects of equality, diversity and inclusion are in
modern higher education and how they are being implemented. As the aspects of equality,
diversity and inclusion are now etched in British society, they are governed by the
government legislation of Equality Act (2010). The direct focus of the law is to remove
discrimination within the UK society according to Butler (2016). However, it also covers
different characteristics in society and how members of the public, employers, public
service providers and therefore education providers need to accommodate for any diverse
qualities without discriminating by law. This statutory requirement has now led to other
aspect of education equality diversity and improvements such as Widening Participation
policy which will be described in this paper.


How to cite
Tsapayi, E. T., & Samuel A. E. (2023). Educational leadership for equality, diversity and inclusion in
curricula design. Management Dynamics in the Knowledge Economy, 11(3), 232-250. DOI
10.2478/mdke-2023-0015
ISSN: 2392-8042 (online)
Journal Abbreviation: Manag. Dyn. Knowl. Econ.
www.managementdynamics.ro
https://content.sciendo.com/view/journals/mdke/mdke-overview.xml

                                   Management Dynamics in the Knowledge Economy | 233
                                Vol.11 (2023) no.3, pp.232-250; DOI 10.2478/mdke-2023-0015



The objective of this paper looks at whether the UK is competitive in equality, diversity
and inclusion on a global level. The implementation of these qualities is to be examined as
to whether they are providing the lawful requirements as well as giving opportunities to
individuals to make them globally competent. A major objective of this element is to
analyse and evaluate how HEIs are competent in producing graduates that are competent
on the global jobs market. The analysis also aims to analyse whether the current system
is sustainable long-term.

The purpose of the study


The purpose of this study is to analyse the role of education leadership in ensuring
equality, diversity and inclusion is achieved in the UK HE industry. This will also
determine whether the implementation aligns with international standards of anti-
oppressive practice and if this will support sustaining the higher education standards in
the future. The higher education system plays a major role in economic growth as future
leaders and participants come through the education system. Do they have the right tools
in guiding the country’s competitiveness on a global level? Therefore, this question is to
set the pace of the primary research directive and look closely at how the existing policies
such as widening participation contribute towards equality, diversity and inclusion.


Literature review

What is curriculum?

Luke, Woods, and Weir (2013) described curriculum as the formal syllabus and course of
study normally held accountable for what students learn and their outcomes ultimately.
Curriculum is also normally what should be learned and is held accountable for ideological
and cultural scrutiny. When there is a problem about the quality of learning, or graduate
outcomes, the focus is then turned onto two factors, the curriculum and the teachers
delivering it. However, there is a suggestion that good teaching involves bending and
shaping the curriculum to respond to particular students’ needs. This is where disability,
culture, ethnicity and other aspects of diversity need to come into play and have some
equity applied. However, Kelly (2009) took a critical look at curriculum as limiting and
immoral and suggested it often ignores current affairs and needs of students to give them
the right tools for progression.

Why equality, diversity and inclusion?

Participation in higher education has been expanding substantially in England gradually
over the last century (Chowdry et al., 2012). However, this has also revealed concerns
about inequalities of access to university for pupils regarded as socially disadvantaged
pupils. The commonly underrepresented groups are grouped by disability, ethnicity, age
and socio-economic status. Chowdry et al. (2012) further reported that pupils eligible for
free school meals are commonly used as the indicator of low socio-economic status. 14%
of these pupils participate in higher education at age 18-19 or 19-20 years compared with
33% of pupils not eligible for free school meals. They also state that despite attempts to
increase participation of pupils from low socio-economic backgrounds, or other
underrepresented groups, the degree participation and achievement appears to have
gradually worsened in the 1980s through to the 1990s. This has triggered a chain reaction
effect to encourage policy making based on ‘Widening’ participation.

The widening participation policy has been implemented for years since the coalition
Government 2010 – 2015 as reported by Connell-Smith and Hubble (2018). The purpose
of this policy was to double the number of students from under-represented backgrounds
such as those from ethnic minorities and low-income backgrounds. The number of
students from black and minorities was proposed to rise by 20%. This however

234 | Enock Tinashe TSAPAYI, Abneer E SAMUEL
Educational Leadership for Equality, Diversity and Inclusion in Curricula Design



introduced what was known as a transparency duty on Higher education institutions to
provide data on the backgrounds of their students. In 2016, the green paper on widening
participation suggested universities would be expected to be directly involved with
schools either by sponsoring existing schools or setting up new schools as to raise
standards of attainment. However, this received a mixed reaction from the university
sector.

Marangozov et al. (2014) wrote an article about an initiative under the Equality Act (2010)
by the government where equality, diversity & inclusion grants were given to Further
Education colleges and training organisations. This was done in order to allow them to
develop the sector’s capacity to meet the duty of inclusion and this sounds like a great
initiative. This was commissioned by the Skills Funding Agency. As good as it is, one can
always ask questions such as if the funding also includes training to organisations to fully
understand inclusion, equality & diversity? This also does not ensure all organisations are
following inclusion policies or training their staff to be competent in understanding
inclusion elements such as disability awareness and how to best support individuals. Is it
down to the organisation and their own morals? It may seem so as this initiative looks as
if the authorities and commissioners would have fulfilled a need to provide provision, but
managing it is another whole responsibility which cannot be guaranteed once the funding
has provided a little awareness and resources.

Sustainability of higher education is an important aspect that is based on different
qualities that have to be achieved nationally in order to have a competent continuity of
the industry based on national and global expectations, anti-oppressive practice is
important in terms of delivering education and services as well as ensuring those using
the services are also trained to be competent in doing so. Therefore, the curricula design
depends greatly on the success of anti-oppressive practice and the social justice basis of
equality, diversity and inclusion (Barth, 2015). This will ensure the competence levels of
equality, diversity and inclusion are globally competent and would support the long-term
sustainability of the UK higher education.

This study also examines how the widening participation affects changes in HE at different
levels of planning and delivering education. The levels examined are the macro, meso and
micro in an HE institution in Greater Manchester. The macro level is where plans are
implemented at government level. The implementation of the policy by the government
directs how certain operations are acted upon within the HE sector directing them to
follow specific instructions. The meso level consists of the management and boards of the
institutions and how they perceive and communicate the changes and requirements to the
micro, which consists of the individuals tasked with carrying out the required actions
(Tutors and student involvement). The impact of social policy is a direct action of
proactive and reactive strategies of governments, creating policy drivers. Power (2001)
looks at the first driver of the WP to be implemented and delivered into the HE context.
The disparities in education are an obvious concern of the government and they have to
pass the instructions and plans to the meso level, which are the university management
boards. However, the micro level which consists of the tutors, student support and
pastoral teams have to ensure the curriculum designs are adapted to match certain
changes implemented. These changes may include relaxed entry requirements to study
for those identified as WP applicants. Other changes that are then affected may include
curriculum design and assessment design to make it accessible for WP students.

In support of understanding the impact of change, Warren (2016) has discussed the
impact of the widening participation policy on curriculum design and what the whole
change process means in enactment. Warren (2016) identified that this provides a
challenge in developing curriculum models designed to accommodate a more
heterogenous student population. The research was completed on the South African and
Australian models of widening participation. The findings show that there is now a
distinction between a separate, semi-integrated and integrated approaches of curriculum
design. They then showed that the impact of the separate provision of the academic

                                   Management Dynamics in the Knowledge Economy | 235
                                Vol.11 (2023) no.3, pp.232-250; DOI 10.2478/mdke-2023-0015



support is less effective and that of a semi-integrated and integrated models offer better
prospects beyond studies at universities. This therefore creates questionable views of
whether the widening participation policy is communicated clearly to employers and
curriculum designers. Do the policy designers understand the implications of policies on
curriculum design?

Equality, diversity & inclusion in context

The organisation the researcher works in is a smaller HEI organisation that provides HNC,
HND and Degree Top Up courses in partnerships with UK wide Universities and Colleges
and awarding bodies. The course delivered are in Business management, Health and Social
Care Practice for England and Computer Network Engineering. The students are an
average age of 40 years old, and they range from those with level 3 qualifications as an
entry requirement to those with level 2 qualifications with experience in the industry
proven by references and their working profile. The course in Health and Social Care
includes a requirement to complete 450 hours of placement to prove their links of practice
and theory.

The organisation has 4 campuses in Bolton, London, Manchester and Oldham. There are a
total of approximately 500 Students. All Tutors employed by the organisation have at least
a Level 7 Post Graduate Certificate in Education (PGCE) and that ranges to several
employees with Level 7 master’s degrees in education pathways. However, there is a
strong understanding and drive in Inclusive Education and that is shown by how the
organisation engages with the local communities and driving of their Widening
Participation focus on giving opportunities to a diverse group of learners across all 3
campuses. One of the organisation’s strengths is understanding equality, diversity and
inclusion in all aspects. The organisation follows all policies and regulations in line with
regulators and awarding bodies such as Pearson Education. This includes visits from
external examiners that monitor the compliance and Student support in an adult learning
environment.

Data is tracked to understand students’ needs and monitoring through regular audits. The
curriculum director has completed audits on all assessments completed and validates the
grades before they are presented to the moderator. Standardisation meetings are held at
the beginning of each module for the assessor to show their plan for delivery and
assessment of the module. These will look at fundamentals such as how inclusive the
teaching and learning materials are and how accessible they are to all students. All tutors
are required to complete a unit recommendation form at the end of each module and
highlight their best outcomes and any concerns including requesting materials to support
the module and student needs to learn effectively. Student evaluations on their modules
are also completed internally for the college to understand their perspectives and
experiences on the course and individual modules. This is to continue providing necessary
support for anti-discriminatory practice as stated by Thompson (2012).

Student involvement and inclusion

The college has a policy of Student representatives across all cohorts and this has led to a
direct channel of communication ensuring Student perspectives are considered at all
times. Student experience is understood as annually, plans for charity events and cultural
festivals include students and their ideas of what they would expect or like to happen.
These are planned by staff and students with consideration to all College policies and this
year these have been restricted due to COVID-19 social distancing. These were still
completed online with activities such as the virtual cake baking morning and online
quizzes. Mulinge, Arasa, and Wawire (2017) specify that one of the modern successes in
Education is to involve Students in certain governance of their courses and institutions.
This ensures their needs and requirements are respected from a partner’s perspective.

236 | Enock Tinashe TSAPAYI, Abneer E SAMUEL
Educational Leadership for Equality, Diversity and Inclusion in Curricula Design



Student support and learning resources are regularly reviewed to ensure Student welfare
is of top quality. The college provides a physical library in both campuses and all module
books are identified by a sticker system which was implemented by Student Services. This
allows students to be more confident in finding the books they require at any given time
they visit the library. The library has new computers for Students to use and there are
quiet computer learning centres on the campuses. Across all four campuses, there is a ratio
of five Students to one computer. Reading materials such as journals and databases are
updated at the beginning of each term allowing the standardisation process to ensure all
resources have been tested and reviewed on their relevance to the taught modules.

The organisation has a good scope on supporting the student journey beyond their studies
and is always aiming to improve on understanding and enhancing Student destinations
and tracking them to allow strategies for growth. The organisation has good relationships
with local employers as the HND course requires Students to complete 450 hours in
placement. This has led to relationships with placement providers such as Nurse Plus and
the Priory. There is a placement officer that engages local organisations and we have
invited several employers that come voluntarily to give talks about what opportunities
will be available to Student’s after gaining their qualifications. This also help us to ensure
our curriculum supports the policies used in practice and these are used in placement for
compliance.

            Table 1. Additional student support to enhance equality of opportunity
     Additional support to
                                    Links to external bodies             Outcomes
            students
                                                               Over 20% of student secured
 Placement support                Nurse plus
                                                               work placements
 Student and employer             Rapha Care & Support         Students get an annual visit
 engagements                      Solutions                    for career advice
                                                               Students get an annual visit
 Career insights                  The Priory
                                                               for career advice
                                                               15% of Health and Social Care
 Placement support                Eden Care
                                                               students secured placements
                                     Source: own elaboration

How has inclusion been achieved?

Teaching and learning

There are also scheduled student meetings where the student representatives meet with
the programme managers and curriculum directors to discuss any issues or success points
that the college may need to be aware of. The idea of diversity is visible in how the college
has approximately 80% being from ethnic minorities and the staff are also fairly diverse
in ethnicity as well as sex and age. 70% of students are female while 3 staff members are
over the age of 60.

The organisation follows the guidance and framework of Pearson Education and practices
monitoring from external examiners that ensure the process is following a framework that
promotes focus on skills to enter a work environment. The curriculum design is planned
in collaboration with employers such as NHS and other industry leaders. This includes
ensuring they are taught reflective, inclusive and interactive criteria to enable transferable
skills and engagement in problem solving. The level 5 HND is a recognised qualification by
one of the Statutory regulators and inspectors of health and social care services, the Care
Quality Commission (CQC). Students are recognised as leaders such as managers or
supervisors with this qualification and they can progress to either manage whole facilities
and even own their own health and social care businesses. Pearson (2018) also specifies
that all lecturers teaching on their programmes need to be qualified and teach high quality
material in compliance with professional standards that have inclusive practice as one of
the fundamentals.

                                    Management Dynamics in the Knowledge Economy | 237
                                 Vol.11 (2023) no.3, pp.232-250; DOI 10.2478/mdke-2023-0015



Assessments

All taught units are assessed internally by trained tutors. After a term of approximately 10
weeks, assessments are completed in the form of assignments. The assignments take
different forms from written reports, essays and even presentations as these also aid the
skills of problem solving using different methods. These also vary with most completed by
individuals and some completed by groups working as a team. The assignments are
different to exams as they are separately addressed with a deadline for submission. They
are to evidence the set learning outcomes and taught material should give the students
material to fulfil requirements of the outcomes. To make them practical, they can also be
broken into more than one assessment and the collective outcome can determine the
grades achieved contributing to credits that will evidence completion of all learning
outcomes and qualifications. The inclusive input is implemented by co-producing with
students to give them freedom in planning some of their assessment types according to
their preferences. Personalisation in assessments gives the opportunity to all learners
without discrimination of different abilities and preferences.

Learning during the Covid-19 pandemic May 2020 – July 2021

The use of the virtual platform Zoom became very popular worldwide at the beginning of
the lockdown which forced many education institutions and businesses to conduct their
business online and human contact virtually. Nash (2020) describes how this platform
allowed many businesses and education to stay alive and effective. However, Nash (2020)
also talks about an emerging challenge of digital literacy. This challenge was faced by
many students that may not have been very technical anyway before being then forced to
use technology in order to access their education. Nash also hints at the difficulties that
may have been overlooked such as accessibility to the actual resources such as computers,
internet access and affordability of these resources. However, some look at how continuity
in education during the pandemic has been hailed as a success as people would have been
discouraged to return to education had it been suspended completely Nash (2020).
Especially adult learners, life could get in the way and it will be a very difficult situation.

Other platforms

Microsoft teams was also another virtual platform which was utilised by institutions in
order to maintain contact and access to courses and learning. This platform was identified
as one that allowed transparency and helped students to keep focus on their work. It
allows users to store their files and share files and the use of platforms. There was also the
feature of virtual meetings. However, one of the drawbacks was the limited number of
faces visible to users at a single time meaning the contact from the classroom could not be
reciprocated (Storyals, 2019).

Student attainment and engagement

It has been reported by Plakhotnik et al. (2021), across Europe, many students showed a
pattern of how they have been affected in their performance and attainment. The study
across France, Germany, Russia and the UK of 2, 707 students show a sudden rise in
university support facilities. One of the most used support elements was pastoral support
as well as academic aid support which showed students felt the sudden struggle to cope
and perform as well as they always done. This study also showed that people
automatically tend to experience stress more when they feel a sudden loss of a resource.
The loss of face-to-face learning means it left many learners anxious and feeling isolated
in their learning environments which are usually interactive. It also showed how personal
resources may not have been invested in before the pandemic with 35% of students
admitting that they use computers provided by universities. The absence of social
activities also left people without external motivation.

238 | Enock Tinashe TSAPAYI, Abneer E SAMUEL
Educational Leadership for Equality, Diversity and Inclusion in Curricula Design



Moate et al (2019) also speaks about how it becomes very difficult when students have to
suddenly find themselves with other personal challenges and pressures such as financial
hardships and balancing work and family duties. This would have created a turbulent
situation on their wellbeing overall.

Student support

During the pandemic many students needed support from the institutions more in terms
of personal financial issues, psychological issues and welfare in general. Universities
bridge a lot of gaps in students’ welfare with several types of interventions apart from
their academic needs. This includes meeting cultural and religious diverse needs of
several students (Plakhotnik et al., 2021). Some of the support comes from peers giving
students a sense of belonging and the positive relationships with other creating autonomy
as a group. Universities also support students in increasing their chances of employability
and ensuring they are learning all the skills they need to enter the world of work or further
higher education.

Social effects on students

The pandemic provided several challenges to all students in higher education. These vary
in social and economic. The social aspect is one that seem to have been overlooked.
However, Office for National Statistics (2020) carried out a Student Covid Insight Survey.
In this survey it was found that student experience which is one of the biggest concerns
for educational institutes deteriorated greatly during the pandemic. Over 53% of students
reported being very dissatisfied with their university experience as they indicated that
they felt they had missed out on the anticipated social experience of university life being
in lockdown. In the same survey, 65% reported not to have attended any of their virtual
taught sessions due to lack of motivation.

Government support

During the pandemic, there was a great need for financial and social support from the
government. This support was great as many people in employment were forced to isolate
and not attend work. HM Revenue and Customs (2020) described the situation in the UK
as the pandemic set in as unpredicted. This led to many employers setting up to make job
cuts as they could not afford to keep employees on their payroll without any production.
This led to the government stepping in and paying around 80% of employee wages to
ensure the British public did not lose their livelihoods. However, this scheme did not
consider students most of which would have been in part time employment and not
eligible as full-time workers. This particular group was left without the financial support.
However, the organisation in study was able to access government support for specific
students to apply for hardship funds. These allowed them to be able to purchase resources
such as new laptops and other devices that allowed students to access learning. One to
one support was also provided where tutors engaged with at risk students based on
several characteristics of widening participation.


Research design

The research was completed in three campuses of the same HE organisation across
Greater Manchester. The research problem and aim are finding out if equality, diversity
and inclusion is implemented effectively through leadership and how it is responded to
by those at ground level in higher education. The widening participation policy therefore
will be examined in how it affects curriculum design and if it is a challenge for those
involved. In this institution, the WP students have been identified as those from low socio-
economic backgrounds returning to education as mature students. They are recruited to
study with considerations of their experience in vocational areas such as Health and Social

                                   Management Dynamics in the Knowledge Economy | 239
                                Vol.11 (2023) no.3, pp.232-250; DOI 10.2478/mdke-2023-0015



Care. The qualifications in maths and English are subsidised with level 2 exams provided
when interviewed, if the students do not hold these qualifications on application.

Data collection was carried out using the pragmatist philosophy as this topic required a
positivist approach to capture statistics of the widening participation students and their
HE journeys. However, an interpretivist approach was also required in order to get a full
understanding of how the widening participation policy and inclusion as a whole is
perceived by those who work within its designs and constraints. Therefore, a mixed
methods approach was used which included semi-structured interviews and semi-
structured questionnaires. The reasons behind mixed methods was that there will be
questions such as how staff understood the success of the widening participation policy
in promoting equality, diversity and inclusion. Even though the qualitative method would
support this type of question, the collection of numerical data is also needed to compare
factual information regarding progression, attainment and achievement of the students.
This would in turn provide a perspective of the success of the WP policy in changing
outcomes for the WP students against the views of staff on the success of the widening
participation policy. Comparing variables of widening participation students, and non-
widening participation students is also dependent on quantitative methods, using a
structured questionnaire. However, as manageable and simple as it was utilising a
questionnaire, there were some limitations such as delays with some of the questionnaires
not being returned timely

The sampling technique used was volunteer sampling with tutors, campus managers,
pastoral and academic support teams. Even though this method is usually associated with
achieving a large sample, it was limited with the organisation being small, and not
considered big in context with HE. The number of students in total is just over 500 in all
three campuses and that consists of 3 courses of HND and a Top up degree. The subjects
covered are Health and Social Care, Business Management and Computer Network
Engineering. In comparison, a typical university in the Northwest of England will have a
total of approximately over 20,000.

The data collection procedures started with the inclusion and exclusion process of the
sample, which reduced it to a total of 20 from 26. The inclusion and exclusion qualities are
described in the Prisma flow chart below (see Figure 1). When the participants were
selected, the data collection process followed the British Educational Research
Association (BERA) principles and the participants were all provided with a consent form
(BERA, 2018). The consent form ensured that fundamental principles were followed
which are ensuring all participants understand their participation is voluntary and they
have the right to withdraw at any time. They were also informed that all data collected is
kept confidential and cannot be used to identify individuals, or their personal views. The
questions presented were examined to reduce any physical or psychological harm to all
participants. Finally, briefing and debriefing was carried out with all participants before
and after taking part, ensuring they understood the full meaning and contribution of their
participation. Ethics underpin reliability and validity in ensuring the research has been
conducted accordingly with research standards that do not manipulate data or use
unreliable sources such as vulnerable or biased participants.

The data was analysed using thematic and narrative analyses. The results therefore show
qualities of what the implications on staff working within the constraints of the widening
participation policy are, what the perception of the WP policy’s success on students’
outcomes is to the staff as well as comparing data regarding retention, attainment and
achievement of widening participation students and non-widening participation students.
Any other findings that will fall outside the emerging themes will then be narrated in how
they were provided, or what they meant for the participants. With the interviews being
semi-structured, the process will begin the analysis by asking further questions if the
responses fall outside common themes or common agreed working patterns.

240 | Enock Tinashe TSAPAYI, Abneer E SAMUEL
Educational Leadership for Equality, Diversity and Inclusion in Curricula Design




              30 staff    17 Tutors
              5 pastoral support                                      Excluded
              4 admin staff (student services)                        9 Tutors
              3 Curriculum directors



              20 staff
              8 tutors
              5 pastoral staff
              4 admin (student services)
              3 directors
                           Figure 1. Inclusion and exclusion of sample
                                      Source: own elaboration

The excluded staff were excluded to ensure there was no bias and balancing the numbers
of participants from as many different departments as possible.

                                  Table 2. Profile of participants
  Participant                        Position                               Experience (years)
       A          tutor                                                             5
       B          Tutor & programme lead                                           13
       C          tutor                                                             8
       D          tutor                                                             4
       E          Tutor & programme lead                                           11
       F          tutor                                                            11
       G          Tutor & programme lead                                            6
       H          tutor                                                             3
       I          Pastoral & listening                                              2
       J          Pastoral officer                                                  6
       K          Pastoral and student experience manager                          14
       L          Pastoral trainee                                                  1
       M          Pastoral officer                                                  4
       N          Reception/student services                                        3
       O          Student adviser (services)                                        5
       P          Student finance manager                                          16
       Q          Student services admin                                            4
       R          Curriculum director                                              11
       S          Director of HE                                                    6
       T          Director of student services                                      8
                                       Source: own elaboration

                             Table 3. Research methods & instruments
 Research question         Research method             Rationale                    Sample
                                                  This method is
                         Semi-structured          appropriate for this
                         interviews. These will   question as it allows
 Is the widening
                         focus on issues such as the interviews to be
 participation policy
                         what the staff in the    directed on main
 supportive of the                                                          All sample of 20 staff in
                         sector think of the role topics such as what
 equality, diversity                                                        one HE institution
                         of the widening          opinions          staff
 and inclusion                                                              across 3 campuses
                         participation policy in  involved have of the
 agenda?
                         support of equality,     actual role of the
                         diversity and            policy to support
                         inclusion.               equality, diversity
                                                  and inclusion.
 Are changes to the      Semi-structured          This method is            All tutors (8) in one HE
 curriculum to           interviews and           appropriate         to    institutions across 3
 accommodate             questionnaires. These    examine what the          campuses

                                      Management Dynamics in the Knowledge Economy | 241
                                   Vol.11 (2023) no.3, pp.232-250; DOI 10.2478/mdke-2023-0015



 widening               will ask staff on what    staff involved with
 participation          their perspective of      students think of
 communicated           how equality,             the support and
 clearly by             diversity and inclusion   communication of
 management to all      is perceived and          equality, diversity
 bodies working         communicated by           and inclusion from
 with students?         leadership teams.         management and
                                                  leadership teams.
                                                  This method will
                                                  use
                        Ethnographic studies
                                                  This method will
 Is equality,           to track the outcomes
                                                  use      progression
 diversity and          of students supported
                                                  data and feedback
 inclusion on course    through the widening                              Data available in the
                                                  from the industry
 to sustain higher      participation policy in                           HEI.
                                                  regarding        the
 education in the       promoting equality,
                                                  pathway of previous
 UK?                    diversity and
                                                  students          in
                        inclusion.
                                                  vocational
                                                  employment.
                                      Source: own elaboration

Reliability and validity in research are important. The researcher has considered a few
ways of ensuring this is increased. Questionnaires and interviews have not included staff
closely working with the researcher as they may manipulate qualitative data and intend
not to victimise themselves when giving their opinions and views. A consent form has
been devised to ensure the participants are briefed and understand the study they are
participating in. Consent is important as it validates the participation and ensure
voluntary participation is reached decreasing bias (BERA, 2018).

Some limitations have been considered to practicality in this research. Firstly, the
representativeness of this study will not be matched to represent the whole population of
the UK higher education. At this research stage, the results are based on one HE institution
in Greater Manchester. The idea of focusing on this one organisation also shows that there
will be results that may be a theme reflecting this particular institution’s practice, but may
be portrayed differently elsewhere. Being a tutor/manager at the same institution, there
is a high chance bias as the participants may give information they perceive to be
acceptable, or expected by the researcher in regards to their working relationship. This
has been named as observer bias by Suter (2012). By using the researcher’s own
organisation, there is a chance personal opinions and perspectives when analysing
qualitative data may introduce another level of bias based on how the researcher has worked
with students fitting the profiles in discussion. The use of 20 staff clearly does not represent the
whole population of people working in the HE context, or the experiences of different
institutions. The way an institution is managed and staffed will shape the perception of workload
and challenges faced. Another limitation was having adequate time to interview staff without
time constraints. This was a challenge that could be overcome with availability of funds, or
maybe using other instruments such as focus groups.


Findings

20 questionnaires were given out with the following data. Starting with Question 1, all 20
staff of the sample have now been interviewed to share their views on the widening participation
policy in supporting equality, diversity and inclusion within their working context. There were
similarities that produced some themes and these were analysed accordingly using thematic
analysis. The majority of participants when asked what they thought in general about the
widening participation policy’s success on equality, diversity and inclusion in HE participation,
the response was that they feel it is great as it offers opportunities to the right people and there
is potential to change their outcomes in life. They know of students that have gone on to careers
in areas such as Health and Social Care that would have been discriminated by eligibility criteria
before. This means they end up with tangible opportunities to embark on life-changing careers

242 | Enock Tinashe TSAPAYI, Abneer E SAMUEL
Educational Leadership for Equality, Diversity and Inclusion in Curricula Design



and change their socio-economic statuses as well as predictions for the future. All participants
also shared the views that there needs to be more support from the government’s perspectives
as the financial support available is not inclusive of people such as single parents. They
collectively suggest that, often some students will miss classes as they have to work and they
do not have the comfort of adequate time to concentrate on the education. Therefore, the
discriminatory view is not fully eradicated.

All participants therefore said there should be more interference from the government to
provide more ongoing financial support while studying (knowing there is financial
support currently). Further to that, employers should also engage in identifying those
fitting the criteria of widening participation in order to give them equal opportunities (by
introducing employment quotas to increase equality, diversity and inclusion). Some of the
tutors said the whole policy is not thought through how participants may think their life
has changed and yet they may struggle to find stable careers after completing university.
This is because being from poor socio-economic backgrounds, the tutor observed the
widening participation students may lack skills in navigating competitive job markets and
excel in their fields. This identified that they may still experience discrimination after
obtaining their qualifications (Figure 2).



              How many students drop out before completing their degree in Health
                          & Social Care and Business Management?
                Comparison between widening participation and non-widening
                                        participation
     20

     15

     10

      5

      0
                                               Question 2

                            Percentage of widening participation students
                            Percentage of 'traditional students

    Figure 2. Comparative dropout rates in health & social care and business management
                                   Source: own elaboration

From Figure 2, it is evident that the number of widening participation students dropping
out of their studies before completion is larger than that of those perceived to be
‘traditional’ students at 14% compared to 2.4%. However, there is no clarity to what the
narrative of widening participation is limited to as this could be age, socio-economic status
and other distinctions within the examined institutions. This is also not a reflection of
equality and inclusion support failing.

From Figure 3, the data provided by all participants has indicated that all of the staff
involved in the research project had received training and information booklets based on
understanding equality, diversity and inclusion. This is a majority outcome that shows the
competence of the organisation and this shows good practice.

                                     Management Dynamics in the Knowledge Economy | 243
                                  Vol.11 (2023) no.3, pp.232-250; DOI 10.2478/mdke-2023-0015




                 What kind of support do you get from management to practice
                               equality, diversity and inclusion?
         25
         20
         15
         10
          5
          0
                                              Question 3

                           Training    Information booklets   No support

     Figure 3. Support from management for equality, diversity, and inclusion practices
                                 Source: own elaboration


                    What specific training have you had in line with equality,
                                     diversity and inclusion?
        25

        20

        15

        10

          5

          0
                                              Question 4

                          Disability awareness      Dyslexia awareness
                          Mental health first aid   Mental wellbeing (self)

               Figure 4. Training in equality, diversity, and inclusion: specifics
                                    Source: own elaboration

In Figure 4, participants have evidently received some form of training showing they
understood equality, diversity and inclusion from many angles such as understanding
disabilities as well as supporting people with a diverse range of issues. This would be
supported by the idea that the different departments would be able to work in unison with
referrals and other ways of ensuring all support needs of the students are met by the team.

From the chart below (Figure 5), when asked about the success rate of different groups of
students, it seems however that the students from the widening participation seem to be
prospering in terms of finding work and establishing a career. However, this data does not take
into account the amount of those that drop out before completing their degree. As a result, this
concludes that the equality, diversity and inclusion policy is effective in changing the outcomes
of the target group.

244 | Enock Tinashe TSAPAYI, Abneer E SAMUEL
Educational Leadership for Equality, Diversity and Inclusion in Curricula Design




                With your own students' destination and progression data,
                 which groups have succeeded in pursuing a career after
                              they complete their degree?
        80

        60

        40

        20

         0
                                              Question 5

                          Widening participation %      Traditional      Both

                     Figure 5. Career pursuit success among student groups
                                      Source: own elaboration


                  What percentage of the whole college are from both groups?
        70
        60
        50
        40
        30
        20
        10
         0
                                             Question 6

                              Widening participation       Traditional

               Figure 6. Percentage of total college population from both groups
                                     Source: own elaboration

From Figure 6, the success of the policy in providing access is evident as the percentage of
the whole college is greater than that of ‘traditional’ students. It also shows that the college
would be financially beneficial to this scheme as without the policy, there would be a small
number of students which may threaten the existence of the college altogether. The
widening participation do seem to be doing well considering they are in vocational
courses and are likely to be motivated by supporting their families and not prefer to not
go straight into work on completion of studies.

                                   Management Dynamics in the Knowledge Economy | 245
                                Vol.11 (2023) no.3, pp.232-250; DOI 10.2478/mdke-2023-0015




                  What percentage makes the age ranges of your students?
      70
      60
      50
      40
      30
      20
      10
       0
                                          Question 7

                          A 18-25    B 26-35     C 36-45    D 45+

                   Figure 7. Student age range distribution by percentage
                                   Source: own elaboration

The percentage here shows that the majority of students in this institution are above 36
years old and these are people that would have otherwise had opportunities earlier on to
go onto accumulating experience in their chosen careers. This suggests that the institution
is heavily involved in widening participation as the characteristic is mature students. The
institution’s ethos therefore is proving to be succeeding in equality, diversity and
inclusion.

Questions 8 to 13 were completed in the form of semi-structured interviews. The
responses have been grouped into similar themes below and analysed based on the
interview outcomes and interactions.

Question 8, When asked if they feel the widening participation policy is doing what it is
supposed to do, in terms of reducing inequalities. Participant B, D, F (tutors), J (pastoral
officer) N (receptionist), O (student advisor) and participant T (director of students’
services) interviewed said there are elements of this. They identified that there are indeed
inequalities in society leading to less participation from certain groups making them
underrepresented. They pointed out these inequalities lead to people from certain
communities without opportunities to work in competitive industries and provide better
financial lives for their families. For example, many of the students they have taught have
ended up in careers in Health and Social care and have proceeded onto other degrees such
as nursing meaning they have a job or career for life. On the other hand, they also pointed
out that the careers they are directed into are not the ones perceived for to be for people
from better socio-economic backgrounds. As a result, they feel that it is not a short-cut
into improving their economic statuses and therefore may have been designed to keep the
poor below those in the ‘competitive’ careers. However, collectively the WP policy has
delivered and transformed the outcomes of the students finding career paths.

Participant A (tutor), I (pastoral officer), K (student experience manager), P Student
finance manager), Q (Admin worker) and T (director of student services) then said they
do not feel there is enough support following entry into university as this does not
automatically improve their socio-economic status. They said it is up to the person to show
some resilience, but at the same time the resilience will only be shaped by how many
challenges they are faced with during their time studying. The rest of the participants were
in between the differing opinions stating they did not feel the need to examine the
students’ background against outcomes.

Question 9, when asked if they thought the policy has reduced inequalities, the majority
of participants agreed on how the equality is implemented by giving access to people that
would otherwise not have bene given opportunities before. They also said that because

246 | Enock Tinashe TSAPAYI, Abneer E SAMUEL
Educational Leadership for Equality, Diversity and Inclusion in Curricula Design



the students receive student loans, they receive opportunities that are out of their reach
financially and even though they have to pay back the loans, they are not in a situation
where they have to be debt-ridden or failing to manage.

Question 10, When asked what else could the widening participation policy consider from
what it already does? The participants showed that there is less intervention during the
time they are studying and more could be done to include some form of interventions
while they are actively studying. The recommendations also showed how maybe their
student finance could include grants based on whether they are from a widening
participation background. Interestingly, all participants from the pastoral team shared
similar views on how other support such as Pastoral and additional academic support
needs to be improved and implemented more as they felt is now needed more. They have
said this is due to the increased numbers of people seeking and accessing this support.
Apparently, the figure has more than doubled since the Covid-19 pandemic where most
people suffered mental wellbeing issues as well and uncertainty and feeling unsupported.
Ironically, all tutors also shared that they feel the need for support has increased, but not
matched with attendance to additional support as most have families and have to rush to
meet school runs and work commitments outside the classroom.

Question 11, When asked what inequalities they come across with some of their students?
The participants showed that the most common is childcare as many of them said during
the Covid-19 pandemic in the UK, most parents isolating with their children would have
struggled to engage due to not having enough devices in their households with their
children also expected to attend their own learning online. This is a clear indication of
socio-economic challenges. Another issue was also that some of the students would have
struggled to keep up with costs to have access to the internet as it was required to access
the Virtual teaching platforms. A further issue was concentration as some of them had very
young children that would have required some form of childcare as the parents were
expected to attend full-time. The students expressed how they struggled, especially during
the Covid-19 pandemic.

Question 12, When asked about what they thought of destination data available, all
participants revealed that the data was much better than they perceived having seen some
of the issues the students have been through. They also said the reasons behind is at the
end of their degree, the students can now visualise their desired career. Because of the
shortages in staffing in the health social care sector, they also said it works in their favour
as they can go into jobs having completed placements in their work contexts. The student
services reported that most of the WP students receive good feedback from employers
while on placement.

Question 13, When asked what other challenges were faced by tutors and others working
with students, participant S (director of HE) and T (director of students services)
discussed the challenges they are faced with as curriculum and HE directors. A point of
reference was during the Covid-19 pandemic as all teaching had to be adapted to the
virtual platforms such as Zoom and Microsoft Teams. They showed that with vocational
studies, most learning includes placement and demonstration of working within team
contexts. However, adapting to digital learning means adjustments to these forms of
delivery and that may change the context in which the students are assessed for their
chosen vacation. For other staff such as Pastoral, they also showed how some of the
challenges are having to change their timetables as most of the WP students cannot
accommodate certain hours for support meaning they are left with options to complete
sessions online, as they are engaged with collecting or transporting their children to
school, or attending their places of work scheduled after class hours.

                                    Management Dynamics in the Knowledge Economy | 247
                                 Vol.11 (2023) no.3, pp.232-250; DOI 10.2478/mdke-2023-0015



Discussion

The participants from the first question identified the organisation’s work in promoting
and exercising equality, diversity and inclusion. However, from a leadership point of view,
there seems to be a lack of co-production with students as this is another strategy that has
been seen to promote and improve participation as students carry a certain level of
accountability and ownership if they had been involved in the planning processes of their
curriculum. Mulinge, Arasa, and Wawire (2017) suggest that involving students in
planning certain services they use or procedures of learning is a good idea for positive
outcomes. In that case, there was not much of student voice considered. However,
according to Chowdry et al. (2012), it seems the priority or primary concern is to ensure
that the planning is designed to increase participation in higher education and increase
the involvement of underrepresented groups. Holistic equality, diversity and inclusion
could greatly improve by continuing to strategize how to involve students more once they
are in the institutions as this will build their confidence and competence on job markets.

There is good practice as the organisation in this study has a policy of support where extra
sessions are dedicated to support and ensuring all learners receive assignment building support
and other areas they may need to work on such as referencing or writing skills. This policy has
proved to be a success with attainment and retention of students in the organisation. Reiser
(2008) also describes how the foundation of building trusting personal relationships with
learners will support attainment and positive outcomes for learners in HE. Hunt (2012) also
discusses how it is important for students to experience a learning environment where there is
exchange as learning will always be traditionally linked to the sharing of knowledge.

Current procedures

The research has shown that there is a good policy in place. However, in special
circumstances, these will then need to be reviewed and create a policy that caters for and
considers learners with special circumstances as the group targeted by this study were
clearly not given enough consideration. Even though the organisation is identified as
providing inclusive and non-discriminatory practice, there is a need to adjust accordingly
as there was limited support from what the study has found. Mittler (2000) says that
inclusive practice should not only be based on ensuring it is in place, however, it should
look at consulting the learners and ensuring they are happy with what is on offer, or at
least be involved in designing some form of practice. Mittler’s theory also shows how the
students hinted on the need to have more ICT support as this has not been a great focus
before. There is a level of support, but a dedicated session for ICT would benefit students.
However, this organisation has a good record of student voice and in the case of the
pandemic.

The organisation has a vast set of skills from the tutors. Most of the staff come from an
inclusive education background and are regularly trained to understand many
characteristics of inclusion such as common disabilities. These skills however need to be
put into practice and monitored regularly. Kuh et al (2007) on the other hand may argue
this point. Their theory describes education not only being reliant on the classroom, and
that a committed student or learner is supposed to have a high level of resilience. The
theory suggests that the issues encountered should not hinder a focused student from
attaining and achieving in their studies. Some issues encountered in life and during the
study journey should not be supported and rather be learning opportunities. This can also
be linked to professional abilities and resilience to adjust to many situations and changes
that may happen such as changing teams in workplaces and colleagues leaving. O’Connor
et al. (2021) would however arguably disagree as they discovered that most mental
anxieties in education are driven by lack of support and therefore students would have
performed poorly with less support.

248 | Enock Tinashe TSAPAYI, Abneer E SAMUEL
Educational Leadership for Equality, Diversity and Inclusion in Curricula Design



Resources

In every walk of life or every professional discipline, success is often linked to the
availability of resources to complete tasks. Resources may account for tangible physical
materials as well as the support and expertise. During the pandemic, this balance was not
an easy problem to solve. Gavigan and Kurtts (2010) identified that the best way to get the
best out of students is to first identify who the at-risk students are and then devising the
resources to meet their needs. These may be in the form of training to tutors to ensure
they have the skills to navigate the different needs of learners. Even though pastoral
support is available in the organisation, it is a matter of whether the resources were
adequate to meet the needs of students at the high rate they were needed during the
pandemic.

Another resource that was challenging for all learners to meet their needs was the actual
computers and electric devices to be able to access their learning environment as and
when they needed to. Mitchell (2009) states that the magic formula to meet diverse or
inclusive needs of students is to ensure there are enough funds and resources. In the case
of the organisation, the number of tutors to provide the required support per student
would not have been met as desired. The result of the struggles of the pandemic are that
not only the students from the targeted sample struggled, but almost every student would
have met a different level of challenges studying at this time. Bates et al. (2012) also looks
at the role of the government as they are the ones that have control over the design of
curriculum. However, their design should also show inclusivity and the way the resources
were distributed to the public does not show a lot of concerns. If there were no adequate
resources, the sensible action would have been to either change the curriculum or provide
funds for all learners to access education fairly.

Retention

Student retention has always been a priority and a strong point of this organisation. It is
clear that there is a link between attendance and attainment. The matrix in the
organisation has identified that and during the pandemic, one of the main support
strategies was to ensure students are encouraged to attend more as that often reflects on
the outcome of retention. As stated by Kuh et al. (2007), participation is the key to
ensuring the continuation of the students’ journey. The findings of this research show that
the staff are well-trained and this plays a major role in ensuring students achieve their
desired outcomes.


Conclusion and recommendations

From the responses in the research, the presence of mental health problems and the
pressures faced by higher education students is evidently understood within the UK from
the literature reviewed However, it seems there are no further measures to meet the
needs of support to specific groups of learners facing hardships due to their exceptional
circumstances. Even though there is support and training, it seems the organisation and
other institutions across the country have not considered adjusting support to meet these
needs on a different level. The policymakers at government level are arguably not thinking
along the lines of preparing for special circumstances of inclusion, and it seems all the
plans and strategies in place are designed for normal circumstances. There needs to be
more student involvement in the planning process of the curriculum and only then can the
curriculum be seen as fully designed with equality, diversity and inclusion. Having said
that, there is still a level of equality, diversity and inclusion in the planning process, though
goo the organisation has to improve on training as there are measures taken with training
and other processes that should not be overlooked.

Looking at different contexts across the world concerning widening participation, the
point of creating a social justice of access to higher education has been achieved, but

                                    Management Dynamics in the Knowledge Economy | 249
                                 Vol.11 (2023) no.3, pp.232-250; DOI 10.2478/mdke-2023-0015



arguably to a certain level. This is because there are still questions such as what level of
support do these students need when they have started their journey and is it all monitory
or is it really working for the education system and jobs market? It seems therefore the
process was not thought through in terms of how the students will require support in
order to complete and attain their targeted goals. There are always changes for the
education system and for institutions to be sustainable, they need to be able to charge the
correct fees to be able to continue providing healthcare and meeting quality requirements
as well as ensuring the objectives of increasing participation to underrepresented groups
is achieved, which often require more resources.

Boliver, Gorard and Siddiqi (2023) reported that despite the WP policy being in the UK
educational policy agenda for the last 50 years, there are still disparities that need to be
addressed to ‘widen participation’ further. The numbers of students from poorer
backgrounds and other underrepresented groups are still lower in competitive
institutions. Of all 93% of entrants to higher education to Russell group universities, those
regarded as WP only make 23%. Therefore, the agenda is a direct drive for government’s
policies in place to address this social issue and not driven by the need to generate
revenue.

Connell-Smith and Hubble (2018), on behalf of the house of parliament described how it
is the duty of a responsible government to reduce barriers and discrimination of
disadvantaged students in UK society. Therefore, the policy tasks institutions through the
work of the Office of Fair Access (OFFA) which approves and monitors HEI’s and ensures
best practice. They also use the Higher Education Funding Council for England (HEFCE)
which funds activities and administers the National Collaborative Outreach Programme.
Even though progress has been slow, the government’s target was to double the
proportion of pupils from disadvantaged pupils going into higher education and increase
the number of black and Asian minorities (BAME) entering HE by 20%. These were targets
set to be achieved by the year 2020. Therefore, the UK HE industry is on course to be
sustainable going into the future and arguably, there are high levels of competence in
equality, diversity and inclusion. It seems to be a hot topic that is widely considered in the
UK higher education policy system.


References

Barth, M. (2015). Implementing sustainability in higher education. learning in an age of
          transformation. Routledge.
Bates, J., Lewis, S., & Pickard, A. (2012). Education policy, practice and the professional.
          Continuum.
Boliver, V., Gorard, S., & Siddiqui, N. (2022). Who counts as socioeconomically
          disadvantaged for the purposes of widening access to higher education? British
          Journal of sociology of Education, 43(3), 349-374. https://doi.org/10.1080/
          01425692.2021.2017852
British Educational Research Association. (2018). Ethical guidelines for ethical research.
          Wiley.
Butler, M. (2016). Equality and anti-discrimination law: the Equality Act 2010 and other
          anti-discrimination protections. Spiramus Press Ltd.
Chowdry, H., Vrawford, C., Dearden, L., Goodman, A., & Vignoles, A. (2012). Widening
          participation in higher education: analysis using linked administrative data. Royal
          Statistical Society Journals, 2(176), 431-457.
Connell-Smith, A., & Hubble, S. (2018, January). Widening participation strategy in higher
          education in England. House of Commons Library (House of Commons Library
          Briefing Paper No. 8204). https://researchbriefings.files.parliament.uk/
          documents/CBP-8204/CBP-8204.pdf
Gavigan, K., Kurtts, S., & Mimms, M. (2010). Bibliotherapy as an intervention approach for
          children and adolescents with emotional disabilities. In C. L. Norton (Ed.),

250 | Enock Tinashe TSAPAYI, Abneer E SAMUEL
Educational Leadership for Equality, Diversity and Inclusion in Curricula Design



          Innovative interventions in child and adolescent mental health (pp. 136-152).
          Routledge.
HM Revenue & Customs. (2020). Guidance: claim for wages through the Coronavirus job
          retention scheme. GOV.UK. https://www.gov.uk/guidance/claim-for-wages-
          through-the-coronavirus-job-retention-scheme
Hunt. C. (2012) Learning in large spaces: the academic engagement of a diverse group of
          students. Journal of Research in Pot-Compulsory Education, 17(2), 195-205.
Kauffman, J. M. (2020). On educational inclusion: meanings, history, issues and international
          perspectives. Routledge.
Kelly, A. V. (2009). The curriculum: Theory and practice. Sage.
Kuh, G. D., & Kinzie, J. A., Bridges, B. K., & Haye, N, J. C. (2007). Piecing together the student
          success puzzle: research, propositions, and recommendations. ASHE Higher
          Education Report, 32(5), 1-182.
Luke, A., Woods, A., & Weir, K. (2013). Curriculum design, equity and the technical form of
          the curriculum. Routledge.
Marangozov, R., Marvell, R., Miller, L., Newton, B., & Fletcher, L. (2014). Evaluation of the
          equality, diversity and inclusion grants in English further education. University of
          Sussex. https://hdl.handle.net/10779/uos.23448743.v1
Mitchel, D. (2010). Inclusive education. Education that fits: Review of international trends
          in the education of students with special educational needs. Education Counts
          Publications.
Mitchell, D. (2018). The ecology of inclusive education: strategies to tackle the crisis in
          educating           diverse         learners          (1st        ed.).       Routledge.
          https://doi.org/10.4324/9781315110448
Mittler. P. (2000). Working towards inclusive education. Fulton Publishers.
Mulinge. M. M., Arasa. J. N., & Wawire. V. (2017). The status of student involvement in
          university governance in Kenya. Codesria.
Nash. C. (2020). Report on digital literacy in academic meetings during the 2020 COVID-
          19 lockdown. Challenges, 11(2), 20. https://doi.org/10.3390/challe11020020
O’Connor, K., Wrigley, M., Jennings, R., Hill, M., & Niazi, A. (2021). Mental health impacts of
          covid-19 in Ireland and the need for a secondary care mental health service
          response. Irish Journal of Psychological Medicine, 38(2), 99-107.
          doi:10.1017/ipm.2020.64
Office for National Statistics. (2020). Student Covid insights study. Census. https://
          www.ons.gov.uk/surveys/informationforhouseholdsandindividuals/
          householdandindividualsurveys/studentcovidinsightsstudy
Pearson. (2018). English sample assessment materials. Pearson.
Plakhotnik, M. S., Volkova, N. V., Jiang, C., Yahiaoui. D., Pheiffer, G., McKay, K., Newman, S.,
          & ReiBig-Thust, S. (2021). The perceived impact of COVID-19 on student well-
          being and the mediating role of the university support: evidence from France,
          Germany, Russia and the UK. Frontiers in Psychology Journal, 12, 1-12. https://
          doi.org/10.3389/fpsyg.2021.642689
Power, T. L. (2001). Assumptions and prescriptions: a critique of widening participation
          policy-making. High Education Policy, 14, 361–376. https://doi.org/10.1016/
          S0952-8733(01)00026-5
Storyals. (2019). The pros and cons of Microsoft Teams. https://storyals.com/blog/pros-
          and-cons-of-microsoft-teams
Suter, W. N. (2012). Introduction to educational research: A critical thinking approach.
          Sage.
Thompson. N. (2012). Anti-discriminatory practice: equality, diversity and social justice (6th
          ed.). Palgrave.
Warren, D. (2016). Curriculum design in a context of widening participation in higher
          education. Sage Journals, 1(1). https://doi.org/10.1177/1474022202001001007


© 2023 Author(s). This is an open-access article licensed under the Creative Commons Attribution-
NonCommercial-NoDerivs License (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0/).