Informatics in Education, 2020, Vol. 19, No. 3, 455–472                                       455
© 2020 Vilnius University, ETH Zürich
DOI: 10.15388/infedu.2020.20




Visual Analysis of Contact Patterns
in School Environments

Jean R. PONCIANO1, Claudio D. G. LINHARES1, Sara L. MELO2,
Luciano V. LIMA2, Bruno A. N. TRAVENÇOLO1
1
 Faculty of Computing, Federal University of Uberlândia, Brazil
2
 Faculty of Electrical Engineering, Federal University of Uberlândia, Brazil
e-mail: {jeanrobertop, claudiodgl, saraluziamelo, lucianovieiralimaster, travencolo}@gmail.com

Received: December 2019


Abstract. Information Visualisation strategies can be applied in a variety of domains. In the con-
text of temporal networks, i.e., networks in which interactions between individuals occur through-
out time, efforts have been conducted to develop visual approaches that allow finding interaction
patterns, anomalies, and other behaviours not previously perceived in the data. This paper presents
two case studies involving real-world education networks from a primary school and a high school.
For this purpose, we used the Massive Sequence View (MSV) layout with the Community-based
Node Ordering (CNO) method, two well established approaches for visual analysis of temporal
networks. Our results show that the identified patterns involving students/students and students/
teachers represent important information to benefit and support decision making about school
management and teaching strategies, especially those related to strategic group formation.
Keywords: temporal networks, collaborative learning, visualisation in education, learning analyt-
ics, dynamic networks, network communities, node reordering, massive sequence view.


1. Introduction

Several researchers have been focusing in recent years on data modeling involving data
sets that represent any kind of interaction among elements. A structure highly adopted
for such representation is the so-called complex network (Albert and Barabási, 2002). In
a complex network, each element is called node and the interaction that links two nodes
is called edge (or connection). This type of network can be seen in several knowledge
areas, as, for example, computer science (e.g., web pages connected by hyperlinks),
sociology (e.g., people connected due to a collaboration), and biology (e.g., networks of
proteins with similar functions) (Estrada, 2015).
    Only the information of nodes and edges in a network, however, may not be enough
depending on the desired type of analysis, as occurs, for example, in the study of social

456                                  J.R. Ponciano et al.

network evolution. In such situations, it is important to know when the interactions oc-
cur, in addition to nodes and edges. Networks that offer these three dimensions (node,
edge, and time) are called temporal networks (Holme and Saramäki, 2012).
    A temporal network can be analyzed by using different approaches. Statistical analy-
ses represent a common approach and are useful to identify specific trends and patterns
in the data. Only the numeric output, however, may represent a “black-box” to the user,
thus impairing pattern comprehension. Another approach involves Information Visu-
alisation, whose strategies help in data analysis by providing interactive and graphical
computational tools, thus including the user in the entire process of exploration and
validation (Ware, 2012). An adequate Information Visualisation strategy allows a visual
analysis that is as much intuitive as possible and also helps the user in finding unex-
pected patterns, anomalies, and other behaviours in the data.
    In the educational context, the visual analysis of temporal networks may be useful
to facilitate the full understanding of how the interactions involving students and teach-
ers occur over time, as well as to allow the identification of patterns that influence the
learning process. In this way, a school class could be considered as a small network com-
posed by students and teachers interacting among themselves over time. By performing
a visual analysis in this type of network, teachers may identify factors that impair and/or
assist in the teaching and learning process.
    In this paper, we present case studies involving two real-world education networks
that represent a primary and a high school. Both networks were analyzed using well
established temporal network visualisation strategies. By using these strategies, we ana-
lyzed the interactions among students/students and students/teachers, as well as the as-
sociated metadata. Although none of these networks provide metadata about individual
or group performances on tests and exams, we show that the analysis of both network
structure and interaction dynamics allows the identification of meaningful patterns that
can be used to support and optimize the teacher’s decision making, especially those re-
lated to strategic group formation and student performance analysis.
    This paper is organized as follows. Section 2 presents studies related to the use of
Information Visualisation strategies applied to educational scenarios. Section 3 presents
the strategies used for the visual analysis in the case studies. Section 4 describes the two
analyzed temporal networks and the performed experiments. Section 5 discusses conclu-
sion and future work.


2. Information Visualisation in Educational Context

Data sets analysis using Information Visualisation inserts the user in the exploration
process through graphical and interactive computational approaches (Ware, 2012). By
doing so, data understanding and consequently the identification of patterns, anomalies,
trends and other behaviours is facilitated, resulting in faster and more reliable decisions
(Linhares et al., 2019).
    Visualisation techniques have been widely used in recent years to analyze data from
various domains, e.g., in healthcare applications (Shneiderman et al., 2013), corporate

                 Visual Analysis of Contact Patterns in School Environments            457

environments (van den Elzen et al., 2013; Zhao et al., 2018) and social networks (Lin-
hares et al., 2019). In educational context, Information Visualisation strategies can be
used to identify patterns and behaviours involving students and teachers (Ruipérez-Va-
liente et al., 2015; Caligaris et al., 2015; McNeil, 2015), improving and optimizing the
teaching and learning process (Vieira et al., 2018).
    In (Chen et al., 2016), a visual analysis system called DropoutSeer was developed
to evaluate the relationship between online learning activity and student dropout behav-
iour. Heterogeneous data were extracted from three different types of student activity
logs: clickstream, forum posts, and attribution records. A case study was developed and
one of the results showed a positive correlation in the performance of the students who
have watched the course videos (learning objects).
    The authors of (Mu et al., 2019) presented a visual analysis system, named MOO-
Cad, that allows exploring anomalies in learning process patterns in open online courses.
They propose an approach to interpret individual learning sequences and anomalies in
the activities of each student according to temporal patterns. As outcome, it is possible
to identify the anomalous groups based on the learning sequence data. In the same way,
other researchers (e.g., (Sung et al., 2017; Shin et al., 2018)) have used visual analysis
in educational tools to verify the impact of instructional media and to interpret both com-
ments and interactions among students.
    Considering the aforementioned efforts, Information Visualisation strategies are em-
ployed to assist the identification of patterns involving students in computational envi-
ronments rather than classroom teaching environments. The visual analysis helps in the
interpretation of students and teachers behaviours (nodes in a temporal network). In this
context, this paper aims to use visual analysis techniques to study interaction evolution
involving students/students and students/teachers and analyze how this information can
affect decision making about teaching strategies, especially those related to strategic
group formation, and school management.


3. Temporal Network Visualisation

Several Information Visualisation strategies can be employed in the analysis of temporal
networks, as, for example, space-time cubes (Bach, 2016), node-link diagrams (also
known as structural layouts) (Linhares et al., 2019), circular approaches (v. d. Elzen
et al., 2014), and Massive Sequence View (MSV) (Holten et al., 2007; van den Elzen
et al., 2013). Among these, the MSV layout is the most appropriate when the task is to
analyze the interaction distribution throughout time (Linhares et al., 2019).
    Fig. 1 presents a visualisation of a small network using the MSV layout. In Fig. 1(a),
the network is shown as tabular data, with the first two columns representing the nodes
involved in the interactions and with the third column representing the timestamp in
which the interactions occurred. Fig. 1(b) illustrates the MSV layout generated from the
tabular data. In MSV, the vertical and horizontal axes represent nodes (from top to bot-
tom) and timestamps (from left to right), respectively. For every interaction between two
nodes, a vertical line (an edge) is drawn linking them.

458                                              J.R. Ponciano et al.


           1RGH 1RGH   7LPH           7LPH                                  7LPH
                                                                                          
                           




                                  1RGHV




                                                                        1RGHV
                                                                                              
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                   D                                 E                                     F

       Fig. 1. Representation of a temporal network. (a) Tabular data. (b) MSV layout, in which the
       -axis represents the time and the -axis represents the nodes, respectively. (c) The same
       visual representation of (b) but with a different node ordering. As it can be seen, the node
       ordering influences the generated layout.


    An important property of MSV layout is node positioning. By comparing the layouts
from Fig. 1(b-c), one can see changes in the edge lengths due to differences in node or-
dering. In real-world networks, node ordering reflects on visual clutter of the layout, and
thus in the perception of patterns. There are several node ordering methods described in
literature, as, for example, optimized MSV (v. d. Elzen et al., 2014), recurrent neighbors
(Linhares et al., 2017), and community-based node ordering (CNO) (Linhares et al.,
2019).
    CNO is a visual scalable method that uses as base for its ordering strategy the com-
munity concept, i.e., groups of nodes that interact more among themselves than to
nodes from other groups (Lancichinetti and Fortunato, 2009). As CNO is hierarchical,
it subdivides each group into smaller ones at each hierarchical level, as exemplified in
Fig. 2(a-c). In educational context, level 1 may contain a community that represents a
school class. This class is then decomposed at each new level, so level 2 could have
communities representing different groups of students that were gathered to perform a
task proposed by their teacher. Finally, CNO allows analyzing only those interactions
that occur inside each community of the desired level (by showing only intra-community




      D                           E                           F                        G               H


       Fig. 2. Different CNO levels applied to the MSV layout. (a-c) The CNO hierarchical ap-
       proach subdivides the groups at each level; (d-e) CNO allows filtering in only intra-commu-
       nity edges, which facilitates the analysis of specific communities.

                  Visual Analysis of Contact Patterns in School Environments             459

edges). Filtering out edges between communities facilitates the comprehension of inter-
action evolution inside each community (Fig. 2(d-e)).
    Network community detection can be seen as a clustering task, highly used in data
mining scenarios, but applied to complex networks (Guidotti and Coscia, 2017). In this
way, traditional clustering methods, such as DBSCAN (Ester et al., 1996), can be adapt-
ed to the community detection task (Gialampoukidis et al., 2016; Linhares et al., 2020).
Among the existent community detection algorithms, Louvain (Blondel et al., 2008)
and Infomap (Rosvall and Bergstrom, 2008) represent two of the most recommended
approaches due to their performances and low computational complexity (Fortunato and
Hric, 2016). As the underlying basis of CNO is community detection, the produced lay-
out is somehow related to hidden patterns that can emerge when visualised in the layout,
facilitating identification of visual patterns in the network, accelerating and supporting
decision making based on them. In this work, the terms “communities” and “groups”
will be used indistinctly from now on.
    The CNO ordering process involves three steps (Linhares et al., 2019). The first one
is related to community detection, and so any non-overlapping detection algorithm (e.g.,
Louvain or Infomap) can be adopted. The other two steps refer to the inter- and intra-
community reordering processes. Each of them employs a node ordering method such as
recurrent neighbors or optimized MSV.


4. Case Studies

This section presents two case studies involving real-world education networks from dif-
ferent scenarios, Primary School and High School. For this purpose, we initially present
information related to the two networks and then discuss the analysis using CNO.


4.1. Education Networks

The first network, named Primary School, contains information about contacts between
teachers and students of a primary school in Lyon, France (Stehlé et al., 2011; Gem-
metto et al., 2014). The data refer to contacts from Oct. 1st to Oct. 2nd, 2009. The network
contains 242 nodes and 125,773 connections distributed in 5,846 timestamps (each time-
stamp refers to a 20-second interval) and represents contacts from the first to fifth grades,
each of them having two classes (A and B). In this network, most contacts involve stu-
dents in the same class and each class has an assigned teacher. Besides the connections,
gender information of the students is also provided. A school day comprises morning
and afternoon, with a break for lunch.
    The High School network contains contacts among students of a high school in Mar-
seille, France (Mastrandrea et al., 2015). The network contains 327 nodes and 188,508
connections distributed in 18,179 timestamps (a 20-second interval each). The data was
collected during five days, between Dec. 2nd and 6th, 2013. Nine classes are represented
by the network, each of them associated with a type of specialization: PC and PC* are

460                                   J.R. Ponciano et al.

focused on chemistry and physics; MP, MP*1, and MP*2 on mathematics and physics;
2BIO1, 2BIO2, and 2BIO3 in biology; and PSI on engineering. Besides the connections,
gender information is provided along with the information of who is a friend of whom
on Facebook.
    For both networks, each connection is obtained using RFID sensors (Cattuto et al.,
2010). Initially, each person receives a badge with the sensor. Whenever there is a face-
to-face approximation between two individuals (between 1 to 1.5 meters), and at least
one information exchange between their sensors in a 20-second interval, the contact
(connection) is recorded. In this way, the two individuals become nodes in the network
and their contact becomes a connection (edge) linking them in the respective timestamp
(Cattuto et al., 2010).


4.2. Visual Analysis Using CNO

All visual analyses were performed using the software Dynamic Network Visualisation
(DyNetVis) (Linhares et al., 2017), freely available at www.dynetvis.com. The adopted
CNO configuration uses Louvain as community detection algorithm (CNO step 1) and
recurrent neighbors as node ordering strategy (CNO steps 2 and 3). For the analyzed net-
works, CNO presents a hierarchical approach that allows detecting groups of individuals
inside each school class. Ideally, each group of the CNO first level contains all students
of a specific class, which is then divided into smaller groups at each subsequent level.
    Fig. 3 presents the two days of the Primary School network using the MSV layout
with hidden edges and two node ordering strategies. The first one is a naive strategy in
which nodes are placed in rows uniformly chosen at random (random node ordering,
Fig. 3(a)). The second one is CNO level 1 (Fig. 3(b)). To facilitate visual analysis, we
associate different colors to different classes. The layout generated by CNO presents at
least three patterns not visible in the layout from the random ordering: (i) the size of each
class, i.e., the number of students in relation to the total number of students in the school
(perceived by the grouping of the same class nodes in the layout); (ii) for some classes
in the first day, there are time intervals without any student interaction (e.g., classes 2B,
1A, and 2A) – probably due to sports activities, when contact information was not gath-
ered (Stehlé et al., 2011) (see arrow at class 2B on the first day of Fig. 3(b)); (iii) at the
end of the second day, the students from the fourth grade (classes 4A and 4B) left the net-
work earlier than the other students (indicated in Fig. 3(b) by the arrows on the second
day). This event may be related to the absence of teachers and the consequent dismissal
of the students. From this example, it can be noted how the quality of visual approaches
can improve or impair the perception of patterns in the Primary School.
    Fig. 4 shows the occurrence of similar patterns in the High School by presenting two
of the five days of the network (days 3 and 4) using CNO level 1. The visual analysis
using MSV and CNO facilitates the perception that the students of class PC leave the
network before the others on day 3. In the same way, it is easy to note that class PSI*
students join the network after the others on day 4. Another pattern involves class 2BIO3
(in red) on day 3: the number of interactions involving this class students is higher in the

                   Visual Analysis of Contact Patterns in School Environments                       461




       Fig. 3. Visual analysis of the Primary School network by using different node ordering ap-
       proaches for the MSV layout. (a) MSV layout with hidden edges and random node ordering;
       (b) MSV layout with hidden edges and CNO node ordering. Note that an efficient node order-
       ing facilitates pattern identification.


first two-thirds of day 3 (approximately) than in the last one (see the absence of several
nodes in the end of the day). When correlated with the factors that motivated these pat-

462                                       J.R. Ponciano et al.




       Fig. 4. Layout MSV with hidden edges showing two of the five days of the High School
       network. The students from class PC left the school earlier than the other students in
       day 3. In the same way, the students from class PSI* joined the school later than the other
       students in day 4.


terns, this can represent a useful information to improve both school management deci-
sions and the teaching and learning process.
    Another useful resource is related to the user interaction process on the MSV lay-
out in a way that the identification of patterns and trends in the data is facilitated. An
important interaction is node selection, which highlights the nodes and edges that will
be analyzed by applying an opacity degree on the others. This resource facilitates local
analyses in regions of interest.
    Fig. 5 illustrates the groups detected on class 5B of the Primary School network. The
group from level 1 is composed of all students of such class and the respective teacher.
At each new level, groups of students with more interaction between themselves are
identified. The last level (level 4) presents some small groups, composed of only 2 or 3
individuals. Although Fig. 5 presents only class 5B, this behaviour can be generalized
to all other classes of the Primary School. This identification is important because the
teacher can choose between encourage these formed groups (ideal groups of students)
or change them (if the teacher considers these groups as a bad formation – with students
that disrupt the class, for instance). Using CNO levels, the teacher can also define the
number of students for each group according to a specific need of a learning activity.
    Another analysis involves the temporal relation between students and teachers. Fig. 5
shows that one group of CNO level 4 contains only the teacher and a single student.
Fig. 6 illustrates how the interactions between this student and the teacher occur in the
two days of the Primary School network. On the first day, they have several interactions

                                    Visual Analysis of Contact Patterns in School Environments                                                                                                         463


                                                                         
                                 /HYHO



                                                                               
                              /HYHO



                                                                                            
              /HYHO



                                                                                                        
  /HYHO


                                                                                            % 7HDFKHU


            Fig. 5. Hierarchy created by CNO method in class 5B of the Primary School network. This
            hierarchical structure allows choosing groups with different sizes. Moreover, the teacher can
            choose between encourage or change the CNO group formation in the class.



                                                                                                                                                                                                 

                                                                                                                                                                                                 


                                                                                                   D
                                                                                                                                                                                                 

 
                                                                                                   E                                                                                                 




                                                                                        %         7HDFKHU



            Fig. 6. Group that contains only the teacher of the class 5B and one of this class’s student.
            (a) Several interactions between themselves on the first day of the network; (b) The student
            is not present in the network on the second day.


between each other (Fig. 6(a)), which may have been motivated by the teacher’s percep-
tion that this student had more difficulty with the subject/activity. On the second day, this
student was not present in the network – which can indicate that the student missed the
class this day. Although Fig. 6 shows only the interactions involving the teacher and this
particular student, the teacher also interacted with other students.
    Besides the analysis involving individuals of the same class, the interactions among
individuals of different classes can also be analyzed. Fig. 7 presents third grade students
(classes 3A and 3B) and their teachers on the first day of the Primary School network
(CNO level 1). Fig. 7(a) shows the interactions among all students and teachers. The
lunch period (represented by the red rectangle in the figure) represents the period in
which there is more interaction involving students from different classes. However, a
pattern that is not visible in the layout from Fig. 7(a) can be identified when interact-
ing with the layout by using node selection to highlight the interactions involving class
3B students and class 3A teacher (Fig. 7(b)): the class 3A teacher interacts a lot with
the class 3B students in several different moments along the first day of the network,

464                                        J.R. Ponciano et al.




       Fig. 7. Visual analysis of the interactions involving students of the third grade (classes 3A
       and 3B) and their teachers on the first day of the Primary School network. (a) Interactions
       involving all students and teachers of the third grade; (b) Class 3A teacher has many inter-
       actions with the class 3B students, especially after lunch period. The identification of the
       factors that motivate this behaviour can be useful to support decision making related to the
       school management.


especially after lunch. The identification of the factors that motivate this behaviour, as,
for example, “Where was the class 3B teacher in this period?” or “The absence of class
3B teacher was previously planned or not?” can be useful to support decision making
related to school management.
    As it could be noted from the previous analyses, it is important to investigate the
amount of interactions involving teachers and students during the teaching and learning
process. Such analyses can support the development of adequate pedagogical strategies
in which, for instance, the teacher identify students with low performance (when relating
the groups of students with the individual performances), as well as make it possible to
observe whether little attention was given to a student with low performance (when ana-
lyzing the interaction frequency between the teacher and this student). Such analyses are
also relevant for the school management point of view since it is possible to observe the
relationship among teachers and students. It is possible, for example, to check whether a
teacher is interacting mainly with specific groups of students, and so adopt administra-
tive decisions that correct or encourage this behaviour.

                  Visual Analysis of Contact Patterns in School Environments                    465




                                                D




                                                E




                                                F
                                    )HPDOH            0DOH

       Fig. 8. Groups of students in the High School network detected by CNO level 4 and cat-
       egorized according to gender information. (a) Heterogeneous group, composed by both
       men and women; (b) Homogeneous group composed only by men; (c) Homogeneous group
       composed only by women. Gender information may also provide a new perspective to the
       teacher concerning strategic group formation.



    Besides student interaction, there are other information that may influence group for-
mation. An example of complementary information is the students’ genders. Fig. 8 pres-
ents the three types of groups detected by CNO level 4 for the High School network ac-
cording to this information. There are heterogeneous (mixed-gender) groups (Fig. 8(a))
and homogeneous (single-gender) groups, composed only by men (Fig. 8(b)) or only by
women (Fig. 8(c)). Taking into account gender information provides a new perspective
to the teacher, as, for example, the prioritization of a specific group formation. Homo-
geneous groups are recommended when teaching unfamiliar tasks in math and science,
while heterogeneous ones can benefit the study of familiar materials (Chennabathni and
Rejskind 1998). The teacher can take into account that each group formation has its own
characteristics and handle it properly. Examples include:
  (i) Balanced-gender heterogeneous groups and homogeneous female groups tend to
        outperform the others (Zhan et al., 2015; Cen et al., 2014).
  (ii) Male students in heterogeneous groups are more confident than those in homoge-
        neous groups (Zhan et al., 2015).
  (iii) Female homogeneous groups tend to present a better distribution of member con-
        tributions (Cen et al., 2014).

466                                      J.R. Ponciano et al.


     Some individual aspects, such as depressive symptoms and self-esteem, are differen-
tially stratified by gender (Pachucki et al., 2015) and thus should be carefully observed
by the teacher as they also affect individual and group performances. As an example,
girls with more depressive symptoms present social inhibition while girls with high self-
esteem tend to have more interaction partners – in contrast, there is no consistent pattern
among boys regarding these two behaviours (Pachucki et al., 2015). On the other hand,
dyslexia appears to be more present in boys than girls (Rutter et al., 2004).
     Table 1 shows the group distribution according to gender information for both net-
works using CNO level 4. One can see a high discrepancy between the amount of
heterogeneous and homogeneous groups in the Primary School network, where 72.2%
of groups are heterogeneous. Such proportion is much smaller in the High School net-
work: only 42.34% of the groups are heterogeneous (47 of 111 groups). This behaviour
may be related to the presence of gender homophily (tendency of having more contacts
with same-gender individuals), which tends to increase with age (Stehlé et al., 2013;
Pachucki et al., 2015). Moreover, when analyzing different classes in the High School,
it is possible to identify characteristics that also help to explain this behaviour. On PSI
class (focused on engineering), for instance, only 1 of 11 groups is composed only by
women, while 5 of them contain only men and 5 are heterogeneous. In this class, there
are 10 women and 24 men, which may explain the presence of a single female group.
On the other hand, class 2BIO1 (biology) has 28 women and 9 men, which is in agree-
ment with the presence of 8 female groups, 4 heterogeneous ones and only 1 composed
only by men.
     Following (Stehlé et al., 2013), we analyzed the strength of the ties existent in differ-
ent groups of students of both Primary and High schools. Strong ties comprehend pairs
of students whose contacts have a cumulated duration of at least five minutes over the
two days of the Primary School (arbitrary threshold also used in (Stehlé et al., 2013) for
this same network), and more than 12.5 minutes over the five days of the High School
(the same proportion as adopted for the Primary School ). Pairs of students who interact
less than these thresholds represent weak ties in the networks.
     Fig. 9 illustrates three different compositions of heterogeneous groups in both net-
works perceived with CNO level 4. In all groups that have more than one male (M) stu-


                                                Table 1
       Types of groups according to gender information and their distribution over the two net-
       works using CNO level 4. The abbreviations `F’, `M’ and `U’ along with the network names
       refer to “Females”, “Males”, and “Unknown” (without gender information), respectively.
       Groups with at least one U member are considered as heterogeneous

        # Groups              Primary Sc. (112 F, 115 M, 15 U)    High Sc. (146 F, 176 M, 7 U)

        Only Females          11 (size 245 ± 065)                28 (size 25 ± 068)
        Only Males             9 (size 322 ± 113)                36 (size 239 ± 068)
        Heterogeneous         52 (size 358 ± 102)                47 (size 347 ± 111)
        Overall               72 (size 336 ± 107)               111 (size 287 ± 102)

                  Visual Analysis of Contact Patterns in School Environments                        467



     0)


     0)


     0)


                                                       D

     0)


     0)



     0)


                                                       E
                               1RGH&RORU       )HPDOH        0DOH

                               (GJH&RORU       6WURQJ        :HDN


      Fig. 9. Different heterogeneous group compositions perceived with CNO level 4 for both
      networks. (a) Primary School. (b) High School. The abbreviations `F’ and `M’ along with the
      numbers refer to number of “Females” and “Males” in each group.


dent (all groups but 1M2F in both networks), no weak ties involve female (F) students.
All weak ties occur between male students probably because female students are better
at communication (González-Gómez et al., 2012) and more willing to express their ideas
(Zhan et al., 2015; Guntermann and Tovar 1987). The analysis of the groups (Primary
School, 1M2F and 2M1F – Fig. 9(a)) and (High School, 2M1F – Fig. 9(b)) supports this
claim: in these three groups, most interactions in the presented time interval involve
female students. In all groups of Fig. 9, except (Primary School, 1M2F) and one male
student from (High School, 3M1F), the male students interacted a lot with most of the
other group members. This behaviour may be related to the higher confidence that male
students tend to have when they are in heterogeneous groups (Zhan et al., 2015). Male
students in female-majority groups might experience bad feelings about their positions,
impairing their attitudes and performances (Zhan et al., 2015). This aspect may help to

468                                        J.R. Ponciano et al.




                                                   D



                                                   E



                                                   F
                   )ULHQGVKLS              1RIULHQGVKLS            1RLQIRUPDWLRQ


       Fig. 10. Groups of students in the High School network detected by CNO level 4 and catego-
       rized according to the existence or not of friendship relation on Facebook. (a) Heterogeneous
       group, in which only some students are friends on Facebook; (b) Homogeneous group com-
       posed only by friends on Facebook; (c) The unique homogeneous group in the network in
       which there is not even a single friendship relation on Facebook. The use of complementary
       information creates a better understanding and represents a useful resource for collaborative
       learning and knowledge construction.



explain why (Primary School, 1M2F) was an exception – the male member interacts
with the other group members only a few times in the presented time interval. In fact,
male students tend to prefer to be in the majority in a heterogeneous group, while female
students prefer to be in the minority (Zhan et al., 2015).
    Information related to the existence of interactions among students outside school
environment can also influence group formation in school. Recall that High School net-
work provides the information about which students have a friendship relation between
themselves on the social network Facebook. This information can be associated with
groups in class. Fig. 10 presents three types of CNO level 4 detected groups. Similarly
to the groups obtained through the gender information, there are heterogeneous groups
(Fig. 10(a)), in which only some students are friends on Facebook (for the others there is
no friendship and/or no information is provided); and homogeneous groups, composed
only by friends on Facebook (Fig. 10(b)) or by students without Facebook friendship
(Fig. 10(c)). Heterogeneous groups are expected to be common in schools. However,
groups in which there is not even a single friendship relation is not so common. In fact,
the group illustrated in Fig. 10(c) is the only occurrence of this type in the High School
network. Complementary information such as the existence of friendships on social net-
works – especially in educational networks (e.g., edmodo.com) – creates a better un-
derstanding and represents a useful resource for collaborative learning and knowledge
construction.

                     Visual Analysis of Contact Patterns in School Environments                        469


5. Conclusion


The employment of adequate visualisation strategies represents a useful approach to fa-
cilitate pattern recognition processes in network data, accelerating and making more re-
liable strategic decision making. This paper presented two case studies that analyzed two
real-world education networks from different scenarios: a primary and a high school.
For this purpose, we applied the Massive Sequence View (MSV) layout along with the
Community-based Node Ordering (CNO) node ordering method.
    Even without having metadata information about individual or group performances
on tests and exams (which would certainly improve our analyses and bring other per-
spectives), we have shown the importance of visual analyses to assist decision making
about teaching strategies and school management. The layouts allowed analyses related
to strategic group formation that can take into account different criteria, such as the eval-
uated day-by-day interaction, friendship on social networks, and gender information.
These and other factors may influence the group formation process and thus represent
relevant information to support the teacher’s decision. In the same way, they provide dif-
ferent data perspectives that could be useful for school management decisions.
    As future work, we intend to analyze the school performance of each student in
group activity and with groups composed according to the studied types of interactions.
Moreover, we can analyze the level of student interaction in groups made by the teacher
through visual analysis, and validate the performance and behaviour of the students dur-
ing the teaching and learning process. In this way, we aim to establish the ideal group
formation for a specific class or discipline.


Acknowledgments


This work was supported by the Brazilian research support agencies Conselho Na-
cional de Desenvolvimento Científico e Tecnológico – CNPq (Grant numbers
456855/2014-9 and 141958/2018-9) and Coordenação de Aperfeiçoamento de Pes-
soal de Nível Superior – CAPES (Finance Code 001). The authors also thank Socio-
Patterns (www.sociopatterns.org) for making available the network data sets used
in this paper.


References

Albert, R. and Barabási, A.-L. (2002). Statistical mechanics of complex networks. Rev. Mod. Phys., 74(1):47–
   97.
Bach, B. (2016). Unfolding Dynamic Networks for Visual Exploration. IEEE Comp. Graph., 36(2):74–82.
Blondel, V. D., Guillaume, J.-L., Lambiotte, R., and Lefebvre, E. (2008). Fast unfolding of communities in
   large networks. J. Stat. Mech-Theory E., 2008(10):P10008.

470                                           J.R. Ponciano et al.


Caligaris, M., Rodríguez, G., and Laugero, L. (2015). Learning styles and visualization in numerical analysis.
   Procedia – Social and Behavioral Sciences, 174:3696–3701. International Conference on New Horizons
   in Education, INTE 2014, 25–27 June 2014, Paris, France.
Cattuto, C., Van den Broeck, W., Barrat, A., Colizza, V., Pinton, J.-F., and Vespignani, A. (2010). Dynamics of
   person-to-person interactions from distributed rfid sensor networks. PloS one, 5(7):e11596.
Cen, L., Ruta, D., Powell, L., and Ng, J. (2014). Does gender matter for collaborative learning? In: 2014 IEEE
   International Conference on Teaching, Assessment and Learning for Engineering (TALE), pages 433–440.
   IEEE.
Chen, Y., Chen, Q., Zhao, M., Boyer, S., Veeramachaneni, K., and Qu, H. (2016). Dropoutseer: Visualizing
   learning patterns in massive open online courses for dropout reasoning and prediction. In: 2016 IEEE Con-
   ference on Visual Analytics Science and Technology (VAST), pages 111–120. IEEE.
Chennabathni, R. and Rejskind, G. (1998). Gender issues in collaborative learning. Canadian Woman Studies,
   17(4).
Ester, M., Kriegel, H.-P., Sander, J., and Xu, X. (1996). A Densitybased Algorithm for Discovering Clusters
   a Density-based Algorithm for Discovering Clusters in Large Spatial Databases with Noise. In: Proceed-
   ings of the Second International Conference on Knowledge Discovery and Data Mining, pages 226–231.
   AAAI Press.
Estrada, E. (2015). Introduction to Complex Networks: Structure and Dynamics. Lect. Notes Math., 2126:93–
   131.
Fortunato, S. and Hric, D. (2016). Community detection in networks: A user guide. Phys. Rep., 659:1–44.
Gemmetto, V., Barrat, A., and Cattuto, C. (2014). Mitigation of infectious disease at school: Targeted class
   closure vs school closure. BMC Infectious Diseases, 14(1):695.
Gialampoukidis, I., Tsikrika, T., Vrochidis, S., and Kompatsiaris, I. (2016). Community detection in complex
   networks based on DBSCAN* and a Martingale process. In: 2016 11th International Workshop on Seman-
   tic and Social Media Adaptation and Personalization (SMAP), pages 1–6.
González-Gómez, F., Guardiola, J., Rodríguez, _ O. M., and Alonso, M. _A. M. (2012). Gender differences in
   e-learning satisfaction. Computers & Education, 58(1):283–290.
Guidotti, R. and Coscia, M. (2017). On the equivalence between community discovery and clustering. In:
   International Conference on Smart Objects and Technologies for Social Good, pages 342–352. Springer.
Guntermann, E. and Tovar, M. (1987). Collaborative problem-solving with logo: Effects of group size and
   group composition. Journal of Educational Computing Research, 3(3):313–334.
Holme, P. and Saramäki, J. (2012). Temporal networks. Physics Reports, 519(3):97–125.
Holten, D., Cornelissen, B., and van Wijk, J. J. (2007). Trace Visualization Using Hierarchical Edge Bundles
   and Massive Sequence Views. In: 2007 4th IEEE International Workshop on Visualizing Software for Un-
   derstanding and Analysis, pages 47–54.
Lancichinetti, A. and Fortunato, S. (2009). Community detection algorithms: A comparative analysis. Phys.
   Rev. E, 80.
Linhares, C. D., Ponciano, J. R., Pereira, F. S., Rocha, L. E., Paiva, J. G. S., and Traven_colo, B. A. (2020).
   Visual analysis for evaluation of community detection algorithms. Multimedia Tools and Applications,
   pages 1–23.
Linhares, C. D. G., Ponciano, J. R., Pereira, F. S. F., Rocha, L. E. C., Paiva, J. G. S., and Travençolo, B. A. N.
   (2019). A scalable node ordering strategy based on community structure for enhanced temporal network
   visualization. Computers & Graphics, 84:185–198.
Linhares, C. D. G., Travençolo, B. A. N., Paiva, J. G. S., and Rocha, L. E. C. (2017). Dynetvis: A system for
   visualization of dynamic networks. In: Proceedings of the Symposium on Applied Computing, SAC ‘17,
   pages 187–194.
Mastrandrea, R., Fournet, J., and Barrat, A. (2015). Contact patterns in a high school: A comparison between
   data collected using wearable sensors, contact diaries and friendship surveys. PLOS ONE, 10(9):1–26.
McNeil, S. (2015). Visualizing mental models: understanding cognitive change to support teaching and
   learning of multimedia design and development. Educational Technology Research and Development,
   63(1):73–96.
Mu, X., Xu, K., Chen, Q., Du, F., Wang, Y., and Qu, H. (2019). Moocad: Visual analysis of anomalous learning
   activities in massive open online courses.
Pachucki, M. C., Ozer, E. J., Barrat, A., and Cattuto, C. (2015). Mental health and social networks in early ado-

                      Visual Analysis of Contact Patterns in School Environments                              471

    lescence: A dynamic study of objectively-measured social interaction behaviors. Social Science & Medi-
    cine, 125:40–50. Special Issue: Social Networks, Health and Mental Health.
Rosvall, M. and Bergstrom, C. T. (2008). Maps of random walks on complex networks reveal community
    structure. P. Natl. A. Sci., 105(4):1118–1123.
Ruipérez-Valiente, J. A., Muñoz-Merino, P. J., Leony, D., and Kloos, C. D. (2015). Alas-ka: A learning analyt-
    ics extension for better understanding the learning process in the khan academy platform. Computers in
    Human Behavior, 47:139–148. Learning Analytics, Educational Data Mining and data-driven Educational
    Decision Making.
Rutter, M., Caspi, A., Fergusson, D., Horwood, L. J., Goodman, R., Maughan, B., Moffitt, T. E., Meltzer, H.,
    and Carroll, J. (2004). Sex differences in developmental reading disability: New findings from 4 epidemio-
    logical studies. Jama, 291(16):2007–2012.
Shin, H., Ko, E.-Y., Williams, J. J., and Kim, J. (2018). Understanding the effect of in-video prompting on
    learners and instructors. In: Proceedings of the 2018 CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing
    Systems, page 319. ACM.
Shneiderman, B., Plaisant, C., and Hesse, B. W. (2013). Improving healthcare with interactive visualization.
    Computer, 46(5):58–66.
Stehlé, J., Voirin, N., Barrat, A., Cattuto, C., Isella, L., Pinton, J., Quaggiotto, M., Van den Broeck, W., Régis,
    C., Lina, B., and Vanhems, P. (2011). High-resolution measurements of face-to-face contact patterns in a
    primary school. PLOS ONE, 6(8):e23176.
Stehlé, J., Charbonnier, F., Picard, T., Cattuto, C., and Barrat, A. (2013). Gender homophily from spatial be-
    havior in a primary school: A sociometric study. Social Networks, 35(4):604–613.
Sung, C.-Y., Huang, X.-Y., Shen, Y., Cherng, F.-Y., Lin, W.-C., and Wang, H.-C. (2017). Exploring online
    learners’ interactive dynamics by visually analyzing their time-anchored comments. In: Computer Graph-
    ics Forum, volume 36, pages 145–155. Wiley Online Library.
v. d. Elzen, S., Holten, D., Blaas, J., and van Wijk, J. J. (2014). Dynamic network visualization with extended
    massive sequence views. IEEE Transactions on Visualization and Computer Graphics, 20(8):1087–1099.
van den Elzen, S., Holten, D., Blaas, J., and van Wijk, J. J. (2013). Reordering massive sequence views:
    Enabling temporal and structural analysis of dynamic networks. In 2013 IEEE Pacific Visualization Sym-
    posium (PacificVis), pages 33–40.
Vieira, C., Parsons, P., and Byrd, V. (2018). Visual learning analytics of educational data: A systematic litera-
    ture review and research agenda. Computers & Education, 122:119–135.
Ware, C. (2012). Information Visualization: Perception for Design. Morgan Kaufmann Series in Interactive
    Technologies. Morgan Kaufmann, San Francisco, CA, USA, 3 edition.
Zhan, Z., Fong, P. S., Mei, H., and Liang, T. (2015). E_ects of gender grouping on students’ group perfor-
    mance, individual achievements and attitudes in computer-supported collaborative learning. Comput. Hum.
    Behav., 48(C):587–596.
Zhao, Y., She, Y., Chen, W., Lu, Y., Xia, J., Chen, W., Liu, J., and Zhou, F. (2018). Eod edge sampling for
    visualizing dynamic network via massive sequence view. IEEE Access, 6:53006–53018.

472                                 J.R. Ponciano et al.



J. R. Ponciano received the BSc and MSc degrees in computer science from the Fed-
eral University of Uberlândia, Uberlândia /MG, Brazil. He is currently a PhD student at
the same university. His research interests include Information Visualization, especially
complex network visualization and visualization of streaming data.
C. D. G. Linhares received the BSc, MSc and PhD degrees in computer science from
the Federal University of Uberlândia, Uberlândia /MG, Brazil. His research interests
include Information Visualization, especially complex network visualization and visual
scalability, Human Computer Interaction and Dynamic processes.
S. L. Melo graduated in Information Systems (2006) and has a MSc degree in Computer
Science (2016). She is currently a PhD student in Electrical Engineering at the Federal
University of Uberlândia – Brazil. Her research interests include Intelligent Tutoring
Systems, Cognitive Science, Affective Computing, and Artificial Intelligence applied to
education.
L. V. Lima received a BSc degree in Electrical Engineering (1983), MSc degree in
Electrical Engineering (1988), and a PhD degree in Electrical Engineering (1998). He
is currently a full professor at the Faculty of Electrical Engineering, Federal University
of Uberlândia, Uberlândia, Brazil. His research interests include Artificial Intelligence,
Neuro Science, Computer Music, and Adaptative Systems.
B. A. N. Travençolo received a BSc degree in Computer Science (2003) and a PhD
degree in Bioinformatics (2007), all from University of São Paulo. He is currently asso-
ciate professor at the Faculty of Computing, Federal University of Uberlândia, Uberlân-
dia, Brazil. His research interests include Image Processing, Information Visualization,
Scientific Visualization and Complex Networks.