International Education Studies; Vol. 13, No. 4; 2020
                                                                                   ISSN 1913-9020 E-ISSN 1913-9039
                                                                Published by Canadian Center of Science and Education


     Enhancement of College English Teachers’ Information Literacy in
                       Information Environment
                                                   Yinghua Gu1
1
    English Department, North China Electric Power University, Baoding, China
Correspondence: Yinghua Gu, English Department, North China Electric Power University, Baoding, China.


Received: October 30, 2019          Accepted: December 15, 2019            Online Published: March 22, 2020
doi:10.5539/ies.v13n4p106                         URL: https://doi.org/10.5539/ies.v13n4p106


Abstract
The 21st century is an era of knowledge and information. Modern science and technology based on information
technology has inspired profound changes in the world, including college education. Information literacy is an
intrinsic element that often plays an important role in teaching and school management. In the information age,
how to improve college teachers’ information literacy has become a major issue in the development of college
education. This paper focuses on the study of college English teachers’ information literacy. It first studies the
basic connotation of information literacy of college teachers which covers information awareness, information
knowledge, and information ability. Then this paper takes college English teachers in North China Electric
Power University as the research object, and adopts questionnaire survey and literature research to analyze the
current situation of the information literacy of college English teachers. Based on the analysis of the basic
connotation of teachers’ information literacy, and the current situation of college English teachers’ information
literacy, this paper puts forward three strategies for improving college English teachers’ information literacy:
enhancing college English teachers’ self-development consciousness, making use of group dynamics, and
perfecting modern information technology training system.
Keywords: college English teachers, connotation, current situation, information literacy, strategy
1. Introduction
The 21st century is an era of knowledge and information. Modern science and technology based on information
technology has inspired profound changes in the world, including college education. In order to meet the
development requirements of the information society, it is an urgent and important task to use information to
drive the modernization of education, promote the leapfrog development of teacher education and actively
promote the construction of teacher education information (Ministry of education, 2002). Teachers who play an
important role in educational activities will inevitably receive a huge impact from information technology. The
improvement of teachers’ information literacy not only directly affects the whole process of education
informatization, but also is an inevitable requirement to conform to the development of information society and
the trend of curriculum reform and promote quality education. The same is true for college English teachers. The
application of modern information technology in college English teaching not only makes teaching methods
modernized, diversified and convenient, but also promotes changes in teaching concepts, teaching contents and
teaching methods. The College English Teaching Guide in China has emphasized the importance of information
technology many times. In terms of curriculum setting based on teaching objectives, the Guide points out that
colleges and universities should incorporate online courses into the curriculum setting, attach importance to
online course construction, and put relevant courses on the online teaching platform so that classroom teaching
and online learning can be seamlessly connected and integrated. In the form of college students’ English
proficiency test, a college English test bank should be built and computer and network-based tests should be
promoted. From the perspectives of college English teachers’ information literacy, this paper makes a series of
questionnaires. Survey results show that although teachers have strong information awareness and information
needs, they do not have a clear understanding of the connotation of information literacy, and their requirements
for the level of information literacy are low, and their ability to obtain and use information needs to be improved.
Therefore, college English teachers should keep pace with the times, keep up with the development of new
technology, continuously improve their awareness, knowledge and ability of using information technology, and
integrate and reasonably apply information technology to the specific classroom teaching design and


                                                        106

ies.ccsenet.org                            International Education Studies                       Vol. 13, No. 4; 2020


implementation.
“Information literacy forms the basis for lifelong learning. It is common to all disciplines, to all learning
environments, and to all levels of education. It enables learners to master content and extend their investigations,
become more self-directed, and assume greater control over their own learning” (The Association of College and
Research Libraries, 2000). In 1898, the Presidential Committee on Information Literacy defined information
literacy as a set of skills, which require an individual to “recognize when information is needed and have the
ability to locate, evaluate, and use effectively the needed information (American Library Association, 1898)”.
Zurkowski (1974), the president of the American Information Industry Association put forward the term
“Information Literacy”: Techniques and skills for solving problems by using a large number of information tools
and sources. He created a new way of understanding the concept of information literacy and the requirements of
the emerging information age. Doyle (1992) defined it as the ability to access, evaluate and use information from
a variety of sources in the National Forum of Information Literacy. In January of 2000, the Information Literacy
Competency Standards for Higher Education were approved and in February of 2004, the American Association
for Higher Education and the Council of Independent Colleges endorsed them. The Standards dictate that an
information literate person determines the nature and extent of information needed, accesses the needed
information effectively and efficiently, evaluates information and its sources critically and incorporates selected
information into his or her knowledge base and value system, uses information effectively to accomplish a
specific purpose, understands many of the economic, legal, and social issues surrounding the use of information,
and accesses and uses information ethically and legally (The Association of College and Research Libraries,
2000).
Based on the above concepts, combined with the particularity of college English teaching, the information
literacy of college English teachers can be shown as information awareness, information knowledge, and
information ability.
English teachers’ information awareness refers to teachers’ inherent demand for various educational and teaching
information and their sensitivity to teaching information, especially information related to English teaching (Tan,
2008). Teachers could consciously combine all kinds of information obtained with teaching. English teachers’
information knowledge means that teachers should have general educational information theory and understand
the basic knowledge of informatics, such as the main sources of information, basic characteristics and whether
the information is valuable or not (Peng & Zhang, 2013). Teachers should also be familiar with multimedia
teaching systems, understand electronic information resources related to teaching, master information retrieval
knowledge and methods, and have certain information security knowledge. English teachers’ information ability
refers to their ability to judge, collect, analyze, summarize, process, generate and disseminate information.
English teachers’ information ability is an important factor in teachers’ information literacy structure. As the
receiver and transmitter of information, teachers’ information ability is directly related to the effect of college
English teaching (Li, 2019).
2. Discussion
This paper conducts a sample survey of 44 English teachers in North China Electricity Powder University
(Hereinafter referred to as NCEPU) through a series of questionnaires. The results of this survey show that
English teachers in NCEPU have a certain awareness of information, but their information knowledge and ability
are not sufficient. Teachers’ application of teaching equipment, such as computer, internet,and multimedia fell
into medium level.
2.1 College English Teachers’ Information Awareness
From the following table, it can be seen that those who agree with question 1 account for 75% of the total
number of people surveyed. Those who agree with question 3 account for 81.2% of the total number of people
surveyed. 95.45% teachers will choose appropriate teaching software and network resources to assist and
improve teaching. The teachers who are very happy to learn and use the new teaching software, teaching
platform or teaching system provided by the school (e.g. some APP such as ketangpai, or intelligent correction,
Ucampus etc.) and the teachers who often encourage or organize students to use online materials to study and
live make up 72.73% of the total number of people surveyed respectively. These data show that in information
era, college English teachers’ information awareness have developed. They could keep pace with the times on
educational concept, deeply know the importance of the information technology in English teaching, fully agree
with the new technology and information education mode used in classroom teaching, and are conscious about
that information literacy plays a critical role in teachers’ teaching improvement and professional development.
However, the survey also suggests that there exist problems. For example, when asked in the face of numerous

                                                        107

ies.ccsenet.org                                        International Education Studies                               Vol. 13, No. 4; 2020


and complicated mass information, whether you will feel at a loss and do not know how to choose the valuable
information, the teachers whose answers are “yes” make up 68.18% which means the teachers lack sensitivity to
teaching information.
Based on the above analysis, college English teachers have acquired certain information awareness, but they still
need developing.


Table 1. Survey on information awareness of college English teachers
Questions                                                                            Choice (%)
                                                                                     A. definitely disagree (0)
1. Information literacy is the core of lifelong learning. It enables people to
                                                                                     B. partly agree (15.91)
effectively acquire, evaluate, apply and create information, thus realizing their
                                                                                     C. definitely agree (79.55)
personal, social, professional or educational goals.
                                                                                     D. don’t know (4.55)
                                                                                     A. definitely disagree (2.27)
2. To obtain more effective and valuable information conveniently, it is a basic
                                                                                     B. partly agree (20.45)
requirement to understand the principles of information technology (such as
                                                                                     C. definitely agree (75)
computer principles, network principles, etc.).
                                                                                     D. don’t know (2.27)
                                                                                     A. definitely disagree (0)
3. In today’s society, information is within reach, which provides excellent         B. partly agree (13.64)
opportunities for teachers’ teaching improvement and professional development.       C. definitely agree (81.82)
                                                                                     D. don’t know (4.55)
                                                                                     A. definitely disagree (0)
4. In the information society, a large number of information and information
                                                                                     B. partly agree (15.91)
technologies provide a better teaching environment and technical support for
                                                                                     C. definitely agree (81.82)
English teaching.
                                                                                     D. don’t know (2.27)
                                                                                     A. definitely disagree (2.27)
5. Information-based teaching is impacting and affecting the traditional teaching
                                                                                     B. partly agree (20.45)
theory, teaching mode and learning mode, bringing new requirements and
                                                                                     C. definitely agree (75)
challenges.
                                                                                     D. don’t know (2.27)
                                                                                     A. definitely disagree (0)
6. In the information society, information literacy is the basic literacy of         B. partly agree (13.64)
teachers.                                                                            C. definitely agree (86.36)
                                                                                     D. don’t know (0)
                                                                                     A. definitely disagree (0)
7. Teachers have good information literacy, which is the need to cultivate           B. partly agree (4.55)
high-quality, compound and innovative talents.                                       C. definitely agree (95.45)
                                                                                     D. don’t know (0)
                                                                                     A. definitely disagree (0)
8. In teaching, English teachers must make full use of information technology to
                                                                                     B. partly agree (6.82)
obtain effective information, which can not only better serve their own teaching,
                                                                                     C. definitely agree (93.18)
but also help teachers’ professional development.
                                                                                     D. don’t know (0)
                                                                                     A. definitely disagree (0)
9. Teachers should choose appropriate teaching software and network resources        B. partly agree (4.55)
to assist and improve teaching.                                                      C. definitely agree (95.45)
                                                                                     D. don’t know (0)
                                                                                     A. definitely disagree (4.55)
10. In the face of numerous and complicated mass information, I sometimes feel       B. partly agree (27.27)
at a loss and do not know how to choose the valuable information I want.             C. definitely agree (68.18)
                                                                                     D. don’t know (0)
                                                                                     A. definitely disagree (2.27)
11. I am very happy to learn and use the new teaching software, teaching
                                                                                     B. partly agree (25)
platform or teaching system provided by the school (e.g. ketangpai, or intelligent
                                                                                     C. definitely agree (72.73)
correction, Ucampus etc.).
                                                                                     D. don’t know (0)




                                                                     108

ies.ccsenet.org                                      International Education Studies                                Vol. 13, No. 4; 2020


                                                                                   A. definitely disagree (4.55)
12. I often encourage or organize students to use online materials to study and    B. partly agree (20.45)
live.                                                                              C. definitely agree (72.73)
                                                                                   D. don’t know (2.27)


2.2 College English Teachers’ Information Knowledge
This survey focuses on teachers’ knowledge of information sources and information tools. Teachers should be
familiar with multimedia teaching systems, understand electronic information resources related to teaching,
master information retrieval knowledge and methods, and have certain information security knowledge.
However, from Table 2, it can be seen that the information knowledge of college English teachers is completely
insufficient. Teacher’s knowledge of information is limited to some superficial knowledge. Besides the
application of some teaching platform and daily electronic equipment, teachers lack knowledge of information
sources and information tools. 68.18% teachers are not proficient in using computer word processing (office
software), spreadsheet (excel), presentation (PPT) and other software. 34.09% teachers have little knowledge
about web design and production, and network maintaining, and 54.55 teachers even have no knowledge about
that at all. Therefore, teachers’ information knowledge needs strengthening.


Table 2. Survey on information knowledge of college English teachers
  Questions                                                                        Choice (%)
                                                                                   A. definitely disagree (2.27)
  1. I am proficient in using computer word processing (office software),          B. partly agree (68.18)
  spreadsheet (excel), presentation (PPT) and other software.                      C. definitely agree (27.27)
                                                                                   D. don’t know (2.27)
                                                                                   A. definitely disagree (54.55)
  2. I am familiar with web design and production, and know how to maintain        B. partly agree (34.09)
  the network.                                                                     C. definitely agree (0)
                                                                                   D. don’t know (11.36)
                                                                                   A. definitely disagree (20.45)
  3. I will pay attention to computer network viruses and set up firewalls to      B. partly agree (38.64)
  protect my computer and network security.                                        C. definitely agree (31.82)
                                                                                   D. don’t know (9.09)
                                                                                   A. definitely disagree (40.91)
  4. I know how to protect important information in computers, such as             B. partly agree (36.36)
  encryption, watermarking, hiding, etc.                                           C. definitely agree (6.82)
                                                                                   D. don’t know (15.91)
                                                                                   A. definitely disagree (38.64)
  5. I have some knowledge of computer hardware and know how to maintain           B. partly agree (36.36)
  the system.                                                                      C. definitely agree (11.36)
                                                                                   D. don’t know (13.64)
                                                                                   A. definitely disagree (2.27)
  6. I can use the school’s teaching platform (e.g. class hall school, etc.) to
                                                                                   B. partly agree (34.09)
  release information to students, assign homework, set up a test bank, organize
                                                                                   C. definitely agree (56.82)
  tests and evaluations, etc.
                                                                                   D. don’t know (6.82)
                                                                                   A. definitely disagree (4.55)
  7. I am familiar with the operation of some daily electronic equipment, such     B. partly agree (27.27)
  as cameras, cameras, televisions and computers.                                  C. definitely agree (68.18)
                                                                                   D. don’t know (0)


2.3 College English Teachers’ Informationability
Table 3 shows that college English teachers can basically master some information technology tools, such as ppt
and the teaching platform provided by the school. They could combine the technology with multimedia teaching
equipment and apply it to assisting daily work. However, teachers are still quite weak in the development of
online courses, web page production and massive open online course production, and there are also great


                                                                    109

ies.ccsenet.org                                          International Education Studies                                Vol. 13, No. 4; 2020


deficiencies in information retrieval technology, information development and sharing.


Table 3. Survey on information ability of college English teachers
Questions                                                                              Choice (%)
                                                                                       A. definitely disagree (13.64)
1. When doing scientific research, I can skillfully use some professional
                                                                                       B. partly agree (56.82)
databases (e.g. Wanfang, VIP, Du Xiu, ERIC, science direction, etc.) to search
                                                                                       C. definitely agree (20.45)
for needed information for scientific research activities.
                                                                                       D. don’t know (9.09)
                                                                                       A. definitely disagree (13.64)
2. I can skillfully use information retrieval technology (e.g. advanced search) to     B. partly agree (52.27)
find suitable information.                                                             C. definitely agree (27.27)
                                                                                       D. don’t know (6.82)
3. I can skillfully use search tools (e.g. web browser, search engine, online          A. definitely disagree (9.09)
library catalog, etc.) to find the information I need.                                 B. partly agree (34.09)
                                                                                       C. definitely agree (50)
                                                                                       D. don’t know (6.82)
4. I will sort out the acquired information according to a certain classification so   A. definitely disagree (20.45)
as to organize my information base in an orderly way.                                  B. partly agree (45.45)
                                                                                       C. definitely agree (25)
                                                                                       D. don’t know (9.09)
                                                                                       A. definitely disagree (29.55)
5. I can use some software (such as Photoshop, Adobe Premiere, etc.) to process        B. partly agree (54.55)
images, audio and video.                                                               C. definitely agree (11.36)
                                                                                       D. don’t know (4.55)
                                                                                       A. definitely disagree (40.91)
6. I will publish the useful information I found on the internet, such as Baidu        B. partly agree (36.36)
library and bean net, to share with others.                                            C. definitely agree (13.64)
                                                                                       D. don’t know (9.09)
                                                                                       A. definitely disagree (6.82)
7. I will use network platforms (such as QQ, MSN, WeChat, Feixin, Blog, etc.)
                                                                                       B. partly agree (15.91)
to chat, exchange and share information with friends, peers and some
                                                                                       C. definitely agree (72.73)
like-minded people.
                                                                                       D. don’t know (4.55)
                                                                                       A. definitely disagree (2.27)
8. I often use multimedia and network to carry out teaching practice and
                                                                                       B. partly agree (20.45)
scientific research activities (e.g. lesson preparation, teaching, homework,
                                                                                       C. definitely agree (75)
communication between teachers and students, etc.)
                                                                                       D. don’t know (2.27)
                                                                                       A. definitely disagree (2.27)
9. Although I can’t often help students solve problems face to face due to
                                                                                       B. partly agree (18.18)
practical and space inconvenience, I often use the Internet, telephone and other
                                                                                       C. definitely agree (77.27)
communication with students to solve their learning problems.
                                                                                       D. don’t know (2.27)


Table 4 demonstrates that most of college English teachers regard insufficient personal information technology
capabilities (86.36%) and lack of relevant training(84.09%)as an obstacle for them to integrate information
technology into teaching. 52.27% teachers have not attended information technology training before joining the
job, and 61.36% teachers seldom attend information technology training after being a college English teacher.




                                                                       110

ies.ccsenet.org                                      International Education Studies                                 Vol. 13, No. 4; 2020


Table 4. Survey on the training of college English teachers
   Questions                                                                Choice (%)
                                                                            A. Insufficient personal information technology capabilities
                                                                            (86.36)
                                                                            B. Heavy teaching task (75)
   1. What is the difficulty in integrating information technology into
                                                                            C. Backward school computer, network, information platform
   teaching? (multiple choice)
                                                                            software and hardware (52.27)
                                                                            D. Lack of relevant training (84.09)
                                                                            E. other factors     (6.82)
                                                                            A. often (0)
   2. Have you attended information technology training before joining      B. seldom (40.91)
   the job?                                                                 C. unclear (6.82)
                                                                            D. no (52.27)
                                                                            A. often (6.82)
   3. Have you attended information technology training after joining       B. seldom (61.36)
   the job?                                                                 C. unclear (2.27)
                                                                            D. no (29.55)
                                                                            A. often (6.82)
   4. Has your school organized relevant information technology
                                                                            B. seldom (68.18)
   training (e.g. on network security, how to use teachers’ teaching
                                                                            C. unclear (20.45)
   platform, etc.) or provided corresponding help?
                                                                            D. no (4.55)
                                                                            A. very necessary (31.82)
   5.Do you think the school should give teachers information               B. necessary (59.09)
   technology training frequently                                           C. don’t care (4.55)
                                                                            D. unnecessary (4.55)
                                                                            A. Use of Office Software (65.91)
   6. If you think it is necessary for the school to strengthen teachers’   B. information retrieval (86.36)
   information technology training, what kind of training do you want?      C. MOOC production (79.55)
   (multiple choice)                                                        D. network security (63.64)
                                                                            E. others   (6.82)


3. Conclusion
The survey shows that college English teachers have great deficiencies in information knowledge, especially in
information ability. While information technology ability is the core accomplishment of high-quality teachers in
the new era and an important part of college English teachers’ professional development. Information literacy of
college English teachers needs to be improved urgently. Based on above analysis, this paper puts forward the
following strategies to improve teachers’ information literacy:
3.1 Enhancing College English Teachers’ Self-Development Consciousness
College English teachers should take the initiative to learn information technology and face the foreign language
teaching reform in the information age with an open, inclusive and positive attitude. To better to apply
information education to college English teaching, the first thing to do is develop college English teachers’
self-development consciousness. Only by doing so can teachers initiatively learn and reflect when facing the
changes and challenges of the external environment. Schools should also give certain policies and material
support in the application of information-based teaching to create a good working environment for teachers, so
that teachers can actively participate in the reform of information-based teaching.
3.2 Making Use of Group Dynamics
The strength of the group is greater than that of the individual, and the group and the individual interact and
depend on each other. It is an effective method to drive the individual to change through the strength of the
group. The mutual communication and cooperation in information between teachers, teachers and technicians,
teachers and students will provide the greatest group motivation and guarantee for the promotion of teachers’
information literacy. As far as students are concerned, students have strong practical ability and are relatively
easy to accept new things. Teachers can let students participate in the discussion on how to integrate information
technology into the classroom, and can also let them join the development and utilization of some courseware


                                                                     111

ies.ccsenet.org                              International Education Studies                         Vol. 13, No. 4; 2020


and online courses, so as to achieve the goal of teaching mutually beneficial.
3.3 Perfecting Modern Information Technology Training System
In order to better realize the goal of college English classroom reform in information-based era, improving the
training of modern educational science and technology should be set priority so as to boost the teachers’ ability
of integrating information technology into English classroom.
Today is an era of developed information technology. Rich information resources provide good conditions for the
development of English teachers. College English teachers should fully realize their shortcomings, strive to
improve their information literacy and better adapt to the changes in teaching environment, thus promoting the
development of college English education.
References
American Association of School Librarians, & Association for Educational Communications. (1988).
   Information power: Guidelines for school library media programs. Amer Library Assn.
American library association. (1898). American library associations presidential committee on information
   literacy final report. Chicago, American library association.
Doyle, C. S. (1992). Outcome Measures for Information Literacy within the National Education Goals of 1990.
    Final Report to National Forum on Information Literacy. Summary of Findings.
Information         Literacy         Standards.        (2008).                 CAUL.           Retrieved           from
     http://www.caul.edu.au/caul-doc/InfoLitStandards2001.doc
Li, Q. (2015). Research on College English Teachers’ Information Literacy and Professional Development under
     the Background of Information Technology. Comparative Study of Cultural Innovation.
Ministry of education. (2002). Opinions of the Ministry of Education on Promoting Informationization of
    Teacher Education. Retrieved from http://www.moe.gov.cn/
Peng, Z., & Zhang, X. (2013). Enhancement of English Teachers’ Information Literacy in Class Teaching. Value
    engineering.
Tan, W. (2008). Research on Information Literacy of College English Teachers. Education and Vocation.
The Association of College and Research Libraries. (2000). Framework for Information Literacy for Higher
    Education. Retrieved from http://www.ala.rog/acrl/standards/ilframework
Zurkowski, P. G. (1974). Growing Information Literacy into Information Optix. Retrieved from
    https://informationoptix.com/


Note.
Note 1. This paper is one of the research achievements of “Research on the Path and Mechanism of University
English Teacher’s Professional Development Supported by Information Technology” (No.17BYY096) supported
by the National Science Foundation of China, and “Research on the Solution of the Contradiction Between
Chinese Cultural Promotion and Chinese Cultural Aphasia in College English Teaching” (No. HB18YY033)
supported by Social Science Foundation of Hebei Province in 2018.


Copyrights
Copyright for this article is retained by the author(s), with first publication rights granted to the journal.
This is an open-access article distributed under the terms and conditions of the Creative Commons Attribution
license (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/).




                                                          112