Book Review:
Inviting Educational Leadership: Fulfilling Potential
and Applying Ethics to the Education Process
by John M. Novak

L. C. MacFarlane (University of Potchefstroom)
M. P. van der Merwe (Rand Afrikaans University)

John Novak is unequivocal about his vision for schools and their
role in society: “S chools can either be part of the solution or part
of the problem.” If schools are to be a part of the former, then they
need to be unconditionally invitational. Invitational Education is
the theory that informs his book Inviting Educational Leadership:
Fulfilling Potential and Applying Ethics to the Education Process.

If educational leadership is to be truly successful, leadership will
acknowledge that there are specific invitational ideals required as
founding principles. There are five core invitational principles
which underscore the notion that education is fundamentally an
imaginative act of hope aimed at inviting all stakeholders to con-
tinuously savour, understand, and better their expectations.

The book is divided into three parts in order to deal comprehen-
sively with the theory and practice of invitational leadership. The
first part, entitled “Inviting Educational Lives”, expounds the de-
mocratic ethos, perceptual tradition and self-concept theory that is
integral to the theoretical framework and practice of Invitational
Education. The second part, entitled “Leading and Managing Edu-
cational Life”, examines the relationship that invitational leaders
have with themselves and the notion of intentionality. It also con-
siders the nature of inviting relationships, and suggests particular
skills for managing conflict and philosophical differences. The
educator’s association with values and knowledge is then illu-
mined. Ways in which schools can be structured and re-structured

                                 61

                                          Journal of Invitational Theory and Practice, 2002, Vol. 8

                          in order to invite an optimal educational experience are suggested.
                          Finally, the symbiosis between invitational schools and their com-
                          munities is discussed. The third section of the book, entitled “Dare
                          to Lead for Education”, summarizes the book’s contents and ex-
                          horts the reader to strive for the realization of the potential of Invi-
                          tational Education.

                          In Novak’s book, prominence is given to the importance of caring,
                          democratic relationships or ‘doing-with’ relationships as opposed
                          to ‘doing-to’ relationships. The style of the book embodies this
                          principle: each chapter is preceded by an overview of the chapter,
                          and concluded with conversational-style question and answers that
                          expands the topics addressed in the chapters. Novak makes a point
                          of indicating that his book is neither the panacea for leadership
                          problems in education, nor is it the final authority on educational
                          leadership. Instead, the emphasis is on discussion and encourage-
                          ment of the reader to think in new and optimal ways about leading
                          invitationally. Even the language of the book is invitational: the
                          book is easy to read and readily comprehensible. In these stylistic
                          aspects the reader is cared for and taken into consideration in the
                          same manner as which Novak urges educational leaders to treat
                          other stakeholders of education.

                          Ultimately, Inviting Educational Leadership is an inviting conver-
                          sation about the merits of human interaction for educational pur-
                          poses. In true Invitational style, it is incomplete: the reader needs
                          to respond to the novel approaches outlined and think further. As
                          such, it is an irreplaceable tool for every educator wishing to do
                          more than merely teach or manage.

                          Linda MacFarlane is a Senior Lecturer at University of Potchefstroom (for
                          Christian Higher Education) School of Educational Sciences.
                          opwlcm@puknet.puk.ac.za




                                                               62

Journal of Invitational Theory and Practice, 2002, Vol. 8

                     Guidelines for Authors

The Journal for Invitational Theory and Practice is published once a year
and promotes the tenets of invitational learning, self-concept theory, and
perceptual psychology. Articles that examine and expand the theory of
invitational learning and development, investigate the efficacy of invita-
tional practices, and relate these beliefs and findings to other theories of
human development and behavior are encouraged.
The journal uses an anonymous review of articles and final decisions re-
garding publication are made by the Editor. On publication, authors re-
ceive two copies of the journal. Authors are asked to follow these guide-
lines when submitting articles for publication:
1. Prepare manuscripts in APA style. Refer to the Publication Manual,
5th Edition of the American Psychological Association.
2. Include an abstract of 50-100 words.
3. Double space everything, including reference, quotations, tables, and
figures. Leave generous margins on each page.
4. Use tables and figures sparingly, and place them on separate pages.
All artwork and diagrams should be camera-ready.
5. Place authors' names, positions, titles, mailing addresses, and email
addresses on the cover page only.
6. Lengthy quotations require written permission from the copyright
holder for reproduction. Authors are responsible for obtaining permis-
sions and providing documentation to the journal.
7. Avoid the use of the generic masculine and feminine pronouns.
8. Please do not submit material that is currently being considered by
another journal.
9. Authors are requested to provide a copy of the manuscript on a 3.5"
computer disk, preferably IBM formatted. This will facilitate the review.
10. Please include email address, home phone number, and business
phone number so that the editor may contact you quickly.
11. Send one copy of the manuscript and an electronic file on 3.5” com-
puter disk to:
Phillip S. Riner, Editor Phone: (904) 620-2610
College of Education and Human Services            FAX: (904) 620-2522
University of North Florida       email: priner@unf.edu
4567 St. Johns Bluff Road, South           http://www.prenhall.com/riner
Jacksonville, FL 32224-2645




                                    63

                                               Journal of Invitational Theory and Practice, 2002, Vol. 8