https://repamjournal.org

                                                                                E-ISSN: 2691-0667
                Research in Educational Policy and Management
                                                                                December 2020

                                                                                Volume: 2 Issue: 2 pp. 133-137




                                              Book Review.
Educational leadership and management: Developing insights and skills


                                        İbrahim Hakkı Öztürk*




* Independent researcher, Ankara, Turkey.
E-mail: ibra.ozturk@gmail.com                   ABSTRACT
                                                This paper reviews the book Educational leadership and
Article Info                                    management: Developing insights and skills, written by
Received: December 12, 2019                     Marianne Coleman and Derek Glover (published in 2010 by
Revised: October 2, 2020                        Open University Press-McGraw Hill, 197 p.). The book
Accepted: October 29, 2020                      addresses the values and skills needed by educational leaders
                                                and managers in a changing and dynamic world of education.
      10.46303/repam.2020.8
                                                KEYWORDS
How to cite                                     Book    review;    Educational     leadership;   Educational
Öztürk, İ. H. (2020). Book Review.              management; Educational leaders.
Educational leadership and management:
Developing insights and skills. Research in
Educational Policy and Management, 2(2),
133-137.
https://doi.org/10.46303/repam.2020.8

Copyright license
This is an Open Access article distributed
under the terms of the Creative Commons
Attribution 4.0 International license (CC BY
4.0).

                                                                                                   134




                                           BOOK REVIEW

Coleman, M. and Glover, D. (2010). Educational leadership and management: Developing
       insights and skills. New York: Open University Press-McGraw Hill.

Significant economic, societal, political and technological changes in the last few decades
require us to rethink education management and school leadership. On the eve of the 21st
century, Brian Caldwell and Jim Spinks (as cited in Davies, 2002, p. 197) stated that there were
three main challenges in the management of education systems: “Building systems of self-
managing schools”, “focus on learning outcomes” and “creating schools for the learning
society”. Since then, there is no doubt that change is faster and challenges become more
important. A recent international comparative study showed that although there are some
differences between countries, the change in conceptions and practice of school leadership is a
global trend and the role of education leaders has become increasingly more complex (Woods
et al. 2018).
         Educational leadership and management: Developing insights and skills, written by
Marianne Coleman and Derek Glover (published in 2010 by Open University Press-McGraw Hill,
197 p.), addresses the values and skills needed by educational leaders and managers in a
changing and dynamic world of education.
       The book takes its origin from a MA module taught at the Institute of Education, University
of London. Therefore, it was written in a didactic style for students and practitioners in field of
educational leadership and management. The importance given to the articulation of theory
and practice is one of the most prominent features of the book:
       The first aim of the authors is to bring together theory and practice in the context of
       leading and managing adults who work in education. Each chapter focuses on an aspect of
       leading and managing and goes beyond lists of ‘how to’, to examine some of the deeper
       theoretical issues that relate to, for example, motivation, decision-making,
       communication and difference (Coleman and Glover, 2010, p. 2).
       In line with the importance given to articulation of theory and practice, the authors placed
a special emphasis on reflexive thinking. “In every chapter, readers are invited to reflect on their
own practice in light of the discussions” (p. 2). Additionally, the chapters include a scenario
drawn from real life and the readers are invited to explore theories and concepts of educational
management through the scenarios.
       Another highlight of the book is its focus on social justice, equity and cultural diversity. The
book aims to “promotes an ethical stance based on values of social justice and equity” (p. 2).
The authors underline that this book “differs from other books in the area of educational
leadership and management as it is firmly placed in the context of diversity and equity” (p. 1).

135


Indeed, a recent review of the relevant literature showed that social justice and equity were
under-examined in the field of the educational leadership (Wenner & Campbell, 2017).
      The book consists of eleven chapters. Apart from the two main authors, Marianne
Coleman and Derek Glover, two authors contributed to the book: Anne Gold and Megan
Crawford who wrote Chapter 2 and Chapter 10, respectively.
      Chapter 1, Leading and managing for diversity and social justice, focuses on concepts of
diversity and social justice in the context of educational management. In this chapter, the
authors explore topics such as racism, discrimination, gender equity, ethnic and religious
diversity and stereotyping in educational contexts and they suggest that “looking at society
through a lens that is not that of the dominant culture can be both exciting and instructive” (p.
8).
      Anne Gold is author of the Chapter 2, Leading with values. This chapter focuses on “the
importance of reflection on values for educational leaders” and “shows how easily values
clashes can lead to difficult dilemmas in an educational organization” (p. 39). The author
highlights the importance of sharing communal values such as democracy, responsibility, social
justice and fairness.
      In Chapter 3, the authors, Marianne Coleman and Derek Glover, deals with the
communication within the educational organizations:
      Effective communication is essential for effective leadership and management. […]
      Although communication is a complex process it is one that we take for granted and may
      assume that we do well. It is a fundamental part of our leadership behavior (p. 46).
      Communicating with people in groups is a vital role for leaders in education and
      elsewhere, but leadership also involves dealing with individuals on a one to one basis.
      Perhaps the most important dealings of this kind occur in the context of appraisal or
      performance review. The main communication skills involved in these activities are
      listening and giving and receiving feedback (p. 49).
      In Chapter 4, the authors address “decision-making and the management of conflict”
stressing the importance of collegial approach of decision-making, negotiation skills,
assertiveness and living with difference.
      “Motivation and delegation” are explored in Chapter 5. The authors state that “whatever
the nature of the team and the interrelationships between colleagues, successful education
depends upon motivation at all levels – as leaders, as followers and as learners” (p. 76) and that
“one of the most significant ways in which colleagues can be given self-ideal is through
delegation of responsibility” (p. 83).
      Chapter 6 focusses on performance management. The authors advocate a collegial and
collaborative approach of performance management that may be developmental and enhance
motivation of the teachers and the other persons involved in the educational organizations.
Otherwise, a more bureaucratic approach of performance management will be limited to
accountability and may be seen as judgemental.

                                                                                               136


       The authors deal with team management in Chapter 7 and 8. Through a scenario
illustrating teams at work in a school in Malawi, Chapter 7 focuses more on cultural aspects of
the group working. The authors suggest that “schools and colleges can be much more effective
if people understand team dynamics, know how they can contribute their full potential to their
team and understand the leadership culture within which teams operate” (p. 99). In Chapter 8,
the authors address the ways of effective and productive meetings with school team. They
highlight once again the importance of collaborative and collegial approach: “Organizations
which value participation tend to have more open and informal meetings than those within a
more hierarchical or authoritarian culture” (p. 113).
       “Managing time and stress” is discussed in Chapter 9. For a better time management, the
authors recommend three points: ”Analyse how you use your time”, “identify time-wasters”
and “plan: long, medium and short term” (p. 129). The problems about time management can
be one of the sources of stress in educational organizations. The well-being of staff is linked to
their work–life balance and also to how educational organization is managed. “Not all stress is
negative and leading and managing people is to some extent a matter of ensuring the right level
of challenge and support” (p. 143).
       Chapter 10, Developing understanding of emotion and leadership, was written by Megan
Crawford. The author discusses the role of emotion in the educational organizations from a
social perspective.
       The last chapter is devoted to personal and institutional development:
       It [professional development] can be at two levels – the personal, whereby one or more
       staff develop specific skills and understanding (e.g. in the integration of new technology
       into teaching and learning), and the institutional, offering development objectives for the
       institution as a whole. (p. 158)
       The authors stress that the personal and institutional development require a learning
culture and “a learning culture can only really exist where there is mutual understanding and
collaboration” (p. 172).
       In conclusion, the book, Educational leadership and management: Developing insights and
skills, is a very helpful and practical resource for students and practitioners to develop
leadership skills in education. Based on a rich and analytical literature review, it integrates
theory with practice through case studies organized as “scenarios”. In addition, the book places
a strong emphasis on values and concepts such as social justice, equity, cultural diversity, mutual
understanding, collegiality, democracy, responsibility, fairness, assertiveness and living with
difference.

137


                                         REFERENCES
Coleman, M. & Glover, D. (2010). Educational leadership and management: Developing insights
       and skills. Berkshire: Open University Press-McGraw Hill.
Davies, B. (2002), Rethinking schools and school leadership for the twenty‐first century: changes
       and challenges, International Journal of Educational Management, 16(4), 196-206.
Wenner, J. A., & Campbell, T. (2017). The Theoretical and Empirical Basis of Teacher Leadership:
       A Review of the Literature. Review of Educational Research, 87(1), 134–171.
Woods, P. A., Roberts, A. & Culshaw, S. (2018). Current Challenges to Educational Leadership &
       Administration: An International Survey. Report on the Pilot Survey, UCEA Review, 59(2),
       1-5.           Retrieved           December             10,           2019            from
       https://uhra.herts.ac.uk/bitstream/handle/2299/20758/2018SummerReview_websmal
       l.pdf?sequence=1