Educational Administration: Theory and Practice
2023, 29(4), 1509-1520
ISSN: 2148-2403
https://kuey.net/                          Research Article

    Education Is A Key Tool In The Development Of Society
    And Educational Leadership And Is A Key Element For
               Effective School And Education
                                                      Ferit Hysa1, Rezak Jakupi2*
1University College “Dardania”, Prishtina, Kosovo. ORCID no: https://0000-0003-2672-1319 e-mail: ferithysa@gmail.com
2*University College “Dardania”, Prishtina, Kosovo. ORCID ID: https://orcid.org/0009-0004-3158-0076

e-mail: rezak_jakupi@hotmail.com

*Corresponding Author: Rezak Jakupi
*University College “Dardania”, Prishtina, Kosovo. ORCID ID: https://orcid.org/0009-0004-3158-0076
e-mail: rezak_jakupi@hotmail.com

Citation: Ferit Hysa et al (2023), Education Is A Key Tool In The Development Of Society And Educational Leadership And Is A Key
Element For Effective School And Education, Educational Administration: Theory And Practice, 29(4), 1509-1520,
Doi: 10.53555/kuey.v29i4.1007

  ARTICLE INFO               ABSTRACT
                             Albanian society and the global society are facing more and more economic
                             difficulties to ensure good well-being and mental health. These problems were
                             created by the lack of human and material resources, but also by bad governance.
                             The key instrument that improves the lives of citizens and regulates their governance
                             is education.
                             This study is based on qualitative research methodology and its analysis is that of
                             comparative analysis in which the importance that other developed countries
                             determine for school leadership, as well as the path followed for its development and
                             continuous improvement, is compared.
                             Through education, students can reach the best results and have prospects and
                             development for their families and society too. At this time, after 20 centuries of
                             development of society, the students must make many offers and try to challenge new
                             circumstances that surround them. There are many fields to invest but investment in
                             education is the most profitable area and key to success for a society.
                             The school leader is the most important element in the educational system for the
                             follow-up and implementation of all educational requirements and standards to
                             achieve high results and increase the quality of education. Therefore, the preparation
                             and building of school leaders through special programs is an important aspect of
                             investment in education.
                             The school leadership training program, considering the relevant training topics, is
                             more like a reinforcement of the master's degree in teaching than a program for the
                             formation and practice of educational leadership. The distribution of responsibilities
                             of the structures of the educational system according to levels, the empowerment, and
                             the increase of the responsibilities of the school leader are done through the
                             construction of a new structure of educational leadership in the school.

                             Keywords: education, school leadership, results, student, society

                                                        1. INTRODUCTION

Education is the biggest influencer and impact on the development of society. For this reason and not only, we
have constantly increased interest from the governments and important institutions of different countries to
set education as priorities not only from the sensitivity of the citizens but also as an approach that brings
development. Having the desire to develop an education is not enough. Support for education is always
expensive and very necessary for a quality, effective education by the needs of society. Looking at the historical
development of education and society, it is noticed that in different times and different societies, we have
different demands of society for the level and quality of education. Education is necessary to enable the
individual to build his life, face the challenges of the time, and be a worthy citizen of society, as well as to take
an active part in society and to make it healthy in the sense of contribution to its values and functioning.

Copyright © 2024 by Author/s and Licensed by Kuey. This is an open access article distributed under the Creative Commons ttribution License which
permits unrestricted use, distribution, and reproduction in any medium, provided the original work is properly cited.

1510                                      Ferit Hysa et al / Kuey, 29(4), 1007

In Albania, before the 90s, education was centralized. Curricula and methods of teaching and learning have
been defined and strict. This is probably from the government's requirements and objectives set for the society
that would be educated as much as the government needed, that is, determined by the government as to how
much the society should know, as well as how the professions would be formed.
Professions and jobs were defined by the government as professions and how these people would be qualified.
The free initiative was not stimulated in schools, does not exist, and is not stimulated in schools. Only ready-
made models of the profession and society were given.
After the 90s in Albania, we have a total change in the political system where we have the establishment of
political pluralism, the establishment of democracy, and the commitment of political parties to build a
prosperous society and a developed democracy. In this context, although not all political parties want the
development of democracy but develop populism and seek new forms of rule and dictatorial governance, in
Albanian society new concerns appear such as poverty, unemployment, lack of jobs, lack of perspective, the
lack of professionals to respond to new developments, new professions and the creation of jobs. In the new
society, the individual not only has to look for a job, but he has to find or create a job himself. Emigration was
often considered as a solution, in which they were once again faced with the lack of qualification, the possibility
of communication, and other obstacles and bureaucracy that required solutions to get a job or build your future.

Albanian society faced these problems after the 90s, but many other societies with developed democracies or
developing democracies also face these problems. So new demands appear for education, so we have an urgent
demand to enable students to develop their professions in quality fields to be competitive and to be citizens of
the future.
In this context, the school curriculum changed completely, especially the influence of political ideologies and
the school and the way of development of teaching and learning, but society once again faced unemployment,
poverty, lack of democracy, non-inclusion in decision-making as well as the lack of initiative and maturity of
professionals. young people to solve problems, build the future, build well-being, and take an active part in
decision-making and solving problems.
The key to solving the above problems is education. The problems of society are solved through education.
Therefore, building a quality education system is very important.
In Albania, every year about 30,000 students apply to continue their studies at universities. There are different
branches in which students can apply to continue their bachelor's studies and then master's studies. What
stands out is that after completing their studies, there are many complaints about their employment. Most of
the students who graduated with bachelor's and master's continue with years of unemployment until they get
a place in the jobs planned by the state, and the government, some of them have to engage in a political party
and hope to get a job. This shows that their ability is incomplete, with a lack of ability to decide for themselves,
lack of maturity, etc.

But what do we mean by a quality education system? What is the most important element in this quality system
to achieve the goals of education? What are the most important models of developed countries that are known
and applied? what should Albania do for quality education?

                                         2.   LITERATURE REVIEW

Education should enable the student to find a job by the qualification obtained during the years of schooling;
it should enable the student to be self-employed by being able to solve problems; must be able and mature to
make right and successful decisions to face the challenges of life; must be able to take an active part in social
life and take part in decision-making; he must be able to ensure his well-being and the security of his life.
Here are the UN objectives that must be achieved by 2030. According to the objectives of sustainable
development, known as the global objectives, which have been adopted by the United Nations in 2015 and aim
at a joint commitment of all the governments of different countries that their realization will bring more
reduction of poverty, protection of the planet, and aims to ensure that all peoples enjoy peace and prosperity.
One of the key objectives of the United Nations for the end of poverty and the enjoyment of peace and prosperity
by all people is the objective of quality education. This Goal is for Quality education as the Sustainable
Development Goal 4 which said: "Ensure inclusive and equitable quality education and promote lifelong
learning opportunities for all".
To achieve this objective as best as possible, it has been determined that SDG 4 has ten targets which are
measured by 11 indicators (UNDP, 2017)

The results according to the defined targets are also detailed:
- education is expensive. to have the opportunity to educate all education, it is required that education be free,
  free primary and secondary education;
- to create opportunities to participate in education in equal ways, and to receive the same quality of education,
  and equal access to quality pre-primary education;
- education, as important as it is, is difficult as it requires a long time and financial means as well as stability

                                          FeritHysa etal/Kuey,29(4),1007                                        1511

  of living conditions to be able to follow it and achieve the right results. therefore, it is determined to have
  affordable technical, professional, and higher education;
- an increase in the number of persons with relevant skills for financial success is also determined as a very
  important aspect;
- all people without distinction are required to eliminate any discrimination in education;
- achieving the most necessary objectives such as universal literacy and numeracy; and
- no less important than all together is education for sustainable development and global citizenship.

In achieving the objectives of the United Nations, three main directions have been defined, which are:
1. Building and improving inclusive schools, in which all students are included and are safe schools.
2. Since education continues for many years and the costs are high, with the help of poor people and countries,
   it was determined that there should be an expansion of scholarships for higher education in developing
   countries.
3. Continuous provision of qualified teachers for developing countries. without qualified teachers, there can
   be no quality education.

There are important data for great progress made in ensuring access to education, especially at the primary
school level, for both boys and girls. we have almost half of this number compared to before. 112 million children
were outside the education system in 1997 and it decreased to 60 million in 2014. Likewise, we have an
improvement in global participation in tertiary education, which reached 224 million in 2018, according to a
gross report, it is 38%, UNESCO ( 2020).

In light of these objectives, a quality education system should be built to solve today's and future social
problems in Albania and globally.
SDG 4 also creates opportunities for the implementation, support, and realization of other SD objectives,
therefore its realization is important.
The educational system to provide high and quality results, including and implementing SDG 4 and others (17
SDGs), must implement an educational strategy with these main directions:
1. The establishment of education as a national priority by the educational policies and governments of different
countries, as well as in Albania in the implementation of the SDGs.
2. Improvement and development of the national curriculum to choose social, welfare, and security problems
for the future.
3. Training of teachers for the implementation of the national and state curriculum.
4. Training of education leaders and schools for the improvement of education, relying on the best models of
education leaders.
What are the best models for education leaders? How does the quality of leadership affect the quality
improvement of education? How does the feature of education and school affect the features of educational
leadership?
In improving the quality results of students, an important role is played by the administration, management,
and leadership of education. According to Bush (2007), the idea of educational management and leadership is
that everyone is self-disciplined. The nature of education, the nature of the school, and the processes of learning
and learning make this a discipline in itself, specific, unlike the management and leadership of organizations.

The building and development of educational leadership is receiving increasing attention in recent decades.
this interest has increased in the first part of the 21st century (Bush, 2007).
a large number of researchers believe that the quality of leadership makes a significant difference in the
achievements, results, and performance of the school and students.
In many parts of the world, including South Africa, there is recognition that schools require effective leaders
and managers if they are to provide the best possible education for their learners (Bush, 2007). The ever-
increasing development of the economy around the world is creating the belief in governments that qualified
workers are more and more necessary to maintain a competitive economy and have further development.
Therefore, the quality of education requires qualified teachers, trained and engaged in achieving high
performance of the school, which requires quality leadership.
This requires trained and committed teachers but they, in turn, need the leadership of highly effective
principals and the support of other senior and middle managers (Bush, 2007).

The management of education is special, diverse, and very complex compared to the management of the
business or the entrepreneurial economy. Education management has been discussed for years as special
education. Ashouri (2014) describes that educational management is also very complex. Many researchers and
theorists in the educational management area currently attempt to give an identity to educational management
as an independent field including administration, management, and educational leadership, and promote the
status of this field in comparison with other fields in the management area.
The important models of educational leadership are as below description (Gumus, 2016):

1512                                     FeritHysa etal/Kuey,29(4),1007

a) Managerial leadership
b) Instructional leadership
c) Curriculum leadership
d) Distributed leadership
e) Teacher leadership
f) Transformational and charismatic leadership
g) Moral and ethical leadership

Managerial leadership
This is the first model of management in education since the beginning of 1900. Managerial leadership has
been greatly influenced by Taylor's theory of economic and scientific management. Taylor's scientific
management theory, Weber's "ideal bureaucracy" and Fayol's "universal list of management principles" made
it possible creation and improvement of leadership characteristics in this field. The works in educational
leadership have been done in the practices and observable actions as well as in the effective models of school
leaders have been related to scientific theories of management of organizations (Bush, 2003; Condoli, et al.,
1997). These researches developed a basis for the managerial leadership model in education.

Instructional leadership
This is an important model of leadership. It defines instructional leadership through three components: The
first component is the school mission which requests principals, and school leaders to prepare and
communicate schools' goals; the second component is managing the instructional program. This includes
coordinating the curriculum, supervising and assessing the instruction, and monitoring the progress of
students; the third component is promoting a positive learning climate. This includes efforts to sure
institutional time, motivate teachers and learning, and promote professional development. It also develops
and enforces academic standards (Gumus, 2014). What is seen in this leadership model? The school leader
must have the knowledge and skills to be able to formulate and communicate the school's mission, of which the
school's objectives are an important part. the value of the school's mission is for it to be communicated to create
clarity among supporters and staff, parents, teachers, and students. He must also communicate it for it to be
valid. Likewise, the school leader
knows the school's curriculum and plans and coordinates it. An important aspect is also the planning and
monitoring of the achievement of the results and academic standards of the students. So the professional
qualification of the school leader is important, but also the necessary training of teachers and school leaders.

Curriculum leadership
This model has seen part of instructional leadership as one of the key elements of it. The special focus of
curriculum leadership is developing and coordinating an effective school curriculum. The leadership of the
curriculum insists on the qualification of the leader in terms of knowledge and psychological and pedagogical
action of curriculum construction, the ability of teachers in teaching and learning as well as the ability of the
leader of the school curriculum. The curriculum leadership model has been an important research topic in
countries that have decentralized educational systems and, therefore, curriculum development is carried out at
the school or district level (Law et al., 2007; Lo, 2012). A curriculum leader is someone responsible for
monitoring, implementing, and improving the curriculum (Lo, 2012).

Distributed leadership
This leadership model has received support recently and is presented as a contemporary and very effective
leadership model in education management. This model consists in criticizing the hierarchically designed
leadership, but it stimulates equal participation in decision-making. The basic essence of this leadership lies in
the importance and influence of the person and not in the place he occupies in the hierarchy of the institution.
This leadership model stimulates cooperation and joint initiatives of the staff. The effectiveness of this
leadership model is in the exchange of experiences as well as in the implementation of projects with the
inclusion of as many staff members and teachers as possible.
Distributed leadership in the literature is often used interchangeably with other terms, such as "shared
leadership," "collaborative leadership," "delegated leadership," and "dispersed leadership" (Spillane, 2005).
Harris says that in distributed leadership it doesn't matter where you are because of how important you are.
The position is not important, but the influence and power of thoughts are important and take value.

Teacher leadership
Teacher leadership consists of the important role that teachers have in school leadership and all educational
aspects of the school, teachers are involved in school leadership. this model greatly strengthens the educational
leadership in the school. In this leadership model, teachers are not only included in the host country, but they
are qualified and trained continuously to know and apply their knowledge in school leadership. Such a model
is expensive but very effective. This model also includes aspects of distributed leadership. Teacher leadership
is carried out when teachers take part in the decision-making mechanism of schools, contribute to the

                                          FeritHysa etal/Kuey,29(4),1007                                      1513

professional development of others, share their expertise with their peers, and generate new ideas for the
development of schools (Leithwood and Jantzi, 2000).

Transformational and charismatic leadership
This is a very important model of school leadership. This model is influenced by the model of the best leadership
of political leaders. Bass is one of the authors and researchers who made the most complete description of this
leadership. Bass (1998) has identified the four main components of transformative leadership, which are:
- idealized influence
- inspirational motivation
- intellectual stimulation and
- individual consideration

Such components provide a framework in which leadership is described as a product of multiple sources
instead of one single authority (Hallinger, 2003).
This leadership model aims to help, encourage and create followers as future leaders who help and empower
the current leader and each of them can take the role of leader in the future.
"Transformational leaders motivate followers by raising their consciousness about the importance of
organizational goals and by inspiring them to transcend their self-interest for the sake of the organization"
(Marks and Printy, 2003).
The leader's charisma is a significant indicator of this leadership. With charisma, we understand the desire of
the leader to carry out this task with devotion and satisfaction and aspire to do the best in the leadership of the
people who follow him. The model of transformative leadership underlines and emphasizes the influence of
leadership on followers, organizations, and society under the light of charisma. The conceptualization of
transformational leadership by Bass (1998) was based on the extended version of charismatic leadership (Lowe
et al., 1996).

Moral and ethical leadership
This leadership model is based on pleasing moral characteristics and fair and proper actions that are guided by
the public interest by the values and moral norms of society. The moral values that must be respected are
honesty, integrity, reliability, doing the right thing, showing concern about people, being open, making
decisions based on carrying values, objectivity, and concerns for society, as well as following ethical rules in
decision making. A moral manager is someone who becomes a role model through visible action, rewards
people and maintains discipline, and communicates about ethics and values (Brown and Trevino, 2006;
Trevino et al., 2000).
The literature published until this time in terms of the specific leadership models showed that distributed
leadership is the most studied leadership model in educational research, although it is a relatively new model
(Gumus et al., 2016). This leadership model is a model that includes the most correct way of solving the school's
problems and ensuring its support for the realization of its mission in an effective, efficient and sustainable
way. Instructional leadership, which is one of the oldest educational leadership models, has also received
significant attention from researchers. (Gumus et al., 2016). This model maintains its importance as it carries
the specific characteristics of learning and learning according to psychological and pedagogical differences. The
third most studied model was found to be teacher leadership, followed closely by transformational leadership
(Gumus et al., 2016). This leadership model has value as it enables followers to become leaders, strengthens
their leadership, and ensures the continuity of experience and the best values gained over the years.

After reviewing the literature, the research questions are still not answered. we will try to give these answers by
completing the study. How does school leadership affect the achievement of high student results? What are the
best educational leadership for an effective and efficient school and high student results? How can educational
leaders be prepared for an effective and efficient school so that students achieve high results? How are
educational or school leaders prepared and decided to administer, manage or lead education or school in
Albania?


                                        3.   RESEARCH METHODS

Research Design
This study is based on qualitative research methodology and its analysis is that of comparative analysis in which
the importance that other developed countries determine for school leadership, as well as the path followed for
its development and continuous improvement, is compared. This study is based on qualitative research
methodology and its analysis is that of comparative analysis in which the importance that other developed
countries determine for school leadership, as well as the path followed for its development and continuous
improvement, is compared. In the review of the literature, it is evident the knowledge, skills, and abilities that
the educational leadership should possess, and through this methodology, the state of this educational

1514                                     Ferit Hysa et al/Kuey, 29 (4), 1007

leadership in Albania will be revealed compared to the developed countries, mainly in the UK, USA, and
Australia.
 The method of collecting the data for the study is done with the documentary method and the interview. The
method of the documentary study consists of the criteria and procedures for the selection and placement of
quality leadership in the tasks of different levels of educational leadership. through the interview method, data
will be collected about the knowledge that educational leaders have in Albania, and the path followed for
knowledge, skills, and development of educational leadership. according to the research questions, we also have
these other details of the research method of this study.
For research questions like How does school leadership affect the achievement of high student results? and
What are the best educational leadership for an effective and efficient school and high student results? the
answer was given by the review of the literature and it described in detail how educational leadership affects
the achievement of high results among students, as well as the best leadership for an effective and efficient
school to achieve high results for students. however, a brief description of each research question will be made
in the discussion data section related to the research question such as i) How can educational leaders be
prepared for an effective and efficient school so that students achieve high results? And ii) How are educational
or school leaders prepared and decided to administer, manage or lead education or school in Albania? an
interview is conducted with a set of questions for each question to 7 teachers, 7 educational leaders, and 7
parents. as well as for each targeted group, a focus group is held with a set of prepared questions.
The data collected are analyzed comparatively with other countries that have priority and developed knowledge,
skills, and abilities of educational and school leadership. The positivist interpretive approach is often used in
data analysis as a complementary and clarifying method.
This study was carried out in the best research and studies in the UK and their experience as well as the practice
of education in Albania. (Hysa, 2017). Until 1990, the educational system in Albania was completely centralized
and closed to western knowledge and experiences, but was under the influence of Russian programs. this study
affects the creation of models of the Western world and especially the English one by studying the current
experience and improving it with the experiences and models of the English, American, etc. Educational
leadership models have been taking shape in the UK for decades. These leadership models are a growing
challenge for better results and a society in which citizens take an active part in decision-making and solving
their problems.
The purpose of the study is to assess the current situation and determine the extent of school leadership's
impact on school effectiveness and the need to develop leadership (Hysa, 2017).

Citizens' need for an effective school and high scores is a goal for the improvement of the Albanian school and
is the challenge of society in the 21st century. This comparative analysis has also been used to highlight
Albanian problems to compare them with Anglo-Saxon prospects, solutions giving the path followed by
contemporary European studies.

                                              Findings / Results

What are the most effective and efficient models of educational leadership?
we are presenting a synthesis of the review of the educational leadership literature so far:
Here is a model of effectiveness according to Leithwood et al (1999).

                                         Ferit Hysa et al/Kuey, 29 (4), 1007                                   1515
 The model of transformational leadership developed from our research in schools, including factor analytic
studies, describes transformational leadership along six dimensions: building school vision and goals; providing
intellectual stimulation; offering individualized support; symbolizing professional practices and values;
demonstrating high performance expectations; and developing structures to foster participation in school
decisions (Leithwood, 1994; Leithwood, Jantzi, & Steinbach, 1999).

     An effective school       -    Set Directions as:         Build a vision
     leadership prescribed                                     Identify specific, shared, short goals
     by Leithwood et al.                                       Create high-performance expectations
     (1999).                                                   Communicate the vision and goals
     Here are the main         -   Build Relationships         Stimulate growth in the professional
     directions/dimensions     and develop people              capacities of staff
     and details for every                                     Provide      support      and     demonstrate
     dimension.                                                consideration for individual staff members.
                                                               Model the school’s values and practices
                                                               Build a trusting relationship with and among
                                                               staff, students and parents
                                                               Establish a productive working relationship
                                                               with teacher federation representatives.
                               - Develop           the         Build a collaborative culture and distribute
                               Organization to Support         leadership
                               Desired Practices               Structure the organization to facilitate
                                                               collaboration
                                                               Build a productive relationship with families
                                                               and communities
                                                               Connect the school to its wider environment
                                                               Maintain a safe and healthy school
                                                               environment
                                                               Allocate resources in support of the school’s
                                                               vision and goals
                               -    Improve          the       Staff the instructional program
                               Instructional Program           Provide instructional support
                                                               Monitor student learning and school
                                                               improvement progress

Model 2 according to Reynolds, D., and Teddlie, C. (2000) summarized by Taysum (2022)

1. Effective leadership that was: firm; involving; instrumentally orientated; involved monitoring; and involved
   staff replacement
2. A focus on learning that involved: focusing on academic outcomes, and maximizing learning time
3. A positive school culture that involved: a shared vision; an orderly climate; and positive reinforcement
4. High expectations of students and staff
5. Monitoring progress at school, classroom, and student levels
6. Involving parents using: buffering negative influences, and promoting positive interactions
7. Generating effective teaching through: maximizing learning time; grouping strategies; benchmarking
   against the best practice, and adapting practice to student needs
8. Professional development of staff that was: It is located and integrated with school initiatives
9. Involving students in the educational process using: responsibilities; and rights

How can educational leaders be prepared for an effective and efficient school so that students achieve high
results?
We asked the interviewees the following questions:
Question: What kind of qualifications do they have?
The answers of the interviewees were:
Educational leadership, school leadership, and other education leaders must have the basic qualification of a
teacher, must have a master's degree for a teacher, and must have completed a master's degree in education
administration and management. Educational leadership, school leadership, and other education experts must
have knowledge, mastery, and skills for education curricula, and teaching masters as well as knowledge,
mastery, and skills for educational leadership. The school is the basic unit of the student’s education and it is
influenced by many factors in a very complex way. The nature of student education is completely different from
the management of other businesses, therefore a special qualification is necessary and necessary to have high
student results by the requirements of the time.
What experience do they have?
The answers of the interviewees were:
Experience! Experience is very important. Every job that starts needs experience. Even a good teacher has this
experience, which is provided through the teaching practices that teachers do during their bachelor's and
master's studies and in their 1-year practice before earning the teaching title. Experience in educational or

1516                                     Ferit Hysa et al/Kuey, 29 (4), 1007
school leadership is even more necessary. During the work, the teacher tests his or her theoretical or practical
knowledge and insists on his continuous training. The nature of the administrative, managerial, and leadership
work in the school is complex, without ready-made recipes, and experience, knowledge, skills, and abilities
make it possible to guide education in the right way and effectively to achieve high student results.
What kind of training will they do?
The answers of the interviewees were:
The demands of society are constantly increasing. The development of society brings new demands. All
knowledge needs to be improved as best as possible. Existing knowledge and skills can give many results in the
beginning, but you soon see that you need to refresh, improve and follow the newest possible models. After
finishing school, you will work for 40 years, so you will walk parallel with the new knowledge that comes in the
future, therefore, continuous training and qualification are necessary to give you the right efficiency.

How are educational or school leaders prepared and decided to administer, manage or lead education or school
in Albania?
What preparation is required to take on the role of school principal?
Regarding the qualifications and education for a school principal in Albania, it is required that the person must
have received the title of teacher and have 5 years of work experience as a teacher. Meanwhile, at this time, he
must have obtained the first degree as a teacher, which is titled as a qualified teacher. In recent years, an
additional criterion has been set, which is required to have completed training at the school of school
leadership. Universities have been opening accredited professional and scientific master's programs for
education administration and management for several years, and this qualification is not taken into
consideration. The school for school leadership was opened with the initiative of the government and an
agreement was made with a private foundation in which a series of pieces of training were defined. as a rule, to
register in this school, you must be the current head of the school or you must obtain an authorization from the
current head of the school where you work to be allowed to continue this qualification. Most of the leaders of
education, with the aim of not being replaced, are kept on temporary leave for years until they receive the school
leadership school.
In the leadership school, an assessment of the school's needs for leadership training was made, but in reality,
these programs are not accredited by any accreditation institution. From this, we conclude that the people who
have been appointed as school leaders are not the most qualified, and the people who aspire to continue the
school of school leadership are limited, hindered, and do not with equal chances to pursue this qualification.
Likewise, the procedures for the appointment of school leaders are not based on quality criteria, with equal
chances for all aspirants for school leadership and with one-sided pro-government commissions for their
selection and appointment.

The criteria for establishing educational leaders at higher levels are related to the qualification, they are
minimal and very general. Thus, it is required to have completed the bachelor's and master's levels for teaching,
to have experience in education. It is required not to be in the high lead levels of political parties.

There are several important aspects for the development and formation of educational leadership.
A career prospect for leadership development is argued that the professional development activities of school
leaders will be ongoing, in career and endless stages. (Peterson, in Davis et al., 2005). The formation of the
educational leader is also endless, both in knowledge and experience, school leadership must be developed
continuously. This stems from two important things: first, the nature of the school and the constant dynamics
of change bring new situations and challenges; and second, the formation of educational leadership requires a
long time and continuous training.
to exercise the task of school leader, you need to know the experience of the teacher, to have been involved in
school and community projects, to have exercised the task of vice-principal, and at the same time to have been
involved in acquiring knowledge about the management and leadership of the school, you will it was ideal to
take on the role of director. There are cases where educational leadership leaders develop by being appointed
in small schools that have fewer problems and management difficulties and then gradually move to larger
schools or other levels of school leadership. In this case, gaining experience and gaining knowledge continue in
parallel and gradually.
The best way is that after completing the studies for the teacher at the Bachelor's and Master's level, the
aspirants for the school director must have a work experience in teaching and learning.
then the development of capacities for school leaders continues with the preparation for:
- be able to lead projects;
- they are capable of the leadership of the team;
- they are qualified for school leadership;
- they are capable of strategic leadership

Ideally, leadership development will start at the teacher level and will continue for the leading candidates and
first-year inductors or directors. Continuous professional development would be expanded and capitalized
based on the leader's experience. An increased body of experience will be useful to outline just as well the
mature understanding of job requirements and the criteria for effectiveness.
In England, a leadership development strategy sets five stages of school leadership development. In Northern
Ireland, there is training for emerging and aspiring leaders as well as the service of managers and managers.

                                          Ferit Hysa et al/Kuey, 29 (4), 1007                                  1517
The Scottish approach is set in box 4.2. Bush. T, Glover. D, 2003




                                                   Conclusion

For years, educational leadership has been considered a scientific discipline alone in the Western world and
not an addition to any other discipline. We see this from the review of the literature that not only talks about
the importance of educational leadership for an effective school and high student results but also explains in
detail the knowledge, skills, and skills that are needed for educational leadership to have a quality qualification.
In the review of the literature, it is noted that the path that must be followed to obtain such a quality
qualification and the criteria that must be established to appoint leaders in school and educational leadership
for all levels of educational institutions are clearly explained.
In contrast to the evaluation and qualification of educational leadership in developed countries, in Albania,
there is a lack of evaluation of the qualification of educational leadership following the tradition that the best
teachers and with good results in their studies through their teaching, were appointed in the different levels of
educational and school leadership. Only recently we have had an improvement, but not a deep one, that those
who are appointed to the lowest level of school leadership, must first attend school leadership training. The
school leadership training program, considering the relevant training topics, is more like a reinforcement of
the master's degree in teaching than a program for the formation and practice of educational leadership. There
are about 2,000 schools in Albania and the number of people who have completed this qualification does not
exceed 500. Regardless of the insufficient number, this qualification also enables them to teach and evaluate
teaching more than to become educational leaders.
Society requires an effective school that could not exist without qualified educational leadership with the best
knowledge, skills, and skills, based on the best models of educational leadership practiced and scientifically
verified. This effective school must prepare students to face the challenges of the future, in which each student
can solve the problems of work and life, identify and provide solutions for the problems that arise, and not just
choose problems according to learned template models. These students who will be future citizens of society
must have the necessary maturity and be educated in school to contribute to a healthy society, to a democratic
society that values human rights and respects the social contract. And for this to happen, it is required to be
active in changing the different systems of government and participating in decision-making so that these
systems are constantly improved in this direction.

1518                                     Ferit Hysa et al/Kuey, 29 (4), 1007


If the school fulfills these and gives results that fulfill these objectives and goals, we can say that we have an
effective school and that the educational leadership has fulfilled its mission.
The qualification of the educational leadership according to the western model and their emeritus in the
educational institutions in Albania with clear, reliable, and transparent criteria from politically independent
institutions, would help the educational institutions in Albania to become more effective and efficient and for
built citizens of the future to face the challenges of the future in a civilized world.

Recommendations
Educational governance systems depend on the development of democracy and the importance they attach to
education in educational policies. The evidence of educational leadership as a key element in learning
outcomes, the ability of students to face life's challenges, and the participation of citizens in decision-making
for a better democracy, creates a good opportunity to move faster in the realization of these objectives. ,
although democracy is not developed and the education system is not perfect. through the development of
educational leadership, we create effective schools that influence high learning outcomes, students capable of
facing life challenges such as work, living conditions, and mental well-being, as well as influencing decision-
making and the development of democracy. So, pressure from the bottom up in the development of democracy
and improvement of the governance system for justice, fairness, and honesty. Education is the key to economic
and democratic development in every society. therefore, scientific research, providing the most effective models
of leadership in education, would be of significant help to students and society.

Limitations
This research has a qualitative approach and was developed as a case study in Albania. The analysis of the study
was comparative, in which the educational leadership of developed countries is compared with the leadership
in Albania. The results and conclusions of this study may not have general value, but we can say for sure that
they have truth and generality to be applied in the Albanian case. Encouraging many such studies in different
countries would make it possible to generalize and unify the results of the study. A limitation of this research
is the lack of a control group to differentiate the results. to understand this, much research should be done to
increase the possibility of discovering the best models of leadership in education and the ways of their
formation.

                                                    References

1. Alexander, R., Rose, J. and Woodhead, C. (1992), Curriculum Organisation and Classroom Practice in
    Primary Schools: A Discussion Paper, London, Department of Education and Science.
2. Allix, N.M. (2000), Transformational Leadership: Democratic or Despotic? Educational Management and
    Administration, 28 (1), 7–20.
3. Bass B. M. (1998) The ethics of transformational leadership. In: Ciulla JB (ed) Ethics, the Heart of
    Leadership. Westport, CT: Quorum, pp.169–192.
4. Beare, H., Caldwell, B., and Millikan, R. (1992), Creating an Excellent School. London: Routledge.
5. Bennis, W. and Nanus, B. (1985), Leaders, New York, Harper, and Row.
6. Blase, J. and Blase, J. R. (1998), Handbook of Instructional Leadership: How Really Good Principals
    Promote Teaching and Learning, London, Sage.
7. Bolam, R., McMahon, A., Pocklington, K., and Weindling, D. (1993), Effective Management in Schools,
    London, HMSO.
8. Bolman, L. and Deal, T. (1984), Modern Approaches to Understanding and Managing Organisations, San
    Francisco, Jossey Bass.
9. Bolman, L.G. and Deal, T.E. (1997), Reframing Organizations: Artistry, Choice, and Leadership. San
    Francisco, CA, Jossey Bass.
10. Brown ME and Trevin˜o LK (2006) Ethical leadership: A review and future directions. The Leadership
    Quarterly 17(6): 595–616.
11. Burns, J.M. (1978), Leadership, New York, Harper, and Row.
12. Bush T & Heystek J 2006. School leadership and management in South Africa: Principals’ perceptions.
    International Studies in Educational Administration, 34:63-76
13. Bush T (2003) Theories of Educational Leadership and Management. London: SAGE Publications. Bush T
    (2007) Educational leadership and management: Theory, policy, and practice. South African Journal of
    Education 27(3): 391–406.
14. Bush T (2008) Leadership and Management Development in Education. London: SAGE Publications.
15. Bush T and Glover D (2003) School leadership: Concepts and evidence. Available at: www.ncsl.org.uk/
    literature reviews (accessed 17 August 2016).
16. Bush T and Glover D (2014) School leadership models: What do we know? School Leadership &
    Management 34(5): 553–571.
17. Bush T. 2007. Educational leadership and management: theory, policy, and practice. South African Journal
    of Education. Vol 27(3)391–406.

                                         Ferit Hysa et al/Kuey, 29 (4), 1007                                1519

18. Bush, T. (1986), Theories of Educational Management, London, Harper, and Row.
19. Bush, T. (1995), Theories of Educational Management: Second Edition, London, Paul Chapman.
20. Bush, T. and D. Glover (2004), Leadership Development: Evidence and Beliefs, National College for School
    Leadership, Nottingham.
21. Candoli IC, Cullen K and Stufflebeam DL (1997) The superintendency. In: Superintendent Performance
    Evaluation: Current Practice and Directions for Improvement. Springer Netherlands, pp.29–44.
22. Coleman, M. (1996), Management style of female headteachers, Educational Management and
    Administration, 24(2), 163–74. National College for School Leadership
23. Cuban, L. (1988), The Managerial Imperative and the Practice of Leadership in Schools. Albany, NY, State
    University of New York Press.
24. Daresh, J. (1998), Professional development for school leadership: the impact of US educational reform,
    International Journal of Educational Research, 29 (4), 323–33.
25. Day, C., Harris, A. and Hadfield M. (2001), Challenging the orthodoxy of effective school leadership,
    International Journal of Leadership in Education, 4 (1), 39–56.
26. Dimmock, C. and Walker, A. (2002), School leadership in context – societal and organizational cultures, in
    Bush, T. and Bell, L. (Eds), The Principles and Practice of Educational Management, London, Paul
    Chapman.
27. Education: Number of out-of-school children of primary school age". data.uis.unesco.org. Archived from
    the original on 30 December 2020. Retrieved 10 March 2019.
28. Fidler, B. (1997), School leadership: some key ideas, School Leadership and Management, 17 (1), 23–37.
29.Fidler, B. (2000), A situational approach to leadership, School Leadership and Management, 20(4), 403–
    05.
30. Foreman, K. (1998), Vision and mission, in Middlewood, D. and Lumby, J. (Eds.), Strategic
31. Fullan, M. (1992a), Successful School Improvement, Buckingham, Open University Press.
32. Fullan, M. (1992b), Visions that blind. Educational Leadership, 49 (5), 19–20.
33. Goal 4: Quality education". UNDP. Archived from the original on 11 September 2018. Retrieved 13 April
    2017.
34. Greenfield, T. and Ribbins, P. (eds.) (1993), Greenfield on Educational Administration: Towards a
    Humane Science, London, Routledge.
35. Gumus S., et al. 2016. A systematic review of studies on leadership models in educational research from
    1980 to 2014. Educational Management Administration & Leadership 1–24.
36. Hallinger P (2003) Leading educational change: Reflections on the practice of instructional and
    transformational leadership. Cambridge Journal of Education 33(3): 329–352.
37. Hallinger, P. and Heck, R. (1999), Next generation methods for the study of leadership and school
    improvement, in Murphy, J., and Louis, K. (eds.), Handbook of Research on Educational Administration,
    2nd edition, San Francisco, Jossey Bass, (141–62).
38. Harris A (2004) Teacher leadership and distributed leadership: An exploration of the literature. Leading
    and Managing 10(2): 1–9.
39. Harris, A. (2002), Distributed Leadership in Schools: Leading or Misleading?, Paper presented at the British
    Educational Leadership, Management and Administration Society annual conference, Birmingham,
    September.
40. Hysa, F & Taysum, A. 2022, 'Using A Blueprint for Character Development for Evolution (ABCDE) to build
    relationships through talk to mobilize attachment theory to develop security attachment capital for good
    choices that regulate continued good lives', Journal of Groundwork Cases and Faculty of Judgement, vol.
    1, no. 2, 3, pp. 192-213.
41. Hysa, F. (2014). School Management and Leadership in Education. Journal of Educational and Social
    Research, 4(3), 303.
42. Hysa, F. (2014). The Expansion of University Education and Student’s High Results. Journal of Educational
    and Social Research, 4(3), 157.
43. Hysa. F., (2017). School leadership and challenges of the 21st century. Beder Journal of Educational
    Sciences. Vol.15-16. P.35.
44. Jacobson SL and Cypres A (2012) Important shifts in the curriculum of educational leadership preparation.
    Journal of Research on Leadership Education 7(2): 217–236
45. Law EHF, Galton M and Wan SWY (2007) Developing curriculum leadership in schools: Hong Kong
    perspectives. Asia-Pacific Journal of Teacher Education 35(2): 143–159
46. Leithwood K (2001) School leadership in the context of accountability policies. International Journal of
    Leadership in Education 4(3): 217–235.
47. Leithwood K and Jantzi D (2000) Principal and teacher leadership effects: A replication. School Leadership
    & Management 20(4): 415–434.
48. Leithwood K and Jantzi D (2005) A review of transformational school leadership research 1996–2005.
    Leadership and Policy in Schools 4(3): 177–199.
49. Leithwood K, Jantzi D and Steinbach R (1999) Changing Leadership for Changing Times. Buckingham:
    Open University Press.

1520                                    Ferit Hysa et al/Kuey, 29 (4), 1007


50. Leithwood, K. (2001), School leadership in the context of accountability policies, International Journal of
    Leadership in Education, 4(3), 217–35.
51. Leithwood, K., Harris, A. and Hopkins, D. (2019). Seven Strong Claims about Successful School Leadership
    Revisited in School Leadership Administration and Management 40 (4) 1-18.
52. Leithwood, K., Jantzi, D. (1999) Transformational School Leadership Effects: A Replication, School
    Effectiveness and School Improvement, 10:4, 451-479, DOI: 10.1076/sesi.10.4.451.3495
53. Leithwood, K., Jantzi, D. and Steinbach, R. (1999), Changing Leadership for Changing Times, Buckingham,
    Open University Press.
54. Leonard LJ and Leonard PE (1999) Reculturing for collaboration and leadership. The Journal of
    Educational Research 92(4): 237–242.
55. Lo YC (2012) Curriculum leadership in schools. In: Lam JT, Leung AW and Lo YC (eds) Curriculum Change
    and Innovation. Hong Kong: Hong Kong University Press. pp.231–254
56. Lowe KB, Kroeck KG, and Sivasubramaniam N (1996) Effectiveness correlate of transformational and
    transactional leadership: A meta-analytic review of the MLQ literature. The Leadership Quarterly 7(3):
    385–425.
57. Management in Schools and Colleges, London, Paul Chapman.
58. Marks HM and Printy SM (2003) Principal leadership and school performance: An integration of
    transformational and instructional leadership. Educational Administration Quarterly 39(3): 370–397.
59. Maslow, A. (1954), Motivation and Personality, New York, Harper, and Row.
60. Moos, L., Mahony, P. and Reeves, J. (1998), What teachers, parents, governors, and pupils want from their
    heads, in MacBeath, J. (Ed.), Effective School Leadership: Responding to Change, London, Paul Chapman.
61. Murphy J (1995) The knowledge base in school administration: Historical footings and emerging trends. In:
    Donmoyer R, Imber M and Scheurich JJ (eds) The Knowledge Base in Educational Administration:
    Multiple Perspectives. Albany, NY: The State University of New York Press, pp.61–73.
62. OECD 2008. Improving School Leadership. Vol 1. http://www.oecd.org/edu/schoolleadership
63. Ogawa, R.T. and Bossert, S.T. (1995), Leadership as an organizational quality, Educational Administration
    Quarterly, 31 (2), 224–43.
64. Reynolds, D., and Teddlie, C. (2000) The International Handbook of School Effectiveness Research.
    London: Routledge.
65. Sergiovanni, T. (1984), Leadership and excellence in schooling, Educational Leadership, 41(5), 4–13.
66. Sergiovanni, T. J. (1992), Moral Leadership: Getting to the Heart of School Improvement, SanFrancisco,
    CA, Jossey Bass.
67. Sergiovanni, T.J. (1991), The Principalship: a reflective practice perspective, Needham Heights, MA, Allyn,
    and Bacon.
68. Spillane JP (2005) Distributed leadership. The Educational Forum 69(2): 143–150.
69. Stoll, L. and Fink, D. (1996), Changing our Schools, Milton Keynes, Open University Press.
70. Taysum, A., Beutner, M., Kallioniemi, A., Iman, H., Midori, U., Canfarotta, D., Casado-Muñoz, R., Rusitoru,
    M-V., Hysa, F., Pathak, R., Mynbayeva, A., Yelbayeva, Z., Timchenko, V., Trapitsin, S., Pogosian, V.,
    Tropinova, E., Saboor, A., Newton, P., McGuiness, S., ... James, F. (2020). EYSIER Charter Mark with
    ABCDE and Assessment for Personal and Social Learning; a Bottom-up Approach to Building Faculty of
    Judgement with an Open Access Knowledge Base of Science with and for Society (Swafs). European Journal
    of Education (Bucureşti), 3(2), 129-150.
71. Trevino LK, Hartman LP, and Brown M (2000) Moral person and moral manager: How executives develop
    a reputation for ethical leadership. California Management Review 42(4): 128
72. TTA, (Teacher Training Agency), (1998) National Standards for Headteachers; National Standards for
    Subject Leaders: National Standards for Qualified Teacher Status, London, TTA.
73. UNESCO (2020). "Global Education Monitoring Report 2020". unesdoc.unesco.org. Archived from the
    original on 30 December 2020. Retrieved 19 September 2020.
74. Wasserberg, M. (1999), Creating the vision and making it happen, in Tomlinson, H., Gunter, H. and Smith,
    P. (Eds.), Living Headship: Voices, Values and Vision, London, Paul Chapman. National College for School
    Leadership 41
75. Yukl, G. A. (2002) Leadership in Organizations, Fifth Edition, Upper Saddle River, NJ, Prentice-Hall