E-ISSN: 2548-7892 & P-ISSN: 2527-4449

                                                                     Volume 7, Number 1, June 2022




Islamic Boarding School Education Leadership in Supporting Virtual
Learning During the Pandemic Period in Indonesia

Zulvia Trinova 1, Ade Iskandar 2, Irwan Fathurrochman 3, Antono Damayanto 4
Endang Fatmawati 5
1 UIN Imam Bonjol Padang, Indonesia
2 STIA YPPT Tasikmalaya, Indonesia
3 Institut Agama Islam Negeri (IAIN) Curup, Indonesia
4 Universitas Jenderal Achmad Yani, Indonesia
5 Universitas Diponegoro Semarang, Indonesia



Corresponding Author:          zulviatrinova@uinib.ac.id
                                                       ABSTRACT
                      This study identified of school education leadership skills in supporting
                      virtual learning approach during pandemic disruption. The author
                      believes that online learning requires solid educational leadership, which
                      can empower all potential and influence. Hence, learning objectives was
                      affected by the Covid-19 pandemic run well. So, the researchers have
                      visited several scientific publications on several application databases of
                      educational leadership studies during the disruption of the pandemic
  ARTICLE INFO        several complications such as Eric Publications, Google book, Taylor and
   Article history:
                      France, and many other publications actively discussing educational
     Received
   April 13, 2021
                      leadership issues during distance learning as a result of responding to the
      Revised         Covid-19 pandemic. While the review process involves several stages,
  March 13, 2022      first, giving coded the data, evaluated and looked for relevance,
     Accepted         interpreted it in depth to conclude if the findings were relevant in
   April 15, 2022     answering valid questions. This study was entirely dependent on
                      secondary data in the form of field details that have been published in
                      various scientific publication journals, especially about educational
                      leadership during pandemic disturbances. We found that there were a
                      number of leadership educations was used to support virtual learning
                      during pandemic as mention in finding section.

                      Keywords: Virtual Learning, Learning Pandemic Time, Educational Leadership
How to cite                 Trinova, Z., et al., (2022). Islamic Boarding School Education Leadership in
                            Supporting Virtual Learning During the Pandemic Period in Indonesia. Jurnal
                            Iqra’ : Kajian Ilmu Pendidikan, 7(1). 14-31.
                            https://doi.org/10.25217/ji.v7i1.1460
Journal Homepage            http://journal.iaimnumetrolampung.ac.id/index.php/ji/
This is an open access article under the CC BY SA license
                            https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-sa/4.0/



INTRODUCTION
      The Coronavirus outbreak that has hit the world has given rise to a crisis of
various difficulties and challenges that have impacted all sectors of life throughout the
world (Wang et al., 2021). In series, each country takes good policies and attitudes from
the government sector, religion, business, and education, including Islamic boarding
school education, which tells the experience of anticipating learning outcomes that are
transferred from face-to-face to a distance system (Lu et al., 2021). Along with the
government making learning policies to close schools and open distance classes, there


                       Jurnal Iqra’ : Kajian Ilmu Pendidikan 7(1): 14–31

Islamic Boarding School Education Leadership in Supporting Virtual Learning During the Pandemic
Period in Indonesia


is a relationship and quality of communication that is disrupted, how online distance
education activities are the most robust solution for the continuity of learning and also
the safety of students and teachers and the education community so that they must
become a strong, creative, dynamic individual with a bit of direction from superiors
how to direct lessons while making sure everything is fine. It is this transitional period
that makes the parties dhikr to make learning through digital assistance one of the
solutions to overcome a crisis that has occurred significantly(Benham & Murakami-
Ramalho, 2010), though rather than a pandemic that affects many sectors of life where
it gives birth to ways of thinking, feeling, acting and continuing to support learning
where activity is needed. The spirit of educational leadership so that learning
continues.
       In advanced education foundations, the scene is developing quickly, with senior
pioneers first entrusted with settling on speedy choices while keeping the well-being
and security of understudies, personnel, and staff central in their preparation
(Agustiarasari et al., 2021). In late winter 2020, scholastic pioneers were associated with
the main flood of choices: dropping occasions, moving students’ home, moving to
instruct on the web, and changing college approaches and methodology. A second
influx of impacts before long followed, including arranging summer/fall situations,
making massive spending plan cuts, proceeding to screen and change strategies, leaves
of absence, cutbacks, and thinking about the drawn-out sway on college understudies
and workers. Heads, who have been arranging a regular drop-in enlistment
(Sihombing & Fatra, 2021) for the 2020-2021 academic year, are preparing for a
significant decrease in undergrad and postgraduate enlistment, as vulnerability looms
over understudies' capacity to pay for school instruction during a time of employment
cutback, soaring joblessness, and aversion to signing up for courses that will, for the
most part, be on the web. The economic effect on advanced education has been
exacerbated by US state-funded instruction. The Great Recession adversely impacted
one of only a handful of prime areas (Hirsch et al., 2021). As directors of their units,
office heads should lead through seasons of commotion and emergency. As mid-level
directors, they may not be straightforwardly engaged with assessing and correcting
college strategies and methods that have unfurled. However, heads commonly take
part in sensemaking (Medeiros et al., 2022) as they lead impartial execution of
overhauled approaches, think about their impacts on personnel, staff, and
understudies, and decide methods of speaking with significant partners. The division
head liability includes jobs both as an entertainer and specialist of the foundation. As
an entertainer, the head "brings their singular information, abilities, viewpoints,
encounters, assumptions, and destinations to the gig" (Geera & Onen, 2014). Along
these lines, the headworks with others inside and across the association, building
connections, overseeing human and social capital, taking care of struggles, and
guaranteeing evenhanded asset dispersion. As a specialist, the head "acts inside the
setting of the foundation" (Gyang, 2020), working inside the framework to address
scholastic capacities, handle managerial obligations, and keep up with outside
connections.
       For heads of units with administration arrangement programs, the complex
requests of an emergency are layered upon the central grant about authority, which
reports the adequacy of initiative as an aggregate joining the standard and various
abilities of the workforce, understudies, and program partners (Bubb & Jones, 2020).
All the more profoundly, crafted by instructive administration lays on public and
popularity-based ethics advancing civil rights and value as the practices and results for


15

Islamic Boarding School Education Leadership in Supporting Virtual Learning During the Pandemic
Period in Indonesia


tutoring at any level. For online learning to continue, a leadership model is needed that
can influence learning activities when learning is disrupted. Of course, several things
become a reference for how teachers play a role in supporting learning, how top
leaders, principals, can become motivating factors, and enlighten how learning must be
carried out so that learning can be carried out correctly (Bambrick-Santoyo,
2018). From this, which previously had not been one thing that was focused on, all
these answers online learning must be a core of learning, so we need a model that can
be played by dancers whom school leaders transfer,
       Virtual learning is carried out in response to school closures and remote
classroom openings, which respond to government policies to combat and decide the
spread of the coronavirus in the school environment, which is a recommendation from
UNESCO and countries affected by the pandemic. So virtual learning is the most
appropriate solution when students cannot learn face to face like the typical life day
before the hit education pandemic in Indonesia.
       Apart from the ability of school leaders, one of the lessons that can help students
is a research-based learning approach system where this approach shows that many
school leaders can provide sufficient training model capital for the position of teachers
who have to handle learning independently (Leithwood & Seashore-Louis, 2011; Hifza
dkk., 2020). The role of leadership in teaching is assumed to have limited influence so
that many teachers cannot make teaching into interesting poetry and provide various
training for teachers so that they can carry out online teaching tasks in terms of
mastery of content and how to treat technology (Rapanta et al., 2020). This digital
virtual becomes significant for the continuity of achieving optimal learning outcomes.
On the one hand, teachers are indeed facing the complexity and demands of learning;
on the other hand, they are also human beings who are on guard not to be infected
with various viruses, which at that time were so scary that they needed a change of
mind on how teaching work could be carried out proportionally, how to optimize the
use of technology so that can help teachers and students and school principals so that
there is harmonization in learning achievement both with school leaders and at the
same and also with students which may therefore not be possible when the service
must be done regularly (Wiliam & Thompson, 2017). This is a challenge that must be
borne by every teacher where they must maintain themselves in teaching in evaluation
in all respects to be able to increase the potential of students even though they are in an
extended state.
       Efforts to identify learning leadership models in boarding schools are inevitable,
which is in line with government policy where the government sends students home to
study, so the relationship between students and students is accidentally cut off teachers
with students, teachers with students with teachers, and also with school leaders so
that a lot of guidance and character building are slowly being missed. Not to mention
the academic content that was cut off because the online learning system was carried
out suddenly along with the outbreak of education with the danger of a pandemic so
that every sudden decision, quite a lot of weaknesses were found so that learning
outcomes would immediately drop almost two years.
       So, by identifying the models and ways of the school through the teacher
through guidance and other potentials possessed by the school to lead and set the good
example that will straighten or attract students what the typical correct learning that
must be done is. everything must come from the typical leadership that is owned by
the government, which is manifested through the guidance of teachers and school
principals to provide support to students and even to parents how instant assistance


16

Islamic Boarding School Education Leadership in Supporting Virtual Learning During the Pandemic
Period in Indonesia


models can be carried out by parents so that students are not poorly left behind during
the pandemic in progress is on this basis that this study is felt to be very important,
namely an effort to identify models of the principles of a how-to guide and protect
students and parents through ways that are taken initiatively because Indeed, the
movement and direction of guidance and leadership is a problem coming from the
government or the school leadership so that all staff are mobilized to be able to export
students during the pandemic as much as possible.
       Indeed, at every level of education entering education in Islamic schools such as
the Islamic boarding school, leadership is in the leadership of the boarding school who
is in charge of the department which is fully responsible for the smoothness and
program as well as the leader of the pesantren to have also the responsibility in
managing, namely achieving educational goals academically. As the leader of an
Islamic school, it is undoubtedly expected to manage the pesantren unit with various
policies and routines of the pesantren so that the boarding school can carry out its
functions both academically and socially and in relation with others. However, the
placement of teaching staff in Islamic boarding schools invites novice teachers to lead
the deputy leaders of the pesantren to carry out academic tasks so that leadership is
often a minor part of formulating strategies to advance learning so that they can
respond to communicate and apply various policies with ways of dividing tasks both
from the leadership of the pesantren to their subordinates and also how they can
improve learning performance, which has indeed been since the outbreak of state
policies to repatriate santri and also school students and carry out learning
technologically.
       This is where leadership is needed that does not only function as the head of the
institution. However, if the academic leadership is so that students are not left behind
in learning as closely as possible, how can the leaders of this Islamic boarding school
and school be able to become both the head of the pesantren and become the head of
education, which is significantly responsible for developing and continuing
partnerships with other students while providing leadership and influence to the
pesantren which they are responsible for saving and not only the safety of the academy
but also health and safety during Pandemic (Bierema, 2017). So, for that, leadership
must develop how the potential exists, utilize technology, and carry out laboratories
that are often unused during learning at schools, all of which are the responsibility of
the pesantren leadership. By subordinates, but a pesantren leader certainly has one
soul. The recipe is in terms of recruiting teaching officers how to make new plans
because, during this epidemic, the planning strategy often changes due to the
enormous challenge of how to evaluate learning how to conduct guidance on how to
assist in the use of the program evaluation budget and as well as acceptance of new
students how to make online payments online. However, as the responsibility holder, a
leader must provide suitable training and other support so that teachers, students, and
the community do not feel lost during the pandemic (Leithwood & Seashore-Louis,
2011; Putra et al., 2020; Suroso et al., 2021). Therefore, this study aiming o identify what
leardership potential shall be propose to schools and even students during pandemic
learning disruption.

METHOD
      This method described the steps for a literature review to obtain scientific
evidence of educational leadership in Islamic boarding schools supporting online
learning during the pandemic (Halik, 2016). The author believes that online learning


17

Islamic Boarding School Education Leadership in Supporting Virtual Learning During the Pandemic
Period in Indonesia


requires solid educational leadership, which can empower all potential and influence
so that learning objectives affected by the covid pandemic can run well and continue
(Ossiannilsson, 2021). So, we have visited several scientific publications on several
application databases of educational leadership studies during the disruption of the
pandemic several complications such as Eric Publications, Google book, Taylor and
France, and many other publications actively discussing educational leadership issues
during distance learning as a result of responding to the covid pandemic-19 (Fiş
Erümit, 2021). The researchers did not be able to use the data if we do not address the
first issue of an in-depth research effort under the phenomenological approach, which
is to find as much data as possible to become findings or answer the questions
currently being studied.
       While the review process involves several stages, first, we coded the data,
evaluated and looked for relevance, interpreted it in depth to conclude if the findings
were relevant in answering valid questions (Fayers & Machin, 2013). This study is
entirely dependent on secondary data in the form of field details that have been
published in various scientific publication journals, especially about educational
leadership during pandemic disturbances in Indonesia (Wilde et al., 2020). We found
data by searching the Google Search engine using education, regressive and virtual
learning, and the pandemic period. Furthermore, lastly, we tried to design the fetus in
descriptive qualitative form, how to present data by looking at the phenomenon of the
impact of the pandemic on various main sectors of education, so by paying attention to
the previous spelling, we designed this report in the form of a qualitative study
(Bennett et al., 2012).

RESULT AND DISCUSSSION
Impact of Covid-19 on education
       COVID-19 has changed the world and has had a severe impact on lives and
economies. The World Bank estimates that the loss of learning from school closures
caused by the pandemic could be worth as much as $10 trillion in lost workers' lifetime
earnings (Schleicher, 2020). School closures have also demonstrated wide and deep
inequality between countries and within countries worldwide. This allows for an
acceleration of some trends; online learning becomes increasingly dominant in
education. However, the issue is not just about providing technological fixes. The
pattern of schooling that has existed so far would be required to respond to the
following issues; (1) changing student needs, especially mental health issues; (2)
teacher capacity development due to the increasing importance of distance teaching;
and (3) reorienting curriculum, pedagogy, and assessment to focus more on student
learning than on test results. A new kind of leader is needed to bring schools out of this
crisis. After the COVID-19 pandemic, school principals must have transformative
abilities. Given the various uncertainties, they need to develop plans with high
flexibility while keeping the main points in mind. It is essential to build support with
key stakeholders in these challenging times as we all move forward to emerge from
this crisis (Marinoni et al., 2020).

Typical crisis leadership
         The key to success in overcoming the crisis is very dependent on the leadership
factor. In conditions full of uncertainty, school leaders face a very tough test (Wu et al.,
2013). This has never been seen more clearly than during the Coronavirus crisis. The
efforts that have been made during this challenging time by the model school leaders


18

Islamic Boarding School Education Leadership in Supporting Virtual Learning During the Pandemic
Period in Indonesia


featured in this book provide vital clues to the form of leadership in the future. They all
point out that, in the absence of pre-tested steps, the most successful leaders do not
believe they have the answers to all problems, but those who view leadership as taking
steps even under uncertain circumstances to get through various stresses. As their
story illustrates, stress is when there is no clear solution, no absolute answer, but
instead presents many often contradictory paths and pulls them in different directions.
Those who manage stress in a planned but flexible way seem to carry their community
through the crisis in positive ways (McNulty et al., 2018).
        These educators seem to prove the truth of the saying that leaders are forged by
adversity. The crisis showed everyone who they are as leaders. Through a fierce
struggle with the pressures that accompany the crisis, educators grow as leaders while
bringing their communities out of massive disruption in the best possible way (Dirani
et al., 2020). Leading through relentless disruption is not about balance, nor is it even a
matter of calm, but about having the correct values to work on over and over again,
constantly tweaked and corrected every time, through various uncertainties – it is in
these conditions that they forge and forged. Experience shows us that the best leaders
in managing crises are pragmatic visionaries. Their eyes are not limited to the period of
the crisis. They look far ahead through their systems, structures, and collaborative
ways. Leaders create a foundation of values-based stability in their organizations,
where teachers can learn, experiment, fail, feel better, and build good relationships.
They are also not proud of their abilities, keep their energy up, have and give hope,
and are mentally challenging. As they transform their schools through crises, the
leaders featured in this book emulate these characteristics perfectly, and as a result,
they and their schools grow stronger (Mosse, 2021).

Collaborate with parents
      The sudden shift to distance learning forces parents to assume roles they were
not used to before as home teachers (Waizenegger et al., 2020). With minimal
preparation or knowledge, they are suddenly expected to guide their children through
distance learning, be it fiddling with technology for online lessons or watching their
children complete their homework, all the while doing their work and
responsibilities—another answer. Parents can no longer chat in the afternoon with their
children's teachers or attend parent-teacher meetings. This can be very frustrating for
some parents. Therefore, it is essential to keep open communication with parents:
principals and teachers can help guide parents through this confusing phase and invite
active parents to provide additional support. Knowing parents and understanding the
community can go a long way in creating and managing parental potential during
times of crisis and in many other school activities during regular times (Ionescu &
Enescu, 2021).

Open communication with parents
        As trusted leaders, skilled in open and personal communication, pesantren and
religious school leaders can share some practical suggestions for building and
maintaining good relationships with parents: Be open to feedback from parents and
send online forms to parents to better understand each family's situation (Hendricks-
Ferguson et al., 2015). The qquestions can range from personal problems and problems
encountered during online learning to their responses to school plans and Hold regular
online meetings and chat sessions with parents to receive feedback for continuous
improvement. Have open communication when needed, share the mobile number and


19

Islamic Boarding School Education Leadership in Supporting Virtual Learning During the Pandemic
Period in Indonesia


work email address with parents and students to facilitate open communication. Have
at least one parent facilitator in each class who can mobilize other parents or facilitate
logistical and administrative issues as needed. We cannot do this alone. We need to
collaborate and share everything with the stakeholders. Because really what we do is
for the common good of our students (Soon et al., 2013). Principal of school and update
information from parents regularly. Hold online forums, such as live broadcasts via
YouTube or Instagram, to inform parents about initiatives and school plans for the new
school year. Reassure parents that their children's education, safety, and well-being are
the school's primary focus.

Involve parents and the education community
         This forced isolation caused by COVID-19 is perhaps the most extended period
parents spend with their children without a break (Berg-Weger & Morley, 2020). When
parents carry out their role as teachers, they have difficulty carrying out these new
responsibilities. Domingo shares how his district and school support parents in
rediscovering the meaning of family life and parenting. Teacher and Parent Parenting
Training Even before the crisis, the Education Office in Valenzuela had partnered with
the City Government to organize the annual Teacher and Parent Parenting Training
event. In the one-day training, parents learned about parenting, positive discipline
methods, facilitating a pleasant learning environment at home, and the role of parents
and families in society. Parental leaders from various schools were also trained as
facilitators. The role of parents as mentors cannot be underestimated, and it is essential
to train and partner with them even in regular times (Deolmi & Pisani, 2020).
         Including and giving a job to the students's family is likewise one of the best
amid pandemic emergencies, including:
1) Strengthen relationship - Foster a more private two-way correspondence among
   school and family - Build joint trust and provide families with a genuine feeling of
   association in their kids' learning.
2) Building limit - Assist families with growing their insight base and clarify the
   purposes for different distance learning tasks - Cultivating families to become
   reasoning accomplices; urge guardians to pose open-finished inquiries regardless of
   whether they know the responses. This opens up unique doors for families to
   discover some new information together.
3) Focus on learning - Console and assist families with the understanding that
   significant learning can, in any case, happen without gadgets or admittance to the
   Internet - Underscore that significant learning happens during the day by day
   exercises, for example, cooking, drawing, and perusing together, and urge families
   to be associated with them.
4) Connect Community - Continuously make sure to check to assume the family has
   any critical necessities that should be met right now before their youngster can be
   engaged with distance learning, e. g food, and power - Fabricate people group
   qualities and assets to assist understudies and families with meeting their
   fundamental requirements today (Iyengar, 2021).

Support parents
      The classrooms have been emptied, the teacher's room which was once a place
for productive discussions among teachers, is now locked, and only dust occupies the
once crowded space. No one thought that in such a short period, everything would
change (Bhamani et al., 2020). During this rapid transition to distance teaching,


20

Islamic Boarding School Education Leadership in Supporting Virtual Learning During the Pandemic
Period in Indonesia


teachers experienced difficulties, including in preparing appropriate materials for
distance learning; engaging with students; adopting and adapting to the use of
technology. While most of our focus has been on ensuring continued student learning,
how can we also support our teachers who have to work with technology, a completely
new medium, which most new teachers are using for the first time? If we can
strengthen the spirit and capacity of teachers, the quality of learning increase, teachers
be empowered, and learning outcomes will also increase (Alhuzimi, 2021).

Leadership recruiting education work team in crisis
        Leaders of schools and pesantren understand and realize that the skills of their
teachers in the field of technology are limited. The teacher is concerned with his
technology skills and how best to respond to the needs and demands of students and
parents (Freysteinson et al., 2021). Transforming non-teaching staff. As non-teaching
staff has a lighter workload during distance learning, Vance assigned them to contact
parents. They assist parents and students experiencing technical difficulties with
distance learning, for example, helping to organize online parenting sessions and
responding to questions from parents and students. This significantly reduces teachers'
workload and gives them more time to improve their remote teaching science and
technology skills. Appointing expert teachers Vance also quickly appoints teachers
with higher technical skills to become expert teachers. These teachers have previously
taken technology courses and can share their knowledge and tips, and advice on
teaching using technology (Stasel, 2020). These expert teachers conduct mentoring
sessions one by one, sometimes late into the night. They also provide technical support
to teachers who are unfamiliar with technology.
       Leaders must also understand how to empower human resources (HR). Some
teachers, for example, physical education teachers, cannot teach online during school
closures (Liu et al., 2021).The principal identified their alternative subject skills and
appointed them to teach in the lower grades with these teachers. During the school
holidays, these teachers develop their mastery of the material and prepare teaching
materials to prepare for the new school year. In cultivating our staff, one thing to
remember is that there is no perfect formula. Each school has a different culture,
system, and potential to be developed. It is the responsibility of leaders to find out
which method works best for them (Petrie, 2011).

Regenerate future school leaders
        In the demands of a fast transition to distance learning, it is easy to feel
overwhelmed with the sheer volume of tasks to complete (Day et al., 2016). As school
leaders, it is essential to trust the teachers and plan and implement programs. An
effective leader has the ripple effect of building new leaders. Here are some tips from
experienced school leaders: Leadership Distribution In schools, one manifestation of
effective leadership is distributed among teams of individuals with different skills and
experiences but with a shared mission to ensure that education continues for all the
students. Suggestions to get rid of the mindset with the leader, and the teacher is the
subordinate who is only there to take orders. We must involve them thoroughly and be
a part of the decision-making process (Grace, 2010). Build trust with the teachers.
When there is trust, responsibility is easier to accept. Develop all the teachers and
empower them to become leaders. Once these teachers feel involved, they will be
motivated to nurture other teachers, who will continue to nurture others. Refrain from
dictating mid-level leaders (school leader, MGMPS leadership) about what to do.


21

Islamic Boarding School Education Leadership in Supporting Virtual Learning During the Pandemic
Period in Indonesia


Instead, focus on being there for them and guiding them to make their own decisions.
Follow up regularly and establish open communication with teachers. Always share
more ideas and thoughts with them. Continue to encourage and motivate them to
become leaders on their own (Yurkofsky, 2021).

Protect and guide teachers and the school team
         The COVID-19 pandemic has forced us to get rid of traditional teaching models.
As frontline workers in the education sector, teachers must quickly adapt their
pedagogy to provide quality education during distance learning. Their workload is
doubled, and the balance between their personal and work life is disturbed (Day et al.,
2016). Apart from being overwhelmed by the new technology they are exposed to for
the first time, teachers must also struggle to provide education to those who do not
have access to technology. The lousy impact that all of this has on the teacher's physical
and mental health cannot be underestimated. The pressure is felt by all teachers and
everyone involved in education to turn this crisis into an opportunity. As the principal,
it is essential to understand and be compassionate in these new conditions and pay
attention to all staff's well-being and psychological needs (Yurkofsky, 2021).
       The Principal's Approach In our struggle to adapt to the new normal, sticking to
old and outdated rules is no longer efficient; it is more important to be flexible and
accommodating when facing the unknown, separately but together (Zepeda & Lanoue,
2021). Here are some ways Caroline gives her staff more leeway during distance
learning sessions. Be flexible The school implements a rotating work schedule for
teachers because not all teachers have a good internet connection in their homes.
Teachers use classrooms instead of teachers' rooms to minimize interaction (Ryan &
Ryan, 2010). Teachers are generally required to be absent from school once a week, but
they can come more often if they wish. Exceptions are given to pregnant women who
can work entirely from home. Building resilience In order for teachers to teach their
students about resilience, they must first be tough themselves. Caroline incorporates
aspects of well-being into their school-based professional development training. In
addition to honing teaching, curriculum, and planning skills, teachers at Tzu Chi
Middle School are also involved in keeping a daily well-being journal to build positive
thoughts and gratitude. During the three weeks in July and August, teachers were
encouraged to write about positive actions, helpful help or advice they encountered
during the day, as well as someone they were grateful for. They then shared their
thoughts in a WhatsApp group chat (Hanafi et al., 2021).

Building of school belonging
        Building a sense of belonging among his coworkers is something that Vance has
been working on with all his heart, even before the pandemic (Felten & Lambert,
2020). When the pandemic hits, there is already a strong support network among
teachers and staff, while everyone may not be ready. Vance was able to take advantage
of this strong foundation as a foothold to continue to motivate teachers and keep staff
morale high. Establishing a sense of normalcy Regular and open communication is the
basis of Vance's strategy of engaging teachers. The management team holds casual one-
on-one or small group chat sessions with the teacher, and talks about light topics like
everyday life, family, even whatever they want to talk about. This creates a sense of
normalcy and helps teachers adjust their remote work schedules. If a teacher has a
particular problem, Vance will hold a one-on-one discussion or counseling session for
them (Verschelden, 2017).


22

Islamic Boarding School Education Leadership in Supporting Virtual Learning During the Pandemic
Period in Indonesia


       Supporting and motivating teachers: Holiday Challenges by Principal Domingo
Lozande When he learned that his teachers were feeling stressed and socially isolated,
Domingo created a series of "Holiday Challenges" to inspire and motivate his staff:
Once a week, articles on various topics such as caring, family support and the
importance of helping others are published, along with tips and guiding questions that
assist staff in self-reflection. Staff can freely reflect or chat with their colleagues on the
topic of the week (Azorín, 2020). At the end of the week, a challenge would be
uploaded for the teacher to complete. Teachers and their families can participate in
these challenges, which allow them to have fun and strengthen relationships.
Teacher welfare during the COVID-19 pandemic
        Instructive pioneers, the two administrators, and managers assume a significant
part in supporting educators (Pelmin, 2020). Research has shown that initiative
practices that help independence can assist with working on educators' encounters of
social help and flexibility and increment their ability to explore shared difficulties in
the work environment. Here are a few ideas for executing initiative that upholds
independence. They were paying attention to the requirements of educators, for
example, those connected with the requirement for executing internet learning (Bishop,
2021). They are perceiving and attempting to comprehend the issue according to the
instructor's point of view, for example, giving the open the door to educators to voice
the troubles and unique open doors that have emerged while instructing from a
distance during COVID-19. Request input from educators in decision-production at the
school level, for example, to get some information about the best way to complete
different exercises and undertakings during the COVID-19 pandemic. Clarify the
explanations for the undertakings instructors should do, such as clarifying how and
why different assignments are critical to do from a distance (Pregowska et al., 2021).

Leadership in activating students
       Learning is essentially a social activity (Dewey, 2012). Placing older students
with their younger siblings can provide 'friends' support which is very important to
overcome isolation in face-to-face and online teaching and learning activities (Sadovnik
& Semel, 2016). This kind of strategy helps teachers ensure students are supported and
ensures that adequate and interactive learning can still be created even in distance
learning situations. A strong focus on student well-being can also integrate life-wide
learning strategies into formal teaching and learning activities. Lifewide learning is any
informal setting that allows students to learn the material while building their identity.
Learning takes place anywhere, not just in the classroom. Students' current experiences
can be incorporated into formal teaching through distance learning. This provides an
opportunity for them to share and discuss their feelings (Retter, 2012).
      Paired groups, or other informal settings, allow students to know they are not
alone and create a sense of belonging in the student community at school " Expanding
and activating support networks: Principal Jaida Malonzo's approach to special
education schools Batino Elementary School is the first Special Education Center in
Quezon City, Philippines; almost 30 percent of students with special needs
(Baquedano-López et al., 2013). The main driving force behind Jaida starting a sign
language program at her school was her difficulties as a principal in helping her hard
of hearing students. SCHOOL PROFILE Batino Elementary School Quezon City,
Philippines Public School 650 students 41 staff Incorporating life-wide learning,
particularly sharing experiences during this pandemic, promises a more authentic,
complete, and holistic form of learning so students can combine and integrate their


23

Islamic Boarding School Education Leadership in Supporting Virtual Learning During the Pandemic
Period in Indonesia


learning, formal and informally, with their personal and academic development
(Csikszentmihalyi, 2014).
       An important point that becomes the fundamental finding of this study is how
the educational leadership in boarding schools supports remote or perceptual learning
during the pandemic disruption. The leadership we found included how the impact of
this pandemic which authorized the implementation of virtual learning, could be
overcome by solutions that came from the school government, which were transferred
to teachers and applied in daily learning so that the solutions were more or less
explained, Mr. from the school. Other findings include how we look at how typical
teachers and students should deal with learning when a pandemic disrupts it. Because
this is a consequence that occurs due to the government's policy of closing schools face
to face but activating online learning. Because this policy was sudden, Yani's learning
was transferred to online, several problems and challenges arose, so it needed a strong
Gresik who still encouraged and helped so that the implementation of online learning
could take place wherever possible by minimizing problems and optimizing good
results.
       So, among other things, is how the sip title from the school is built for
collaborative ideas in learning, meaning that it does not expect solutions to come from
parents from teachers but is raised from schools, namely schools by adopting policies
from the education office through the collaboration of policymakers with input from
researchers on how to provide solutions to problems that arise. Other findings include
how school leaders build communication that is not very open in dealing with
problems, including building communication with the school committee, teacher
council, and, most importantly, with parents. So, the involvement of the community
and parents is beneficial, whereas when teachers and students do not. We meet again
every day. However, assignments and lessons still happen, so the empowerment of
parents and the community is necessary here. This must be filled by educational
leadership who truly understands the actual conditions and how to apply government
policies oriented towards solving problems, not adding to problems.
         These are significant findings, among others, that we have reviewed from
various sources with the note that leadership in solving problems during the learning
period disrupted by the pandemic must come from schools and schools based on
policies made by the regulatory policy team in collaboration with the findings of
experts in the field so that schools can demonstrate function as a leader, protector, and
protector so that the virtual educational goals during the pandemic can be carried out
as much as possible
         The COVID-19 pandemic in 2020 has caused unprecedented chaos. Education
systems worldwide are being forced to carry out a seemingly endless shutdown of
institutions (Hargreaves & Fullan, 2020). In its 2020 statement, UNESCO warned of the
devastating impact of school closures. UNESCO warns that the negative impact of the
extension of the school closure period would be felt much more severely by
marginalized and vulnerable groups. The forced closure of schools and places of
learning around the world has exposed three significant weaknesses of global
education (Jandrić et al., 2020) namely: (1) the need to rethink education not only as a
school-driven endeavor but must be a concerted effort of families, communities, and
entire societies; (2) the inadequacy of the "one size fits all" education model, which is
reflected in the inability of factory-style education to cope with the diverse
characteristics of education systems around the world; and (3) widening gaps in access
to education, some students have the opportunity to be able to continue their


24

Islamic Boarding School Education Leadership in Supporting Virtual Learning During the Pandemic
Period in Indonesia


education while those who are not fortunate experience severe suffering, which
became increasingly apparent during the pandemic. This handbook extracts practical,
insightful conversations from the three-part webinar series, Educational Leadership in
Crisis Times, held earlier this year.
        Leaders of schools and pesantren must be able to mobilize Leaders People can
gather parent leaders (selected officers and volunteers from among parents, such as
school committees) to help the school handle administrative matters (Mukhtar et al.,
2020). He divided the elders' leaders based on where they lived and monitored their
environment. These parental leaders act as information officers for families, especially
those who do not have internet access or are less responsive. Families who have
difficulty engaging in distance learning contact these parent leaders, coordinating
home visits with teachers and school management (Hartiwi et al., 2020). The support
and attention of schools for parents can be in the form of training and understanding
the use of technology for parents, which among other things, pesantren and school
leaders must be able to help others manage disruptions in their lives and work, and
ensure students and their communities do not freeze and can react reasonably and
positively (Murray & Swanson, 2020). Turning lessons online further clarifies
competence, commitment, collaboration, and coping mechanisms. Therefore, Domingo
implemented a five-step professional development plan for his teachers. Needs
analysis Hold meetings and informal conversations on social media to assess the
current technology skills of teachers (Ren et al., 2020). Training Conduct a series of
webinars and Learning Action Cell sessions online to train teachers in using various
technology-based applications and platforms to improve their teaching performance.
Schools can partner with the Information and Communication Technology unit of the
Education Office and experts and various other parties to provide this training.
Consultation Separately, each division can conduct virtual discussions, as a whole or in
smaller groups, to provide tailored technical, emotional, and social assistance to
teachers. Assessment Have informal chats or regular online message exchanges to
assess teachers' progress. Peer support Assign a critical peer to assist teachers with
concerns about distance teaching. The role of the friend is to provide technical
guidance and emotional support (Lau & Lee, 2021).
        So we can conclude that through the identification of several field studies
evidence that proposes educational leadership during a pandemic disrupted through
suggestions and perspectives on how to support distance learning after we describe
both in the results and discussion sections. Thus, we believe this finding has answered
the main problem, namely what and how the principles and policies of leadership from
schools in supporting support for learning that are being disrupted by the pandemic
through various programs and creativity and innovation from schools that are
transferred to teachers and teachers are applied in student support, especially parents
and even the community how they participate in supporting learning when disturbed
by the pandemic. Educational leadership during this disruption must appear and be
supported and initiated by the school, and Bastian gets guidance and supervision from
the education office and then transferred to be applied at the level of students,
teachers, and parents.
        The results of the study identified models and characteristics of school leaders
for teachers and forwarded them to students with solutions on how to anticipate
learning while the covid pandemic disrupted it. So, concretely, this study has
succeeded in several sources of literature that have been published in various
educational journals that are disturbed by conflict, among others, we note that the most


25

Islamic Boarding School Education Leadership in Supporting Virtual Learning During the Pandemic
Period in Indonesia


strategic thing to give to mean students learn is, among other things, that we
understand that conflict not only has an impact on health but also has an impact on the
world of education, how it is carried out, how Ali feels and how he is perceived. The
point is that learning must not be left behind. Furthermore, we see that in schools,
there are many leadership crises where teachers and students, when they are in a
coffee crisis, do not get a preventative solution how to get through this critical period,
so because we serve a problem we are looking for models of forms of support that the
school for students can carry out. The example that we cannot help but suggest is how
the school is in collaboration, meaning that parents are not considered as other people
but are partners where when the school is disconnected but can be reconnected,
education and supervision by parents, so by the school we build this collaboration
which we think is where the school should move.
      Another example is how teachers and principals open communication with
parents on how to handle learning and what obstacles they face to be resolved together
in the future. Likewise, schools should not hesitate to invite community leaders,
especially parents, to jointly find learning solutions because, for almost two years,
students have been in their respective places, a change that is not uncommon, so that
students are more involved with the community and their parents. Support students,
so do not be cut off at all. Then schools also need to think about how to regenerate
school leaders who have high leadership potential and have dedication and have
character as a leader, which means they have a solution for a high commitment to
problem-solving, right? The last thing is we studied and found that it is essential to
protect teachers and teachers under challenging times so this must come from school
leaders who know how to protect and protect teachers and students and give full
attention to parents invites to build open communication and establish cooperation
compact so that the problems faced during coffee can be run together but must start
from the school because the school gives them great authority and responsibility
because they are every holder who must be ready to provide solutions in the form of
leadership. Furthermore, we also note that God is included in how the leadership
recruits academic staff to become a team that work separately. Furthermore, we also
noted how to distinguish staff and teachers and other essential components for future
preparation that each of them has preparation and a vision for the future how the
company or school continue to be in his heart not only while he is still around. Next,
we found out how to protect and help teachers and schools in a team understand how
to succeed in learning when the covid pandemic disrupted them. Next, we also see
how to make the school or make education a sense of belonging by parents and the
community so that the school is owned by the school and becomes a sense of belonging
by the community. The next part of leadership is to provide a sense of security. Prosper
in carrying out their duties, especially during the pandemic crisis, the principal or
school leader must have a trick and have a circle to prosper the teachers and other
animals. We also see that leadership, not only to parents but also to students, meaning
teachers and the school, can motivate students to be active even though the masses are
in a state of tension due to the pandemic outbreak. We have presented all of these
explanations in the results section, which results from a study of various sources of
information and existing literature.

CONCLUSION
       In this final section, we can conclude the critical role gained after a series of
literature reviews to gain the understanding and skills needed when guiding schools


26

Islamic Boarding School Education Leadership in Supporting Virtual Learning During the Pandemic
Period in Indonesia


during a pandemic disruption. We believe that the bleaching of our data held by the
previous state has answered these elephant questions and hypotheses with high
quality. As for the critical points, among others, we see that the impact of this
copyright does have not only an impact on human health but also education, so that it
requires a strategy or approach or method for every educational leader to be able to
implement it so that the goals established during the disturbance can be resolved.
Furthermore, we also see that several tropical crises have occurred so that many
schools cannot carry out some government policy in responding to coffee. We also
want to share that for school empowerment or student learning, school collaboration
with parents is essential because the typical payment during coffee is at home being a
teacher is like a teacher if we have received training and understanding, then they will
be easy to help and support their students. Furthermore, we must have various skills,
including open communication with parents, to make it easier to carry out these
obligations. Yes, we also see that Indonesia Bagus always involves parents in terms of
learning and also the learning community in places where students have a heart,
teachers, and schools cannot afford to be active in the village, so they have to involve
parents and the community leaders to support each other's learning during this
disturbance period. We see that the support from parents is tremendous where the
student succeed almost 100% it has an impact or a result of the support of parents.

ACKNOWLEDGEMENT
      The authors are pleased and grateful to all parties who have supported the
ministry of education, which has provided financial assistance so that the masses carry
out the duties. We feel immensely helped.

AUTHOR CONTRIBUTION STATEMENT
        All authors have contributed their work accordingly to their shared authorship
roles. Therefore there is no complicated issues in this project.

REFERENCES
Agustiarasari, B. P., Monica, D., Jordan, M., Risky, M., Arsika, P., Syari, R., &
       Nursapitri, R. (2021). Pentingnya pengenalan vaksin di masa pandemi covid-19
       desa ibul kecamatan simpang teritip. Jurnal Abdimas Bina Bangsa, 2(1), 100–104.
Alhuzimi, T. (2021). Stress and emotional wellbeing of parents due to change in routine
       for children with Autism Spectrum Disorder (ASD) at home during COVID-19
       pandemic in Saudi Arabia. Research in Developmental Disabilities, 108, 103822.
Azorín, C. (2020). Beyond COVID-19 supernova. Is another education coming? Journal
       of Professional Capital and Community.
Bambrick-Santoyo, P. (2018). Leverage leadership 2.0: A practical guide to building
       exceptional schools. John Wiley & Sons.
Baquedano-López, P., Alexander, R. A., & Hernández, S. J. (2013). Equity issues in
       parental and community involvement in schools: What teacher educators need
       to know. Review of research in education, 37(1), 149–182.
Benham, M., & Murakami-Ramalho, E. (2010). Engaging in educational leadership: The
       generosity of spirit. International Journal of Leadership in Education, 13(1), 77–91.
Bennett, N., Desforges, C., Cockburn, A., & Wilkinson, B. (2012). Quality of Pupil
       Learning Experiences (RLE Edu O). Routledge.
Berg-Weger, M., & Morley, J. E. (2020). Loneliness and social isolation in older adults
       during the COVID-19 pandemic: Implications for gerontological social work.


27

Islamic Boarding School Education Leadership in Supporting Virtual Learning During the Pandemic
Period in Indonesia


        Dalam The journal of nutrition, health & aging (Vol. 24, Nomor 5, hlm. 456–458).
        Springer.
Bhamani, S., Makhdoom, A. Z., Bharuchi, V., Ali, N., Kaleem, S., & Ahmed, D. (2020).
        Home learning in times of COVID: Experiences of parents. Journal of Education
        and Educational Development, 7(1), 9–26.
Bierema, L. L. (2017). No woman left behind: Critical leadership development to build
        gender consciousness and transform organizations. Dalam Handbook of research
        on gender and leadership. Edward Elgar Publishing.
Bishop, P. A. (2021). Middle Grades Teacher Practices during the COVID-19 Pandemic.
        RMLE Online, 44(7), 1–18. https://doi.org/10.1080/19404476.2021.1959832
Bubb, S., & Jones, M.-A. (2020). Learning from the COVID-19 home-schooling
        experience: Listening to pupils, parents/carers and teachers. Improving schools,
        23(3), 209–222.
Csikszentmihalyi, M. (2014). Applications of flow in human development and education.
        Springer.
Day, C., Gu, Q., & Sammons, P. (2016). The impact of leadership on student outcomes:
        How successful school leaders use transformational and instructional strategies
        to make a difference. Educational administration quarterly, 52(2), 221–258.
Deolmi, M., & Pisani, F. (2020). Psychological and psychiatric impact of COVID-19
        pandemic among children and adolescents. Acta Bio Medica: Atenei Parmensis,
        91(4).
Dewey, M. (2012). Towards a post-normative approach: Learning the pedagogy of ELF.
        Journal of English as a lingua franca, 1(1), 141–170.
Dirani, K. M., Abadi, M., Alizadeh, A., Barhate, B., Garza, R. C., Gunasekara, N.,
        Ibrahim, G., & Majzun, Z. (2020). Leadership competencies and the essential
        role of human resource development in times of crisis: A response to Covid-19
        pandemic. Human Resource Development International, 23(4), 380–394.
Fayers, P. M., & Machin, D. (2013). Quality of life: The assessment, analysis and
        interpretation of patient-reported outcomes. John Wiley & Sons.
Felten, P., & Lambert, L. M. (2020). Relationship-rich education: How human connections
        drive success in college. JHU Press.
Fiş Erümit, S. (2021). The distance education process in K–12 schools during the
        pandemic period: Evaluation of implementations in Turkey from the student
        perspective. Technology, Pedagogy and Education, 1–20.
Freysteinson, W. M., Celia, T., Gilroy, H., & Gonzalez, K. (2021). The experience of
        nursing leadership in a crisis: A hermeneutic phenomenological study. Journal
        of Nursing Management, 29(6), 1535–1543.
Geera, S., & Onen, D. (2014). Roles and Challenges faced by Heads of Academic Department
        in Reforming University Curricula to Promote Graduate Employability.
Grace, G. (2010). Renewing spiritual capital: An urgent priority for the future of
        Catholic education internationally. International Studies in Catholic Education,
        2(2), 117–128.
Gyang, T. S. (2020). Educational leadership response to the COVID-19 pandemic crisis
        in Nigeria. International Studies in Educational Administration, 48(3), 73–79.
Halik, A. (2016). Paradigm of Islamic Education in the Future: The Integration of
        Islamic Boarding School and Favorite School. Information Management and
        Business Review, 8(4), 24–32.
Hanafi, Y., Taufiq, A., Saefi, M., Ikhsan, M. A., Diyana, T. N., Thoriquttyas, T., &
        Anam, F. K. (2021). The new identity of Indonesian Islamic boarding schools in


28

Islamic Boarding School Education Leadership in Supporting Virtual Learning During the Pandemic
Period in Indonesia


        the “new normal”: The education leadership response to COVID-19. Heliyon,
        7(3), e06549.
Hargreaves, A., & Fullan, M. (2020). Professional capital after the pandemic: Revisiting
        and revising classic understandings of teachers’ work. Journal of Professional
        Capital and Community.
Hartiwi, H., Kozlova, A. Y., & Masitoh, F. (2020). The Effect of Certified Teachers and
        Principal Leadership toward Teachers’ Performance. International Journal of
        Educational Review, 2(1), 70–88.
Hendricks-Ferguson, V. L., Sawin, K. J., Montgomery, K., Dupree, C., Phillips-Salimi,
        C. R., Carr, B., & Haase, J. E. (2015). Novice nurses’ experiences with palliative
        and end-of-life communication. Journal of Pediatric Oncology Nursing, 32(4), 240–
        252.
Hirsch, J. S., Ikizler, T. A., Sharma, S., & Mohammed, A. (2021). Acute Kidney Injury
        and Advanced Kidney Disease in the COVID-19 Pandemic: Proceedings From a
        National Kidney Foundation Symposium. Kidney medicine, 3(3), 426–432.
Ionescu, V. M., & Enescu, F. M. (2021). Using information technology in Romanian
        preschool environment during the COVID-19 pandemic. 2021 13th International
        Conference on Electronics, Computers and Artificial Intelligence (ECAI), 1–6.
Jandrić, P., Hayes, D., Truelove, I., Levinson, P., Mayo, P., Ryberg, T., Monzó, L. D.,
        Allen, Q., Stewart, P. A., & Carr, P. R. (2020). Teaching in the age of Covid-19.
        Postdigital Science and Education.
Lau, E. Y. H., & Lee, K. (2021). Parents’ views on young children’s distance learning
        and screen time during COVID-19 class suspension in Hong Kong. Early
        Education and Development, 32(6), 863–880.
Leithwood, K., & Seashore-Louis, K. (2011). Linking leadership to student learning. John
        Wiley & Sons.
Liu, B. F., Shi, D., Lim, J. R., Islam, K., Edwards, A. L., & Seeger, M. (2021). When crises
        hit home: How US higher education leaders navigate values during uncertain
        times. Journal of Business Ethics, 1–16.
Lu, L., Peng, J., Wu, J., & Lu, Y. (2021). Perceived impact of the Covid-19 crisis on SMEs
        in different industry sectors: Evidence from Sichuan, China. International Journal
        of Disaster Risk Reduction, 55, 102085.
Marinoni, G., Van’t Land, H., & Jensen, T. (2020). The impact of Covid-19 on higher
        education around the world. IAU global survey report, 23.
McNulty, E. J., Dorn, B. C., Serino, R., Goralnick, E., Grimes, J. O., Flynn, L. B., Pillay, S.
        S., & Marcus, L. J. (2018). Integrating brain science into crisis leadership
        development. Journal of Leadership Studies, 11(4), 7–20.
Medeiros, K. E., Crayne, M. P., Griffith, J. A., Hardy III, J. H., & Damadzic, A. (2022).
        Leader sensemaking style in response to crisis: Consequences and insights from
        the COVID-19 pandemic. Personality and Individual Differences, 187, 111406.
Mosse, G. L. (2021). The crisis of German ideology: Intellectual origins of the Third Reich.
        University of Wisconsin Pres.
Mukhtar, K., Javed, K., Arooj, M., & Sethi, A. (2020). Advantages, Limitations and
        Recommendations for online learning during COVID-19 pandemic era. Pakistan
        journal of medical sciences, 36(COVID19-S4), S27.
Murray, P. D., & Swanson, J. R. (2020). Visitation restrictions: Is it right and how do we
        support families in the NICU during COVID-19? Journal of Perinatology, 40(10),
        1576–1581.



29

Islamic Boarding School Education Leadership in Supporting Virtual Learning During the Pandemic
Period in Indonesia


Ossiannilsson, E. (2021). Some challenges for Universities, in a post crisis, as Covid-19.
        Dalam Radical Solutions for Education in a Crisis Context (hlm. 99–112). Springer.
Pelmin, M. (2020). Readings on Coronavirus Disease (COVID-19) and the Higher
        Education Institution (HEIs) Emergency Preparedness in the Philippines.
        Available at SSRN 3573896.
Petrie, N. (2011). Future trends in leadership development. Center for Creative Leadership
        white paper, 5(5), 36.
Pregowska, A., Masztalerz, K., Garlińska, M., & Osial, M. (2021). A worldwide journey
        through distance education—From the post office to virtual, augmented and
        mixed realities, and education during the COVID-19 pandemic. Education
        Sciences, 11(3), 118.
Putra, P., Liriwati, F. Y., Tahrim, T., Syafrudin, S., & Aslan, A. (2020). The Students
        Learning from Home Experiences during Covid-19 School Closures Policy In
        Indonesia.      Jurnal     Iqra’ :    Kajian    Ilmu   Pendidikan,     5(2),   30–42.
        https://doi.org/10.25217/ji.v5i2.1019
Rapanta, C., Botturi, L., Goodyear, P., Guàrdia, L., & Koole, M. (2020). Online
        university teaching during and after the Covid-19 crisis: Refocusing teacher
        presence and learning activity. Postdigital science and education, 2(3), 923–945.
Ren, J., Li, X., Chen, S., Chen, S., & Nie, Y. (2020). The influence of factors such as
        parenting stress and social support on the state anxiety in parents of special
        needs children during the COVID-19 epidemic. Frontiers in psychology, 11, 3413.
Retter, H. (2012). Dewey’s progressive education, experience and instrumental
        pragmatism with particular reference to the concept of Bildung. Dalam Theories
        of Bildung and growth (hlm. 281–302). Brill Sense.
Ryan, J. E., & Ryan, J. E. (2010). Five miles away, a world apart: One city, two schools, and
        the story of educational opportunity in modern America. Oxford University Press.
Sadovnik, A., & Semel, S. (2016). Founding mothers and others: Women educational leaders
        during the progressive era. Springer.
Schleicher, A. (2020). The impact of COVID-19 on education: Insights from education at
        a glance 2020. Retrieved from oecd. org website: https://www. oecd. org/education/the-
        impact-of-covid-19-on-education-insights-education-at-a-glance-2020. pdf.
Sihombing, A. A., & Fatra, M. (2021). Distance Learning During the Pandemic Era:
        Online Learning Experiences of State Madrasah Tsanawiyah Students During
        Covid-19 in Indonesia. Analisa: Journal of Social Science and Religion, 6(01), 95–
        112.
Soon, C. N., Kaida, A., Nkala, B., Dietrich, J., Cescon, A., Gray, G., & Miller, C. L.
        (2013). Adolescent experiences of HIV and sexual health communication with
        parents and caregivers in Soweto, South Africa. SAHARA-J: Journal of Social
        Aspects of HIV/AIDS, 10(3–4), 163–169.
Stasel, R. S. (2020). Learning to Walk All Over Again: Insights From Some International
        School Educators and School Leaders in South, Southeast and East Asia During
        the COVID Crisis. International Studies in Educational Administration
        (Commonwealth Council for Educational Administration & Management (CCEAM)),
        48(3).
Suroso, A., Hendriarto, P., Mr, G. N. K., Pattiasina, P. J., & Aslan, A. (2021). Challenges
        and opportunities towards an Islamic cultured generation: Socio-cultural
        analysis.       Linguistics       and      Culture    Review,      5(1),     180–194.
        https://doi.org/10.37028/lingcure.v5n1.1203



30

Islamic Boarding School Education Leadership in Supporting Virtual Learning During the Pandemic
Period in Indonesia


Verschelden, C. (2017). Bandwidth recovery: Helping students reclaim cognitive resources
       lost to poverty, racism, and social marginalization. Stylus Publishing, LLC.
Waizenegger, L., McKenna, B., Cai, W., & Bendz, T. (2020). An affordance perspective
       of team collaboration and enforced working from home during COVID-19.
       European Journal of Information Systems, 29(4), 429–442.
Wang, C., Wang, D., Abbas, J., Duan, K., & Mubeen, R. (2021). Global financial crisis,
       smart lockdown strategies, and the COVID-19 spillover impacts: A global
       perspective implications from Southeast Asia. Frontiers in Psychiatry, 12.
Wilde, J., Chen, W., & Lohmann, S. (2020). COVID-19 and the future of US fertility: What
       can we learn from Google?
Wiliam, D., & Thompson, M. (2017). Integrating assessment with learning: What will it
       take to make it work? Dalam The future of assessment (hlm. 53–82). Routledge.
Wu, H.-K., Lee, S. W.-Y., Chang, H.-Y., & Liang, J.-C. (2013). Current status,
       opportunities and challenges of augmented reality in education. Computers &
       education, 62, 41–49.
Yurkofsky, M. (2021). From Compliance to Improvement: How School Leaders Make
       Sense of Institutional and Technical Demands When Implementing a
       Continuous Improvement Process. Educational Administration Quarterly,
       0013161X211053597.
Zepeda, S. J., & Lanoue, P. D. (2021). A leadership guide to navigating the unknown in
       education: New narratives amid COVID-19. Routledge.



                                     Copyright Holder :
                                  © Trinova, Z., et al., (2022)

                                   First Publication Right :
                            © Jurnal Iqra’ : Kajian Ilmu Pendidikan

                                     This article is under:




31