Humanistic Management Journal (2024) 9:247–267
https://doi.org/10.1007/s41463-024-00181-z

    ORIGINAL RESEARCH



The Development of a New Model of Educational Leadership:
Leadership for Teacher Flourishing

Katy Granville-Chapman1             · Matthew T. Lee2        · James Ritchie-Dunham3

Received: 15 May 2024 / Accepted: 30 May 2024 / Published online: 14 June 2024
© Crown 2024



Abstract
This paper contributes to a broader movement in which the telos of leadership is flourish-
ing, and the primary role of a leader is to promote the flourishing of their team members
through creating a loving environment. In support of this, we propose a new perspective
on, and associated model, of educational leadership: ‘leadership for teacher flourishing’
(LFTF). This model was developed through a literature review and a mixed methods
research project across 78 British schools with collaborative and participatory elements
which asked how school leaders could improve the flourishing of teachers. The quantita-
tive and qualitative findings suggested that key factors in enabling teachers to flourish,
and therefore incorporated into the model ‘LFTF’, were positive relationships; opportuni-
ties for growth; positive impact on subjective wellbeing; and increasing teachers’ sense
of meaning at work. The ways leaders could impact these factors were reported as: be-
ing supportive and compassionate; being trustworthy; giving teachers autonomy; enabling
teachers to grow; being appreciative and focusing on strengths; and enabling teachers to
do meaningful work. It was also found that not only leaders could influence flourishing;
teachers with no formal leadership role could also positively impact teacher flourishing. It
is suggested that virtuous dispositions in leaders are required to ensure they are consistent
in acting in ways that promote flourishing. We argue that this integration of virtue and a
desire to promote flourishing is properly understood as love. The participatory and col-
laborative phase of the research showed that teachers wanted autonomy in deciding what
would help them to flourish. The conclusion sets out the implications of this research for
policy on the training and selection of school leaders, to improve not only the flourishing
of teachers, but also pupils and communities.

Keywords Flourishing · Leadership · Love · Teachers · Schools



      Katy Granville-Chapman
      katygc@icloud.com
1
      Department of Education, University of Oxford, 5 Norham Gardens, Oxford OX2 6PY, UK
2
      Institute for Studies of Religion, Baylor University, One Bear Place #97236, Waco, TX
      76798, USA
3
      McCombs School of Business, University of Texas–Austin, 2110 Speedway, Austin,
      TX 78712, USA


                                                                                              13

248                                                 Humanistic Management Journal (2024) 9:247–267


Introduction

This article supports a broader movement which suggests that the primary role of a leader
is to create a loving environment in which their teams and the community can flourish.
This has been termed ‘leadership for flourishing’ (Ritchie-Dunham et al. Forthcoming) and
‘love in action’ (Ritchie-Dunham et al. In Press). Philosophers argue for the intrinsic value
of flourishing (Aristotle 2009; Brighouse 2006; Kristjánsson 2013; Macintyre and Dunne
2002). We could argue that its intrinsic value is enough justification for flourishing being the
primary aim of leadership, especially in light of data showing that millions of people around
the world are not thriving or flourishing at work, and also due to the fact that many posi-
tive outliers exist across all cultures that have been studied (Clifton 2022; Ritchie-Dunham
2024). We posit that leadership makes a critical difference and that leadership for flourish-
ing in the education sector might offer useful lessons for all sectors, partly because teachers
seem to be lagging other professions on important well-being outcomes. If some progress
has been made in leading teachers towards greater flourishing, as our study suggests, then
there is hope for other sectors as well. Furthermore, over the past decade the significance
of flourishing has also been increasingly acknowledged by researchers, health practitio-
ners, and the general public (Su et al. 2014; Levin 2020, 2021). In addition to being an end
in itself, cross-sectional, longitudinal and experimental studies have also shown that high
levels of flourishing are associated with a variety of positive outcomes, such as: effective
learning (Lindorff 2020); productivity and creativity (Huppert 2009); good relationships
(Diener et al. 2010); pro-social behaviour (Lyubomirsky et al. 2005); and good health and
life expectancy (Chida and Steptoe 2008).
    This project focuses on education as a case study in order to discover how school lead-
ers could improve the flourishing both of teachers and leaders. It argues that school leaders
have the opportunity to influence the flourishing of teachers, and that this is a worthy goal
of school leadership. Whilst there has been a proliferation of research into school leadership
and the development of school leaders over the past twenty years, there is a prominent gap
in the literature concerning how leaders can improve the flourishing of teachers.

Current State of Teacher Flourishing and Impact on Their Students

Teachers are not all flourishing. School teaching is recognized globally as one of the most
stressful jobs (Lhospital and Gregory 2009; Kyriacou 2000). Johnson et al. (2005) in a com-
parison of 26 diverse occupations within the UK found that teachers score below average
on physical health, psychological well-being and job satisfaction. Johnson et al. (2005) also
found that teachers have an increased risk of burnout and a higher prevalence rate of psy-
chosomatic complaints. In addition, the number of therapeutic treatments of stress-related
disorders, such as depression in teachers is growing (Austin et al. 2005). The COVID-19
pandemic has only exacerbated these concerns with over half of teachers participating in
a YouGov survey reporting that they were experiencing anxiety and nearly a third saying
they felt hopeless (YouGov 2020). Researchers and educators have described the harmful
impact of teacher stress in schools and the damage it creates in both the education system
and society at large (Carlyle and Woods 2002). Furthermore, it is argued that teachers can-
not transmit emotional and social competence and well-being effectively to their students if
their own emotional and social needs are not met (Weare and Gray 2003).


13

Humanistic Management Journal (2024) 9:247–267                                            249


   Teaching is considered to be a key contributor to a flourishing society (Arthur et al.
2015). Teachers will work with several hundred, if not thousands, of students over their
careers, influencing the lives of those students and indirectly impacting the lives of those
connected to their pupils. This project begins with the premise that, if school leaders can
enhance teachers’ flourishing, then this will also have a positive impact on the students they
work with, as well as on the teachers themselves.
   The primary aim of the analysis of these data was to identify trends that could be easily
understood and potentially applied by school leaders and teachers in their contexts, and with
broader relevance to leaders outside of the education sector. This was done through calculat-
ing and comparing percentages across the items and 5 ratings options. Participants were also
asked how important they perceived each dimension was to their flourishing.

The Relevance of a Focus on School Leaders to Teacher Flourishing

Whilst there is very limited research into the impact of school leaders on teacher flourish-
ing, there is evidence to suggest that leaders across sectors can influence the flourishing of
those they lead. For example, Kuoppala et al. (2008) conducted a systematic review and a
meta-analysis of 109 articles and presented results from 27 papers from Europe, the USA,
Australasia, Asia and Africa. They conclude that good leadership seems to improve flour-
ishing at work. Kuoppala et al. (2008), however, call for more well-founded, rigorous pro-
spective studies to strengthen and clarify the evidence concerning the relationship between
leadership and employees’ flourishing at work. This project hopes to contribute to reducing
this gap in the literature in one sector, in the hope that our process and findings might be
replicated in other sectors.
    This project drew upon work from positive psychology: the scientific study of ordi-
nary human strengths and what goes well in life. Positive psychology research focuses on
learning what the nature is of the effectively functioning individual or organization, which
successfully adapts and learns (Peterson 2006; Sheldon and King 2001). From the posi-
tive psychology movement, three other particularly relevant fields for this research have
emerged: humanistic management; positive education; and positive organizational schol-
arship (including positive leadership). The project also drew from, and hoped to contrib-
ute to, the educational leadership literature and the general leadership literature; both of
which implicitly consider flourishing, but rarely consider explicitly the role of leadership
in flourishing.

Defining Key Terms

Flourishing in this project was defined using participants’ understanding of the term, which
was put forward in the initial pilot focus group and resonates with but simplifies many of
the definitions of flourishing in the literature: ‘being at your best’ (for example, Vander-
Weele 2017; Fox 2013; Butler and Kern 2016). Flourishing is, however, recognized as a
multi-dimensional construct and this project focuses on teachers’ work-lives. This proj-
ect focused on exploring where and how leaders can improve the following dimensions
of teacher flourishing in their work contexts: relationships; subjective wellbeing (SWB);
engagement; meaning; mastery; autonomy; and optimism, drawing upon Su et al. (2014)
model of psychological wellbeing and associated Comprehensive Inventory of Thriving.


                                                                                  13

250                                                 Humanistic Management Journal (2024) 9:247–267


These domains can be expanded to encompass Ecosystem-Wide Flourishing (Ritchie-Dun-
ham et al. In Press), but it is helpful to begin the exploration of flourishing with a less com-
prehensive and more manageable set of domains (Lee and Wellinghoff In Press). A school
leader, within this project, was anyone working in a school with a named, formal leadership
position and with responsibility for one or more members of staff. This definition included
middle leaders (such as heads of department and heads of year); senior leaders (including
deputy heads and assistant heads); head teachers; and executive head teachers. It was shown
in this research project, however, that teaching staff, whatever their position or role could
have an impact on others’ flourishing; any member of staff could improve their own and oth-
ers’ flourishing if given the opportunity and support. Teachers were defined as any member
of staff with a teaching role.
    In an educational setting, the desire to promote flourishing—and the ability to actually
do this with effectiveness and practical wisdom—transforms education into a love-based
technology of change that can impact population health and wellbeing (see Lee et al. 2021;
Levin 2023; Maparyan 2012). The word ‘love’ will seem out of place to those who have
internalized the many cultural confusions (Reeve 2005) that have obscured the power and
clarity of this greatest of all ideas (and ideals). But love, properly understood, has been
declared the essence of flourishing (Briggs and Reiss 2021) and this idea has guided edu-
cational practice (Lee and Pearson In Press). It involves the recognition that we learn in
relationships, but not just any kind of relationship. As Lee et al. (2021, p. 204) have framed
it, in educational contexts possibilities for “transformation and flourishing are connected to
‘feelings of being loved and loveable,’ on the one hand, and the development of personal
agency in the context of democratic practices.” This requires the creation and regeneration
of a social container that orients human beings toward seeking each other’s greatest good. In
other words: a social space organized by a “logic of love” (Guillén 2021, p. 149).
    In common usage, to love well means to relate to the other in healthy ways and contribute
to the good of the other (VanderWeele 2023; Lee 2022). Self-love would entail relating to
one’s own best possible self and drawing it forth in ways that promote deepest self-flour-
ishing. Some philosophers and theologians (e.g., Aquinas, Frankfurt, Tillich, respectively)
have claimed that “all of our reasons for action are grounded in love,” that love is “the cause
of all the various passions,” that there is “no higher principle” than love (see VanderWeele
2023, p. 50; Lee 2022, p. 11). Indeed, healthy expressions of love are at the heart of a truly
humanistic form of leadership, one that refuses to dehumanize and instead works skilfully
for the flourishing of people and planet (Pirson 2022; Lee 2022; Hummels et al. 2021, 2022;
Guillén 2021; Ritchie-Dunham et al. Forthcoming).

What Does the Leadership Literature Say About Flourishing?

There is scarce research into the influence of school leaders on the flourishing of teach-
ers. Further, there is limited consideration of the influence of leaders on the flourishing of
those they lead in the general leadership literature, with only a small number of studies
focusing on the effect of leadership on flourishing. The literature review examined the most
prevalent models of both school leadership, and general leadership models, and the extent to
which these theories provide information on how leaders applying these models could influ-
ence the flourishing of the teachers they lead. The review considered instructional, student-
centred, distributed, transformational and moral leadership to assess what these theories


13

Humanistic Management Journal (2024) 9:247–267                                            251


of school leadership said about the flourishing of teachers. The review chose to explore
these theories as they are frequently cited in the literature (Gumus et al. 2018) and have
the potential to influence teacher flourishing. It then reviewed theories that reside beyond
the education literature and their potential implications for teacher flourishing, focusing on
what responsible leadership (Maak and Pless 2006; Waldman and Galvin 2008), humanistic
management (Arnaud and Wasieleski 2014; Melé 2016), servant (Greenleaf 2002; Farling
et al. 1999), positive (Cameron 2012), and authentic leadership (Avolio and Gardner 2005)
and followership theories (Shamir 2007) said about flourishing.
   The school leadership literature presented several theories of leadership that have the
potential to influence the flourishing of teachers indirectly; none of the theories reviewed,
however, included the flourishing of teachers as a stated aim. The theories also did not
include the dimensions of flourishing that this project focuses on as defined outcomes of
the leadership models (relationships; subjective wellbeing (SWB); engagement; meaning;
mastery; autonomy; and optimism, from Su et al. 2014). Furthermore, research into these
models has focused more on their impact on school performance than on their influence on
human flourishing.
   Within the general leadership literature only humanistic management and positive lead-
ership stated flourishing as an explicit goal. Some aspects included in the general leadership
models and theories reviewed had the potential to improve the flourishing of teaching staff
if applied by school leaders, but within the school leadership literature the mechanisms
for this influence were not explored explicitly. In the leadership literature, the impact of
responsible, servant, authentic and positive leadership, as well as humanistic management
on flourishing was more explicitly reported. The literature review revealed a research gap
in both the school and general leadership literature concerning theories of leadership that
directly address the flourishing of teaching staff.


Methods

This project began with the aim of discovering how school leaders could improve the flour-
ishing of teachers; to do this, data were collected on three research questions:

RQ1. What do teaching staff (including school leaders) understand by the term ‘flourishing
  at work’?
RQ2. What do teaching staff believe school leaders could do to improve their flourishing?
RQ3. What kinds of strategies could school leaders adopt with the intention of improving
  the flourishing of teaching staff?

These questions were answered using a mixed-methods approach with collaborative and
participatory elements.
   Table 1 presents the data sets that were used to answer each of the research questions.
Table 2 shows the data collected during each of the phases of the research.
   RQ1 was answered through the collection of quantitative and qualitative data, which
were used to assess the extent to which various dimensions of flourishing were relevant
to teachers’ and school leaders’ understanding of flourishing. These data were collected
through an online questionnaire, using Likert style ratings, as well as open questions, and


                                                                                  13

252                                                           Humanistic Management Journal (2024) 9:247–267

Table 1 How each data set was           Research questions             Data collected
used to answer the research
                                        1. What do teaching staff      1. Focus group session 1 exploring
questions
                                        (including school leaders)     what participants understood by the
                                        understand by the term         term ‘flourishing’ in their work
                                        ‘flourishing at work’?         2. Online questionnaire: Likert-type
                                                                       rating questions asking the importance
                                                                       of seven dimensions of flourishing
                                        2. What do teaching staff      1. Online questionnaire: open
                                        believe leaders could do to    questions
                                        improve their flourishing?
                                        3. What kinds of strate-       1. Focus groups 2–4 exploring oppor-
                                        gies could school leaders      tunities for interventions to improve
                                        adopt with the intention of    the flourishing of teaching staff
                                        improving the flourishing of   2. Online survey in School 1 plus
                                        teaching staff?                focus groups and individual inter-
                                                                       views in Schools 2 and 3.



Table 2 An overview of data             Phase         Data collected
collection and how methods
                                        Phase 1       Pilot exploratory focus group to design Questionnaire 1
were mixed
                                                      Pilot exploratory focus group to design Questionnaire 2
                                                      Pilot of the online questionnaire
                                        Phase 2       Exploratory online questionnaire. Used for RQ1, RQ2
                                                      and RQ3
                                        Phase 3       Pilot focus group 3 to design focus group questions
                                                      and delivery
                                                      Pilot focus group 4 to design focus group questions
                                                      and delivery
                                        Phase 4       Focus group session 1 (with 3 × schools). Used for
                                                      RQ1 and RQ2
                                                      Focus group session 2 to design intervention. Used for
                                                      RQ3
                                        Phase 5       Implement interventions (in 3 × schools). RQ3
                                                      Focus group session 3 to reflect on progress of inter-
                                                      vention. RQ3
                                                      Survey and interviews about the impact of interven-
                                                      tions in School 1. RQ3
                                        Phase 6       Focus group session 4 (with 3 × schools) to reflect on
                                                      the impact of interventions. RQ3


the first of the series of focus groups with three schools. The online questionnaire was
answered by teaching staff in all roles in 48 state-funded secondary schools, 17 state-funded
primary schools, 8 fee-paying secondary schools and 5 fee-paying primary schools in the
UK. Therefore, a total of 78 UK schools participated. The respondents included 98 teach-
ers with no named leadership responsibilities, 6 head teachers, 70 middle leaders (heads
of department, subject leaders, heads of year or housemasters/mistresses/parents)1 and 20
senior leaders 2. A total of 194 teaching staff participated and the completion rate was 94%,
where the questionnaire was started.

1
    A precise breakdown of the different middle leader roles was not recorded in this project.
2
 All middle and senior leaders were also teaching classes of students. The headteachers were not teaching
lessons.


13

Humanistic Management Journal (2024) 9:247–267                                              253


    The questionnaire drew upon the items included in Su et al.’s (2014) Comprehensive
Inventory of Thriving (CIT), but these were adapted to focus on the impact of leaders on
dimensions of teacher flourishing. Qualitative data were also collected to provide a richer
understanding of the data, as flourishing is such a complex concept and varies significantly
between individuals. Qualitative data were collected through open questions on the online
questionnaire and the first focus group discussions in three UK schools, where participants
were asked to describe their understanding of flourishing in a work context.
    RQ2 also required quantitative and qualitative data (for similar reasons). It was useful for
school leaders and policymakers to be given the trends in people’s answers regarding what
they believed leaders could do to impact their flourishing; richer data was also required,
though, as this question asked what school leaders could do to improve flourishing. Data
were collected for RQ2 in the online questionnaire and first focus group discussions.
    RQ3 aimed to find out what improvements in flourishing could look like in practice in a
school setting, rather than solely in theory. To answer this RQ, participants in the three case
study schools were asked to design and deliver interventions collaboratively to improve the
flourishing of teachers in their schools. This process began in the second focus group where
teachers were asked to consider the questionnaire data and then suggest and decide on two
strategies that their school could adopt to improve the flourishing of teaching staff. The third
focus group was used to allow the groups to reflect on how the intervention was progressing
and whether they wanted to make any changes to the intervention. The final session was an
opportunity to reflect on how effective their strategies had been in improving flourishing in
their schools. Further data were collected through an additional online survey for School 1
and from the WhatsApp group for School 3. They reviewed the impact of these interven-
tions, as well as refining them, halfway through the project; they evaluated their impact in
the final series of focus group discussions.
    A participatory (Bergold and Thomas 2012) and collaborative approach (Hafernik et al.
1997) was therefore introduced at this point. This allowed teaching staff and school leaders
to consider the data collected in RQ1 and RQ2, and then decide what they wanted to try
in their own contexts. This provided the opportunity to explore the leadership processes
and challenges that arose when leaders and teachers worked collaboratively to improve the
flourishing of teaching staff. It also began to bridge a perceived methodological gap between
‘academic’ research and ‘practitioner’ research (Jagosh et al. 2012).
    The research was influenced by pragmatism, specifically Tashakkori and Teddlie’s (2003)
interpretation of pragmatism, which ‘focuses on “what works” as the truth regarding the
research questions under investigation’ (p. 713). It also drew on Dewey’s (1938) ‘problem-
centred pedagogy’ and notion that democracy is about more than just votes; rather, it is the
idea that all societal institutions should aim to promote flourishing: something this project
is trying to grapple with for schools. This research took a virtuous approach to ensure it
was ethical. The research showed respect for participants by enabling them to voice their
thoughts on the quantitative and qualitative data that had been collected, as well as provid-
ing further information on what enabled them to flourish. It also empowered participants to
design interventions that would improve their own and others’ flourishing. The authors have
named this methodology ‘loving collective inquiry’. The participants co-created a loving
environment from which to inquire together about what would most effectively enable the
members of their school community to flourish.




                                                                                    13

254                                                         Humanistic Management Journal (2024) 9:247–267


Results

This section presents the findings to RQ1: What do teaching staff understand by the term
flourishing at work?; RQ2: What do teaching staff believe school leaders could do to
improve their flourishing? and RQ3: What are the impacts of the collaborative creation of
interventions that aim to improve the flourishing of teaching staff?

Results: RQ1: What Do Teaching Staff Understand by the Term ‘Flourishing at Work’?

Su et al.’s (2014) dimensions of psychological wellbeing (relationships; subjective wellbe-
ing (SWB); engagement; meaning; mastery; autonomy; and optimism) were found to be
helpful as a means of organising a multifaceted and complex phenomenon; further, there
was adequate fit with the data to justify their continued use as a means of understanding how
teachers understand flourishing. See (Granville-Chapman 2021) for statistical validation of
the survey instrument. Each of the dimensions of Su et al.’s (2014) model of psychologi-
cal wellbeing was found to be relevant to teachers’ understanding of flourishing, and these
factors were difficult to isolate, with many of the teachers’ responses covering more than
one dimension. The dimensions were also frequently described as overlapping and affecting
one another in the literature (Su et al. 2014). The data also suggest that relationships are
particularly important in teachers’ understanding of flourishing, which serves as a reminder
that love is a key: not just any relationships will suffice. As we will see, relationships that
express and nurture the deepest human needs (Ryan and Deci 2000; see also Waldinger and
Schulz 2023) are required.

Results: RQ2: What Do Teaching Staff Believe School Leaders Could Do to Improve
Their Flourishing?

This RQ aimed to explore what teaching staff believe leaders could do to improve their
flourishing. Data were collected through the online questionnaire’s open questions and the
focus group discussions with the groups from three different UK schools. What had been
shown so far in the project was that relationships in the literature, and in the perception of
participants, were important to people’s understanding of flourishing. Relationships were
also shown to be linked to all the other factors involved in flourishing that had been explored
to this point. The centrality of relationships is not surprising, and it reminds us of the conclu-
sion drawn by the director of the longest longitudinal study of human well-being in history:
“Happiness equals love. Full stop.” (Vaillant, quoted in Shenk 2009). Or as the current study
director put it, “if we had to take all eighty-four years of [the research] and boil it down to
a single principle for living… it would be this: Good relationships keep us healthier and
happier. Period” (Waldinger and Schulz 2023, p. 10). As for RQ1, it was found that there
were many dimensions of flourishing that overlapped, and participants had different percep-
tions of what would most influence the extent to which they were flourishing. The factors
most frequently reported that participants thought leaders could influence to improve their
flourishing were, using their words, rather than Su et al.’s (2014) dimensions, positive rela-
tionships, time/balance, growth,3 and subjective wellbeing.

3
  Participants suggested that the word ‘growth’ was a word that better represented a key factor in their flour-
ishing than ‘mastery’ (which was Su et al.’s 2014; dimension). They said that growth to them meant develop-


13

Humanistic Management Journal (2024) 9:247–267                                                          255


Results: RQ3: What Are the Impacts of the Collaborative Creation of Interventions
that Aim to Improve the Flourishing of Teaching Staff?

Focus groups of teaching staff in three schools reflected on the impact of trial interventions,
approximately halfway through and at the end of the intervention. See (cite dissertation) for
protocol and assessment details. The interventions that schools discussed in depth and/or
implemented were:

School 1 (an independent secondary school in Southeast England): yoga, coaching and fail-
   ure stories.
School 2 (a secondary academy in Southeast England): positive boards in departments,
   discussion of behaviour and email management.
School 3 (a secondary Academy in Southwest England): WhatsApp group and pay it for-
   ward acts of kindness.

Within these, participants reported the generalised positive impacts on their flourishing
shown in Table 3.
   As shown in Table 3, participants reported that the development and formation of posi-
tive relationships (a key ingredient in love) were affected positively in all interventions.
Both a decrease in stress and an increase in positive feelings were also reported for each of
the interventions. Yoga and coaching were reported to have enabled participants to grow.
This mirrored the findings for the earlier questions, whereby positive relationships, SWB
and growth were perceived to be particularly important to participants’ flourishing. Grati-
tude and physical health were also reported benefits of the yoga intervention, with gratitude
also cultivated in the ‘positive boards’ intervention.
   This article proposes that school leadership involves having a positive impact on the
flourishing of others, and that the role of school leaders in promoting the flourishing of
teachers is particularly important. Empirical evidence from surveys, focus groups, and pilot

ment of their whole person, while they thought that mastery was more related to accomplishment in specified
fields.

Table 3 The impacts of the          Intervention                                Impact on factors
interventions on factors most                                                   identified as influencing
frequently identified by teaching                                               teaching staff flourishing
staff as affecting participants’
                                    Yoga                                        Positive relationships
flourishing
                                                                                Growth
                                                                                SWB and optimism
                                                                                Appreciation + gratitude
                                                                                Physical health
                                    Coaching                                    Positive relationships
                                                                                Growth
                                                                                SWB
                                    Positive boards                             Positive relationships
                                                                                SWB
                                                                                Appreciation + gratitude
                                    WhatsApp group                              Positive relationships
                                                                                SWB
                                    Pay it forward kindness acts                Positive relationships
                                                                                SWB


                                                                                              13

256                                                Humanistic Management Journal (2024) 9:247–267


interventions support the impact of this shift in school leadership focus towards leader-
ship for teacher flousing and flourishing-focused interventions. These results suggest that
perhaps the most important method school leaders can utilise to improve the flourishing
of those they lead is through giving their teams the opportunity to co-create and co-lead
interventions to improve their own and others’ flourishing. This has implications for other
sectors and is actually a reasonable shorthand definition of (organising) love. Our project’s
findings suggest that what the interventions are (in this project, yoga, coaching, positive
boards, WhatsApp groups and random kindness acts)—is less significant than the process
of empowering teachers to co-design activities with other teachers that they perceive will
benefit the staff, and then enabling teachers to lead them, evaluate their impact, and suggest
and deploy improvements. The interventions chosen by the teachers in this project were
diverse and targeted different aspects of flourishing. For example, yoga would traditionally
be considered for focusing on improving an individual’s physical health and mental wellbe-
ing; whereas acts of kindness and coaching focus on helping others to flourish. Nonethe-
less, there was overlap in the impact on domains of flourishing that were affected by the
intervention.


Discussion: A New Model of School Leadership: Leadership for Teacher
Flourishing

The overarching aim of this research was to explore how school leaders could improve
the flourishing of teachers, and it led to the proposal of a new model of school leadership,
leadership for teacher flourishing (LFTF), to add to current models of teacher, school, and
educational leadership. The model is summarised in the table below (Table 4).
    Love is implicated in all of these ways. In fact, they can be seen as forms of love in
action. The model focuses on how leaders could improve the flourishing of teachers. It
includes possible actions leaders could take and examples of virtuous dispositions that could
improve the influence of leaders on teacher flourishing. The model also highlights the most
frequently reported dimensions of flourishing that teachers perceived that school leaders
could influence that would have an important impaction on their flourishing. The discussion
elaborates on what the new model (LFTF) may mean in a school context and connects this
project’s findings to other research on the topic. The project also proposes a new dimension
of leadership, which is not included explicitly in other models of school leadership, or in the
school leadership literature: ‘supporting and promoting the flourishing of others.’
    The LFTF model is intended to contribute to filling a gap in the literature concerning
the influence of school leaders on the flourishing of teachers. This model is based on a new
approach that suggests effective school leadership prioritizes the flourishing of teachers;
this, in turn, evidence suggests, improves pupil outcomes (for example, Sammons et al.
2007). LFTF propose that flourishing should be a key focus for leaders because of its intrin-
sic worth (Kristjánsson 2013); and because of its performance benefits (for example, Cam-
eron 2012). This project also found, though, that leadership and having a positive impact on
flourishing was not only possible for someone in a formal leadership role. In fact, it was also
shown that teaching staff at any level of an organization could influence the flourishing of
others; this finding echoed some of the later literature on leadership, which views leadership
as service and impact on others, rather than an allocated role or the achievement of change


13

Humanistic Management Journal (2024) 9:247–267                                                       257

Table 4 Model of school leadership: leadership for teacher flourishing (LFTF)
Preconditions of love in processes of leading and/or      Examples of         Outcomes of the processes
organizing for flourishing                                enabling virtuous of leading and/or organiz-
                                                          dispositions of     ing that express love and
                                                          leaders             result in flourishing
Being supportive and compassionate.                       Supportive, com- Positive relationships
Ask teachers what support and compassion they need        passionate, caring, SWB
and would value. Acting to meet those requests and        loving, selfless
needs, while balancing the needs and interests of all
stakeholders.
Trustworthiness                                           Integrity, compas- Positive relationships
Ask teachers how they could most effectively build trust sion, fairness, gen- SWB
within the team and/or school. Showing integrity, being erosity, gratitude,
compassionate and supportive, empowering teachers         and courage.
Giving autonomy/empowering                                Empower-            Positive relationships
Understand what autonomy the teacher wants in line        ing, trusting,      SWB
with their strengths and capability. Work with teachers   positive, humility, Growth
to maximize autonomy within the constraints of (pos-      understanding       Meaning
sibly externally imposed) accountability measures.
Enabling teacher growth                                   Empowering,         Positive relationships
Ask teachers how they would like to grow and develop trusting, support-       SWB
and help facilitate and support this growth               ive, positive       Growth
                                                                              Meaning
Appreciativeness and focus on strengths                   Gratitude,          Positive relationships
Find out how teachers like to be appreciated and desig- empowering, trust- SWB
nate time and resources to this. Take the time to learn   ing, supportive,
what teachers’ strengths are and recognize and celebrate positive
these
Enabling teachers to focus on meaningful work             Empowering,         Positive relationships
Remove all work that is not directly helping pupils       trusting, sup-      SWB
to achieve their potential. Help teachers to connect to   portive, positive,  Meaning
aspects of their work that are meaningful, for example, understanding,
improving pupil outcomes. Help teachers job craft to      purposeful,
make their work feel more meaningful.                     visionary


or results (for example, Laloux 2014). The model has particular congruence with models of
responsible, servant and positive leadership, but takes each of these models further with its
inclusion of specific actions and dispositions that emerged as being influential in flourishing
(Maak and Pless 2006; Patterson 2003; Cameron 2012). Responsible, servant and positive
leadership have also all been shown to have positive impacts on follower flourishing (Maak
and Pless 2006; Patterson 2003; Cameron 2012).
   The influence of school leaders on flourishing was much less commonly explored in the
school leadership literature, which seems to focus more on the impact of school leaders on
pupil outcomes (attainment) and a focus on strategy and operations rather than on teacher
or, indeed, pupil flourishing (for example, Earley et al. 2012). Harris and Muijs (2002)
observed that, while there is considerable evidence of the positive effects of teacher lead-
ership, there is limited research on the nature of teacher leadership, adding that there is a
need for both empirical evidence of teacher leadership in action and for different models of
teacher leadership. Gumus et al. (2018), also cite this proposal made by Harris and Muijs
(2002) and, following a systematic review of studies on leadership models in educational
research from 1980 to 2014, say that the development of new educational leadership models
can be explained as researchers’ efforts to clarify the definition and practices of effective


                                                                                            13

258                                                 Humanistic Management Journal (2024) 9:247–267


leadership from different perspectives. This project’s proposed new model (LFTF) aims
to add to this understanding through suggesting effective leadership actions and virtuous
leader dispositions for improving the flourishing of teachers.
   The key challenge leaders in all organizations face, however, when organizing for love
and flourishing, is the need to take decisions. The factors included in the model LFTF address
what kind of style of leadership is required. In line with the leadership style that emerges
from these virtuous dispositions, the decision-making itself should ideally reflect balanced
decision-making that weighs all the needs and interests of the stakeholders (pupils, staff,
parents, the wider community). The leadership should also provide adequate and timely
feedback to the stakeholders explaining how their flourishing has been considered; and cre-
ating a responsive and accountable culture: accountability should be focused on the request
for every member of the organization to support and promote each other’s flourishing; the
responsiveness appreciates that what stakeholders need to flourish will change over time.


Virtuous Dispositions and Actions

The main ways identified in this project that leaders could impact flourishing were through:
being supportive and compassionate; being trustworthy; giving autonomy, or empowering
teachers; enabling teachers to grow; being appreciative; and enabling teachers to focus on
meaningful work. For a leader to successfully carry out these actions it is suggested that vir-
tuous dispositions are also required to ensure the leader is consistent in acting in ways that
promote flourishing. The specific virtues a leader needs to influence positively the flourish-
ing of teachers will, however, vary depending on their relationship and the context. Further-
more, a key recognition the LFTF model makes is that, when articulated in words or actions,
virtuousness tends to be interpreted as one or more discrete virtues; the attributing of virtues
to words or actions is arguably, though, a subjective exercise (Newstead et al. 2019). For
example, a school leader acts on good inclination (acts on virtue) and covers a teacher’s les-
son so that they can watch their child’s nursery school play. Some people may consider this
to be indicative of the virtue compassion; while others would say it is self-sacrifice, generos-
ity, or humanity. The model does not, therefore, propose that it is possible to say that certain
virtues are the most important for school leaders since the context will constantly vary and
the articulation of virtues into words or actions is also subjective. It does, however, suggest
virtues that were shown to be likely to predict the leader actions identified by the model that
could be beneficial to teacher flourishing.
    The LFTF model builds upon research into the dispositions of leaders and the impact
of this on flourishing (e.g. Hannah and Avolio 2011). Bair (2017) says that a review of the
literature on dispositions revealed that in spite of a lack of consensus on a precise defini-
tion for the term, researchers predominantly describe dispositions as internal attributes or
psychological characteristics that motivate action, or as a propensity to act in a certain way
that tends to be predictive of future action (Borko et al. 2007). Hollon et al. (2010), however,
describe this as a choice as opposed to a tendency: ‘the choice to act or react in charac-
teristic ways in certain situations’ (p. 123). Furthermore, Sockett (2009) claims that while
dispositions are related to action, they only predict acts, rather than causing them.
    For the model LFTF, dispositions are defined in a similar way to Hollon et al. (2010) as a
choice to act or react in a characteristic way, thus highlighting the agency of school leaders


13

Humanistic Management Journal (2024) 9:247–267                                              259


to choose to act virtuously. Furthermore, this paper agrees with Diez (2006) who says that
a disposition is the regular expression of attitudes in stable behavioural patterns. This thesis
proposes that the choice to act virtuously in a consistent manner is related to school leaders’
attitudes; thus, if a school leader has a compassionate attitude, they are then likely to choose
to act compassionately. For this to be a disposition, the leader would act compassionately
consistently. The model, LFTF, uses the term disposition, but with the appreciation that for
a school leader to habitually act virtuously could be even more effective in promoting flour-
ishing since some scholars argue that habits can be performed without conscious attention,
whereas dispositions are intentional and voluntary (Bair 2017). A virtuous habit such as
compassion could be less effortful than merely a compassionate disposition for a stretched
and stressed school leader.
    Villegas (2007) argues that dispositions also have a social component; she proposes that
they are the tendency to act in a certain way, under particular circumstances and are strength-
ened or weakened through experiences with others. Thus, reinforcing the idea that disposi-
tions are not static traits; they are likely to develop as people encounter experiences and
opportunities (Feiman-Nemser and Schussler 2010). This suggests that the dispositions of
leaders are influenced, and influence, the dispositions of others, implying that relationships
and cultural factors are important in the development of dispositions. While this paper does
not focus on the cultural influences within schools on teacher flourishing, as it concentrates
on the direct influence of individual leaders (whether or not in a named role) on teachers, it
does recognize the importance of a loving culture and environment on the development of
character and, therefore, flourishing. This is an area recommended for future study.
    In the review of the literature, it was found that a variety of virtues were mentioned in
relation to the moral component of several leadership theories, including moral and ethi-
cal, responsible, servant, transformational, and positive leadership, as well as humanistic
management. This paper builds upon Cameron and Caza’s (2003) work which says that
virtuousness goes beyond concepts such as ethics or moral reasoning: ethics and moral rea-
soning focus on what is sufficient, necessary or instrumental; whereas, virtue goes beyond
this and focuses on the highest human potential, or flourishing. Enabling teachers to reach
their highest human potential is a worthy goal of school leaders and this thesis proposes
that the virtuous dispositions in the model LFTF go some way towards enabling this goal.
    The discussion will now consider in more detail each of the ways included in the model
LFTF that leaders could improve the flourishing of teachers, drawing upon the main lessons
learnt from the data collected for each of the three research questions and the literature.


The Proposed Model, ‘LFTF’, in Practice

For the model to work in practice it is suggested that the first thing a leader must do is gain
an excellent understanding of the teachers, or people they lead. The leader needs to gain a
full appreciation of how teachers want to be supported and to have compassion shown to
them. As was seen from the diversity of responses coded into this category, individuals vary
significantly in their preferences around how a leader could show support and compassion
to them to enable them to flourish. Also of note, empowering teachers and giving them
autonomy were other factors identified by teachers and leaders as being important for them
to flourish: how much autonomy and how this autonomy is given, as well as how much


                                                                                    13

260                                                 Humanistic Management Journal (2024) 9:247–267


support is needed also varies between individuals. This paper, therefore, recommends that
a leader asks teachers directly how they can best support them, show them compassion,
empower them, and give them autonomy; then act on the teacher’s requests, where this is
possible, given the demands on leaders to balance a range of stakeholders’ needs. Where it
is not possible to meet a teacher’s needs, a leader will explain the reason for this; this will
perhaps be the most challenging aspect of leadership for someone who wishes to support
and promote flourishing and to create a loving environment. Equally, literature suggests that
there are important differences between individuals’ strengths; what one teacher is particu-
larly strong in, is unlikely to be the same as another teacher’s forte. An individual’s strengths
can also vary across time and context. To promote teacher flourishing, and therefore per-
formance, a school leader needs to know what a teacher’s strengths are (and continue to
improve their understanding of this throughout their leadership) in order to focus on those
and allow teachers to do work that uses those strengths (Peterson and Seligman 2004).
Guessing or generalising is not likely to be effective in enabling teachers to flourish. This,
the data showed, is true also of how teachers want to grow and develop, as well as how
teachers wish to be shown appreciation and gratitude.
    Furthermore, to enable teachers to focus on meaningful work, a leader needs to know
what individual teachers value. Asking them directly what they value or working with
teacher to uncover their values and purpose through coaching, was shown by this project to
be effective in enhancing teachers’ sense of meaning at work. It is, therefore, suggested, that
the key method a leader can translate the LFTF theory to practice is to get to know those
they lead extremely well. As mentioned above, coaching is a good method for this, but
questions directed towards enhancing a leader’s knowledge of each of the areas mentioned
above are also necessary.
    This proposal reflects the core philosophy of a book a colleague and one of the article’s
published which can be summarised as ‘know your people; love your people; inspire your
people’ (Granville-Chapman and Bidston 2020). In the book, we argue that only by knowing
your people can you show them love; and only once you know your people and have shown
them love can you inspire them through enabling them to connect to and be active in areas
that are meaningful to them. The book draws upon the business literature and interviews
with leaders from a range of professions including (amongst others) the law, sport, the char-
ity sector, technology, politics, health, and the military.
    This paper argues that the application of the model LFTF by school leaders, particularly
through finding out the extent to which they are exhibiting virtuous dispositions that are
relevant to the needs of the individual teachers they lead, would have a positive impact on
the flourishing of teachers and, therefore, also pupils. How school leaders develop such vir-
tuous dispositions is beyond the scope of this paper, but the authors are co-leading a project
‘leadership for flourishing’, which hopes to begin to answer this. Having considered the
application of the model in practice, this article will now consider the strengths and limita-
tions of the project.




13

Humanistic Management Journal (2024) 9:247–267                                               261


Strengths and Limitations

The use of mixed methods, whilst it had its limitations, was an appropriate way of accessing
two complex concepts: flourishing and leadership. It was beneficial to collect both quantita-
tive and qualitative data. The quantitative data highlighted general trends which could be
used by school leaders and policy makers; it identified trends in participants’ understand-
ing of the term flourishing in their work contexts and in what teachers believed school
leaders could do to improve the extent to which they flourished in their school roles. The
quantitative data was also used by participants in the collaborative phases of the research
and enhanced their understanding of what other teachers’ perceptions were. The use of par-
ticipatory and collaborative research was appropriate for the aims of the project and it was
beneficial to involve teaching staff throughout the project to improve the relevance of its
design and their engagement with the research. This also bridged a perceived gap between
research and practice, and empowered teachers to design interventions to improve flourish-
ing that were relevant to their schools’ contexts.
    The online survey provided a broader and larger sample than could have been achieved
through focus groups and interviews alone; teachers from 78 schools in the UK in a range
of roles completed the survey. The sample for the online questionnaire was not, however, as
representative as it could have been for UK schools as the sampling was purposive and then
utilised snowball sampling to increase the number of respondents. It is likely that respon-
dents were interested in the topic and, therefore, not wholly representative of teachers in the
UK. It would also have been better to have collected a higher number of responses and to
have ensured that within each school that responded, teachers in a representative range of
roles were included. The size and nature of the sample mean that any generalisation of the
findings to other contexts should be approached with caution.
    The qualitative data collection methods were helpful for gaining richer data about a com-
plex multidimensional concept, flourishing. They also enabled a more in-depth reflection on
the creation of interventions by participants. The qualitative methods could, however, have
been enhanced by using more individual interviews to gain a deeper understanding of what
individual teachers and school leaders understood by flourishing and what leaders’ impacts
could be on flourishing. The selection of the schools involved in the participatory phase
of the project was dictated primarily by access, so the schools were within one and a half
hour’s drive of the school I work in, and they were schools that I had worked with through
our Teaching Schools Partnership. Although the Teaching School does not dictate leadership
policy or culture within the member schools, there is some shared understanding between
the schools of leadership as all members have sent at least one teacher on a leadership pro-
gramme that I have run. The three schools are also located in semi-rural areas in the South
East of England. It would have been interesting to have included cases from very different
contexts, such as schools which are part of a large academy group, or those in an inner-city
location. As data on teacher wellbeing increases in its availability, it could also be beneficial
to carry out purposive sampling to include schools with varying levels of staff flourishing.
    The methods of analysis could have been enhanced by using a team of researchers to
check the data and spending more time with participants exploring with them the extent to
which the findings and conclusions reported were congruent with what they were intending
to contribute to the research.




                                                                                     13

262                                                Humanistic Management Journal (2024) 9:247–267


Contributions to the Literature

The model proposed by this project contributes to the school leadership, and general lead-
ership literature. The model focuses on the dispositions of leaders and the actions leaders
could take to improve teacher flourishing, whilst acknowledging that those dispositions and
actions, when enacted by someone not in a named, formal leadership role are also likely to
improve the flourishing of those they have a relationship with (as was shown to be the case
in the collaborative and participatory phase of the research). The model resonates particu-
larly with models of servant and positive leadership but takes these further with its inclusion
of specific dispositions that emerged as being influential in flourishing (Maak and Pless
2006; Patterson 2003; Cameron 2012). Servant and positive leadership have also all been
shown to have positive impacts on follower flourishing (Maak and Pless 2006; Patterson
2003; Cameron 2012).
    Contributions to the literature also included using an established model of flourishing
and modifying it to focus on the impact of leadership on flourishing in a school setting; Su
et al.’s (2014) Model of Psychological Wellbeing and their associated scale the Comprehen-
sive Inventory of Thriving had not been used in this way before. It provided an instrument
that, when adapted to focus on the impact of leaders on teacher flourishing, was well under-
stood by teachers and shown to be relevant to their contexts. Each of the factors included
in the CIT was perceived to be influential in the extent to which teachers flourished and the
impact of leaders on each dimension could also be measured in the future using this tool.
Further modifications could make the instrument even more useful to exploring the flourish-
ing of teachers in a school context and the impact of school leaders on this.
    The research brought the school leadership, business leadership and flourishing, well-
being, thriving and happiness literature together to contribute to an understanding of an
under-researched area: how school leaders could improve teacher flourishing. This provided
a new understanding of school leadership and its impacts and led to the proposal of a new
model of school leadership: leadership for teacher flourishing (LFTF). Collaborative and
participatory research was combined with the collection of quantitative and qualitative data
from online surveys, focus groups and interviews, which is unusual methodologically but
effective for understanding an under-researched and complex area: the influence of leaders
on teacher flourishing. It was found that the actions, dispositions, and decisions of school
leaders were shown to influence teacher flourishing, and that through working collabora-
tively with staff, school leaders can improve teacher flourishing.


Future Research

A future project could explore the extent to which the model of school leadership proposed
by this thesis is applicable in other schools and in different contexts (business; medicine;
technology, etc.). The project hypothesises that the model, LFTF, would be applicable
because the literature provides evidence to support the leadership behaviours that emerged
in the findings as being influential in follower flourishing, as well as contributing to the
flourishing of the leader themselves. This research is being carried out by members of the
‘Leadership for Flourishing’ group (Ritchie-Dunham 2024), part of the Human Flourish-




13

Humanistic Management Journal (2024) 9:247–267                                                              263


ing Program’s Flourishing Network at the Institute of Quantitative Social Science, Harvard
University.4


Conclusion

This paper proposes the LFTF model for people working in education to use to create a
positive impact on their colleagues’ and, indeed, pupils’ flourishing. The findings from this
project are also, however, relevant well beyond education: the model is founded on the idea
that a leader’s primary role is to create a loving, thriving and flourishing environment for
their teams whatever the context may be (for the business context, see Chapman and Sisodia
2015; Hummels et al. 2021; Lee and Wellinghoff In Press). To do this, it is imperative to
get to know each individual a leader has the privilege of working with extremely well and
then use this understanding to provide them with the best support possible; so that they in
turn can support their teams, and, in the case of teachers, the young people we educate. In
a sense, this involves a new way of organizing in many settings where leadership with love
for flourishing is not normal, although it is encouraging to learn from positive outliers (Lee
and Wellinghoff In Press; Ritchie-Dunham 2024). Our findings suggest that schools—and
potentially all organizations—can become laboratories for flourishing when leaders create
and expand rituals that convey to organizational members that they are supported, appreci-
ated, empowered, and encouraged to grow and find deeper meaning in their work, all in a
context of trust and compassion. Enhancing the flourishing of those in an organisation is not,
however, only the responsibility of those in named leadership positions. Everyone within an
organisation, or community, has the opportunity to improve the flourishing of those around
them. It is hoped that the findings of this research and associated model will be used by
leaders, educators, researchers, and policy makers to make a real and lasting impact on the
flourishing of those they are fortunate enough to work alongside and to educate.

Declarations

Ethical Approval This research adhered to Ethical Guidelines for Educational Research (BERA, 2011, 2018)
and obtained ethical approval from the University of Oxford's Central University Research Ethics Committee
(CUREC) to CUREC 1. The authors also certify that the study was performed in accordance with the ethical
standards as laid down in the 1964 Declaration of Helsinki and its later amendments or comparable ethical
standards.

Consent to Participate Informed consent was obtained from all individual participants included in the study.

Competing Interests No competing interests are at stake and there is no conflict of interest with other people
or organizations that inappropriately influenced or biased the paper or could do so in the future.

Disclosure Matthew Lee received support from grant #62,731 from the John Templeton Foundation (“The
Construct and Assessment of Interpersonal Love,” funded from 2022 to 2025).

Data Availability Data on which this article is based can be obtained from the authors upon request.

4
 As training was a recommendation that emerged from the exploration of what support school leaders need
to enable those they lead to flourish, two of the authors also co-created an online, freely available leadership
programme (with Granville-Chapman et al. 2020) which trains school leaders (and people in other sectors) in
‘leading and flourishing in difficult times’.


                                                                                                  13

264                                                         Humanistic Management Journal (2024) 9:247–267

Open Access This article is licensed under a Creative Commons Attribution 4.0 International License,
which permits use, sharing, adaptation, distribution and reproduction in any medium or format, as long as
you give appropriate credit to the original author(s) and the source, provide a link to the Creative Commons
licence, and indicate if changes were made. The images or other third party material in this article are
included in the article’s Creative Commons licence, unless indicated otherwise in a credit line to the material.
If material is not included in the article’s Creative Commons licence and your intended use is not permitted
by statutory regulation or exceeds the permitted use, you will need to obtain permission directly from the
copyright holder. To view a copy of this licence, visit http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/.



References
Arnaud, S., and D. Wasieleski. 2014. Corporate humanistic responsibility: social performance through man-
      agerial discretion of the HRM. Journal of Business Ethics 120(3): 83–334. https://doi.org/10.1007/
      s10551-013-1652-z.
Aristotle, Ross, W.D., & Brown, L. (2009). The Nicomachean ethics. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
      https://doi.org/10.1093/actrade/9780199213610.book.1
Arthur, J., K. Kristjánsson, S. Cooke, E. Brown, and D. Carr. 2015. The good teacher: understanding virtues
      in practice: research report. Retrieved from http://epapers.bham.ac.uk/1970/1/The_Good_Teacher_
      Understanding_Virtues_in_Practice.pdf. Accessed 5 September 2023.
Austin, V., S. Shah, and S. Muncer. 2005. Teacher stress and coping strategies used to reduce stress. Occupa-
      tional Therapy International 12(2): 63–80. https://doi.org/10.1002/oti.16.
Avolio, B. J., and W. L. Gardner. 2005. Authentic leadership development: getting to the roots of positive
      forms of leadership. Leadership Quarterly 16: 315–338. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.leaqua.2005.03.001.
Bair, M. A. 2017. Identifying dispositions that Matter: reaching for Consensus using a Delphi Study. The
      Teacher Educator 523: 222–234. https://doi.org/10.1080/08878730.2017.1315475.
Bergold, J., and S. Thomas. 2012. Participatory research methods: A methodological approach in motion.
      Forum: Qualitative Social Research 13(1). Retrieved from https://www.jstor.org/stable/41756482.
      Accessed 21 August 2023.
Borko, H., D. Liston, and J. Whitcomb. 2007. Apples and fishes. The debate over dispositions in teacher
      education. Journal of Teacher Education 58(5): 359–366. https://doi.org/10.1177/0022487107309977.
Briggs, A., and M. J. Reiss. 2021. Human flourishing: scientific insight and spiritual wisdom in uncertain
      times. Oxford.
Brighouse, H. 2006. On education. London: Routledge.
Butler, J., and M. L. Kern. 2016. The PERMA-Profiler: a brief multidimensional measure of flourishing.
      International Journal of Wellbeing 6(3): 1–48. https://doi.org/10.5502/ijw.v6i3.526.
Cameron, K. S. 2012. Positive leadership. Strategies for extraordinary performance. San Francisco, CA:
      Berret-Koehler Publishing.
Cameron, K. S., and A. Caza. 2003. Organizational and leadership virtues and the role of forgiveness. Journal
      of Leadership & Organizational Studies 9(1): 33–48. https://doi.org/10.1177/107179190200900.
Carlyle, D., and P. Woods. 2002. The emotions of teacher stress. Stoke-on-Trent: Trentham Books.
Chapman, B., and R. Sisodia. 2015. Everybody matters: the extraordinary power of caring for your people
      like family. New York: Penguin.
Chida, Y., and A. Steptoe. 2008. Positive psychological well-being and mortality: a quantitative review
      of prospective observational studies. Psychosomatic Medicine 70: 741–756. https://doi.org/10.1097/
      PSY.0b013e31818105ba.
Clifton, J. 2022. Blind spot: the global rise of unhappiness and how leaders missed it. Gallup.
Department for Education. 2022. National professional qualifications (NPQs) reforms. https://www.gov.
      uk/government/publications/national-professional-qualifications-npqs-reforms/national-professional-
      qualifications-npqs-reforms. Accessed 30 August 2023.
Dewey, J. 1938. Experience & education. New York, NY: Kappa Delta Pi.
Diener, E., J. F. Helliwell, and D. Kahneman. eds. 2010. International differences in well-being. New York:
      Oxford University Press.
Diez, M. 2006. Assessing dispositions: five principles to guide practice. In Teacher dispositions: building
      a teacher education framework of moral standards, ed. H. Sockett. 49–68. Washington, DC: AACTE.
Earley, P., R. Higham, R. Allen, T. Allen, J. Howson, R. Nelson, S. Rawar, S. Lynch, L. Morton, P. Mehta, and
      D. Sims. 2012. Review of the school leadership landscape. Nottingham: National College for School
      Leadership.




13

Humanistic Management Journal (2024) 9:247–267                                                           265

Farling, M. L., A. G. Stone, and B. E. Winston. 1999. Servant leadership: setting the stage for empirical
     research. The Journal of Leadership Studies 6: 49–72. https://doi.org/10.1177/10717919990060010.
Feiman-Nemser, S., and D. Schussler. 2010. Defining, developing, and assessing dispositions: a cross-case
     analysis. In Teaching as a moral practice. Defining, developing, and assessing professional disposi-
     tions in teacher education, eds. P. C. Murrell Jr., M. E. Diez, S. Feiman-Nemser, and D. L. Schussler.
     177–201. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press.
Fox, E. 2013. Rainy Brain sunny brain. The New Science of Optimism and Pessimism. London: William
     Hienemann.
Granville-Chapman, K. 2021. How Could School Leaders Improve the Flourishing of Teaching Staff? DPhil
     (PhD) Thesis, University of Oxford. ProQuest Dissertations Publishing.
Granville-Chapman, K., and E. Bidston. 2020. Leader: Know, love and inspire your people. Carmarthanshire:
     Crownhouse Publishing.
Granville-Chapman, K., M. Lee, E. Brooks, and E. Bidston. 2020. Leading and Flourishing in Difficult Times
     Human Flourishing Program at Harvard University’s Institute for Quantitative Social Sciences and the
     Oxford Character Project. https://leader-know-love-inspire.teachable.com/p/leadership-for-flourishing.
     Accessed 5 April 2022.
Greenleaf, R.K. (2002). Servant leadership: A journey into the nature of legitimate power and greatness.
     New York: Paulist Press https://doi.org/10.33972/ijsl.372
Guillén, M. 2021. Motivation in Organisations: searching for a meaningful work-life balance. Routledge.
Gumus, S., M. S. Bellibas, M. Esen, and E. Gumus. 2018. A systematic review of studies on leadership mod-
     els in educational research from 1980 to 2014. Educational Management Administration & Leadership
     46(1): 25–48. https://doi.org/10.1177/1741143216659296.
Hafernik, J. J., D. S. Messerschmitt, and S. Vandrick. 1997. Collaborative research: why and how? Educa-
     tional Researcher 26(9): 31–35. https://doi.org/10.2307/1176273.
Hannah, S. T., and B. J. Avolio. 2011. The locus of leader character. The Leadership Quarterly 22(5): 979–
     983. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.leaqua.2011.07.016.
Harris, A. R., and D. Muijs. 2002. Teacher Leadership: A Review of Research. National College for School
     Leadership. Available from: www.ncsl.org.uk/researchpublications. Accessed 3 March 2019.
Hollon, R., M. Kolis, S. McIntyre, T. Stephens, and R. Battalio. 2010. Toward a professional consensus
     around dispositions: lessons from practice in teacher education, eds. P. C. Murrell Jr., S. Feiman-
     Nemser, M. E. Diez, and D. L. Schussler. 117–140. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press.
Hummels, H., M. T. Lee, P. Nullens, R. Ruffini, and J. Hancock. 2021. The Future on Love and Business
     Organizing. An agenda for growth and affirmation of people and the Environment (AGAPE). Humanis-
     tic Management Journal 6(3): 329–353. https://doi.org/10.1007/s41463-021-00117-x.
Hummels, H., Y. Bammens, M. van Dijk, and A. van Uden. 2022. Agape in business: policies and actions
     beyond Caritas. In Love and Organization: lessons of Love for Human dignity, Leadership and Motiva-
     tion, ed. M. Pirson. 70–89. Routledge.
Huppert, F. A. 2009. Psychological well-being: evidence regarding its causes and consequences. Applied
     Psychology: Health and Well-being 1: 137–164. https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1758-0854.2009.01008.x.
Jagosh, J., A. Macaulay, P. Pluye, J. Salsberg, P. L. Bush, J. Henderson, E. Sirett, G. Wong, M. Cargo, C.
     Herbert, L. Seifer, Green, and T. Greenhalgh. 2012. Uncovering the benefits of participatory research:
     implications of a realist review for health research and practice. Milbank Quarterly 90(2): 311–346.
     https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1468-0009.2012.00665.x.
Johnson, S., C. Cooper, S. Cartwright, I. Donald, P. Taylor, and C. Millet. 2005. The experience of work-
     related stress across occupations. Journal of Managerial Psychology 20(2): 178–187. https://doi.
     org/10.1108/02683940510579803.
Kristjánsson, K. 2013. Virtues and vices in positive psychology: a philosophical critique. Cambridge: Cam-
     bridge University Press.
Kuoppala, J., A. Lamminpaa, J. Liira, and H. Vainio. 2008. Leadership, Job Well-Being, and Health Effects-
     A Systematic Review and a Meta-analysis. Journal of Occupational & Environmental Medicine 50:
     904–915. https://doi.org/10.1097/JOM.0b013e31817e918d.
Kyriacou, C. 2000. Stress-busting for teachers. Cheltenham: Stanley Thornes.
Laloux, F. 2014. Reinventing organisations. Massachusetts: Nelson Parker.
Lee, M. T. 2022. Love as a foundational principle for humanistic management. In Love and Organization:
     lessons of Love for Human dignity, Leadership, and motivation, ed. M. Pirson. 5–38. Routledge.
Lee, M. T., and W. G. Pearson. Jr. In Press. Love as the essence of flourishing: Educational experiments with
     the subjunctive mood. J. Beal and C. Easton (Eds.). The Future of Education: Reimagining Its Aims and
     Responsibilities. Oxford.
Lee, M. T., and B. Wellinghoff. In Press. Love & flourishing in a business organization: the practical wisdom
     of Barry-Wehmiller, Inc. Humanistic Management Journal.



                                                                                                13

266                                                        Humanistic Management Journal (2024) 9:247–267

Lee, M. T., M. Hartsough, S. Borick, and B. Gathagan. 2021. Open space, transformative education,
     and the pursuit of flourishing. Journal of Transformative Education 19(3): 198–217. https://doi.
     org/10.1177/1541344620978226.
Levin, J. 2020. Human flourishing and population health: meaning, measurement, and implications. Perspec-
     tives in Biology and Medicine 63(3): 401–419.
Levin, J. 2021. Human flourishing: a new concept for preventive medicine. American Journal of Preventive
     Medicine 61(5): 761–764.
Levin, J. 2023. The epidemiology of love: historical perspectives and implications for population-health
     research. The Journal of Positive Psychology 18(1): 34–43.
Lhospital, A. S., and A. Gregory. 2009. Changes in teacher stress through participation in pre-referral inter-
     vention teams. Psychology in the Schools 46: 1098–1112. https://doi.org/10.1002/pits.20455.
Lindorff, A. 2020. The impact of promoting student wellbeing on student academic and non-academic out-
     comes: An analysis of the evidence. Impact Study Report. https://ora.ox.ac.uk/objects/uuid:2b562315-
     8876-4c1f-a173-76a7605ecfed/files/s8s45q940r. Accessed 5 April 2024.
Lyubomirsky, S., K. M. Sheldon, and D. Schkade. 2005. Pursuing happiness: the architecture of sustainable
     change. Review of General Psychology 9: 111–131. https://doi.org/10.1037/1089-2680.9.2.111.
Maak, T., and N. M. Pless. 2006. Responsible leadership. London: Routledge.
MacIntyre, A., and J. Dunne. 2002. Alasdair MacIntyre on education: in dialogue with Joseph Dunne. Jour-
     nal of Philosophy of Education 36(1): 1–19. https://doi.org/10.1111/1467-9752.00256.
Maparyan, L. 2012. The womanist idea. Routledge.
Melé, D. 2016. Understanding humanistic management. Humanist Management Journal 1: 33–55. https://
     doi.org/10.1007/s41463-016-0011-5.
Newstead, T., S. Dawkins, R. Macklin, and A. Martin. 2019. The virtues project: an approach to developing
     good leaders. Journal of Business Ethics 1–18. https://doi.org/10.1007/s10551-019-04163-2.
Patterson, K. 2003. Servant leadership: A theoretical model. Servant Leadership Research Roundtable–
     August 2003. https://www.regent.edu/acad/global/publications/sl_proceedings/2003/patterson_ser-
     vant_leadership.pdf. Accessed 5 September 2020.
Peterson, C. 2006. A primer in positive psychology. New York, NY: Oxford University Press.
Peterson, C., and M. E. Seligman. 2004. Character strengths and virtues: a handbook and classification.
     New York, NY: Oxford University Press.
Pirson, M. ed. 2022. Love and Organization: lessons of Love for Human dignity, Leadership and Motivation.
     Routledge.
Reeve, C. D. C. 2005. Love’s Confusions. Harvard.
Ritchie-Dunham, J. L. ed. 2024. 2023 World agreements for ecosystem-wide Flourishing Report. Institute for
     Strategic Clarity. https://isclarity.org/pages/research.
Ritchie-Dunham, J., K. Granville-Chapman, and M. T. Lee. eds. Forthcoming. Leadership for Flourishing.
     Oxford.
Ritchie-Dunham, J. L., S. C. Jones, J. Flett, K. Granville-Chapman, A. Pettey, H. Vossler, T. J. VanderWeele,
     and M. T. Lee. In Press. Love in action: Agreements in a large microfinance bank that scale ecosystem-
     wide flourishing, organizational impact, and total value generated. Humanistic Management Journal.
Ryan, R. M., and E. L. Deci. 2000. Self-determination theory and the facilitation of intrinsic moti-
     vation, social development, and well-being. American Psychologist 55(1): 68–78. https://doi.
     org/10.1037/0003-066X.55.1.68.
Sammons, P., C. Day, A. Kington, Q. Gu, G. Stobart, and R. Smees. 2007. Exploring variations in teachers’
     work lives and their effects on pupils: key findings and implications from a longitudinal mixed-method
     study. British Educational Research Journal 33: 681–701. https://doi.org/10.1080/01411920701582264.
Shamir, B. 2007. From passive recipients to active coproducers: followers’ roles in the leadership process.
     In Follower-centered perspectives on leadership: a tribute to the memory of James R. Meindl, eds. B.
     Shamir, R. Pillai, M. C. Bligh, and M. Uhl-Bien. ix–xxxix. Greenwich, CT: Inform. Age.
Sheldon, K. M., and L. King. 2001. Why positive psychology is necessary. American Psychologist 56: 216–
     217. https://doi.org/10.1037/0003-066X.56.3.216.
Shenk, J. W. 2009. What Makes Us Happy? The Atlantic, June 6, https://www.theatlantic.com/magazine/
     archive/2009/06/what-makes-us-happy/307439/.
Sockett, H. 2009. Dispositions as virtues: the complexity of the construct. Journal of Teacher Education
     60(3): 291–303. https://doi.org/10.1177/00224871093351.
Su, R., L. Tay, and E. Diener. 2014. The development and validation of the Comprehensive Inventory of
     Thriving (CIT) and the brief inventory of thriving (BIT). Applied Psychology Health and Well-Being
     6(3): 251–279. https://doi.org/10.1111/aphw.12027.
Tashakkori, A., and C. Teddlie. 2003. Handbook of mixed methods in social & behavioral research. Thou-
     sand Oaks: Sage.



13

Humanistic Management Journal (2024) 9:247–267                                                          267

VanderWeele, T. J. 2017. On the promotion of human flourishing. Proceedings of the National Academy of
     Sciences, U.S.A. 31: 8148–8156. https://doi.org/10.1073/pnas.1702996114.
VanderWeele, T. 2023. On an analytic definition of love. Journal of Ethics and Social Philosophy 25(1):
     105–135. https://doi.org/10.26556/jesp.v25i1.2695.
Villegas, A. 2007. Dispositions in teacher education: a look at social justice. Journal of Teacher Education
     58(5): 370–380. https://doi.org/10.1177/00224871073084.
Waldinger, R., and M. Schulz. 2023. The Good Life: lessons from the World’s Longest Scientific Study of
     Happiness. Simon and Schuster.
Waldman, D., and B. Galvin. 2008. Alternative perspectives of responsible leadership. Organizational
     Dynamics 37(4): 327–341. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.orgdyn.2008.07.001.
Weare, K., and G. Gray. 2003. What works in developing children’s emotional and social competence and
     wellbeing? Department for Education and Skills research report no. 456. London: DfES.
YouGov. 2020. Key worker mental health. May 2020. https://docs.cdn.yougov.com/52k79cfgk4/YouGov%20
     -%20Key%20workers%20mental%20health.pdf. Accessed 5 August 2020.

Publisher’s Note Springer Nature remains neutral with regard to jurisdictional claims in published maps and
institutional affiliations.




                                                                                               13