Edunesia : Jurnal Ilmiah Pendidikan                                                            p-ISSN 2722-5194
 Vol 3 No 1 January 2022                                                                        e-ISSN 2722-7790




                                       Full Day School Management at
                                          SMA As Safi'iyah Medan

                     Ojak Manurung1; Candra Wijaya2; Achmad Zulfikar Siregar3
        1,2,3Department of Education Management, Universitas Islam Negeri Sumatera Utara, Indonesia
              1Corresponding Email: manurungojak34@gmail.com, Phone Number: 0823 xxxx xxxx



Article History:                         Abstract: This study aims to determine Full Day School Management in
Received: Dec 11, 2021                   SMA As Syafi’iyah Medan, Jl. Karya Wisata Ii No.1,Medan Johor, Medan,
Revised: Jan 08, 2022                    North Sumatra Province. This research is a qualitative popoulasi study of
Accepted: Jan 13, 2022                   the Full Day School teacher and management and students of SMA As
Online First: Jan 15, 2022               Syafi’iyah Medan. In an effort to improve student character education in
                                         MAN 2, the terrain model includes stages, namely: planning Full Day
Keywords:                                School learning, implementing Full Day School learning and evaluating
Full Day School,                         Full Day School learning. Learning planning is adapted to the curriculum
School Management,                       adopted by SMA As Syafi’iyah Medan, namely the government
SMA As Safi’iyah.                        curriculum, local curriculum and school curriculum and the formulation
                                         of syllabus and plan for implementing learning. The implementation of
Kata Kunci:                              Full Day School learning consists of habituation activities, exemplary
Full Day School,                         activities, nationalism and patriotism activities and student creativity
Managemen Sekolah,                       activities. Evaluation Full Day School learning in general in Medan Model
SMA As Safi’iyah.                        2 MAN 2 in determining minimal completeness provides an assessment of
                                         three domains, namely cognitive, affective and domain psychomotor.

______________________                   Abstrak: Penelitian ini bertujuan untuk mengetahui Manajemen Full Day
How to cite:                             School di SMA As Syafi’iyah Medan, Jl. Karya Wisata Ii No.1, Kecamatan
Manurung, O., Wijaya, C., &              Medan Johor, Medan, Provinsi Sumatera Utara. Penelitian ini merupakan
Siregar. A.Z. (2022). Full Day           penelitian kualitatif popoulasi penelitian ini adalah guru Full Day School
Management at SMA As
                                         dan manajemen serta siswa-siswi SMA As Syafi’iyah Medan. Sebagai
Safi’iyah Medan. Edunesia: Jurnal
Ilmiah Pendidikan, 3 (1): 89-98.
                                         upaya meningkatkan pendidikan karakter siswa di SMA As Syafi’iyah
                                         Medan meliputi tahapan, yaitu : perencanaan pembelajaran Full Day
This is an open access article under     School, pelaksanaan pembelajaran Full Day School dan evaluasi
the CC-BY-NC-ND license                  pembelajaran Full Day School. Perencanaan pembelajaran disesuaikan
                                         dengan kurikulum yang dianut SMA As Syafi’iyah Medan, yaitu
                                         kurikulum pemerintah, kurikulum local dan kurikulum sekolah dan
                                         penyusunan berupa silabus dan rencana pelaksanaan pembelajaran
                                         (RPP). Pelaksanaan pembelajaran Full Day School terdiri dari kegiatan
                                         pembiasaan, kegiatan keteladanan, kegiatan nasionalisme dan patriotism
                                         serta kegiatan kreatifitas siswa. Evaluasi Pembelajaran Full Day School
                                         secara umum SMA As Syafi’iyah Medan dalam menentukan ketuntasan
                                         minimal memberikan penilaian tiga ranah, yaitu ranah kognitif, ranah
                                         afektif dan ranah psikomotorik




                                                           89

 Manurung, O., Wijaya, C., & Siregar. A.Z.               Educational Research in Indonesia (Edunesia)

                                                                https://doi.org/10.51276/edu.v3i1.216




A. Introduction
        Educational management applied in the internal environment of the school system
is only part of the principal's responsibility as education manager (Khori, 2016). Education
managers (principals, heads of education offices, heads of offices of the ministry of religion)
as modern executives must be able to observe and respond to all challenges posed by the
external environment, both near and far. The immediate external environment is an
environment that has a direct influence on the operations of educational institutions, such
as various potentials and conditions in the field of education that become the concentration
of the school's business itself, competitive situations, educational customer situations, and
graduate users (Umam, 2017; Khori, 2016). All of them affect the determination of strategies
that are expected to support the school in achieving its goals. The distant external
environment is a variety of forces and conditions that arise outside the immediate external
environment, including socio-economic, political, national security, technological
developments, and global challenges (Fahmi, 2019). Indirectly affect the implementation of
the education system in a school. Strategic management is a dynamic process because it
takes place continuously in an organization. In other words, strategic management is
intended so that the organization becomes a unit that is able to display high performance
because a successful organization is an organization whose level of effectiveness and
productivity is getting higher and higher (Widiyanto, 2016).
      Internal and external environmental factors need to be considered, monitored,
assessed, and included in executive decision making (Sari et al, 2017). Decision makers,
including heads and other education managers, are often forced to carry out internal and
external activities of educational institutions in order to serve various interests such as
routine affairs, service, work must always be under the instructions or work guidelines set
by the organization without considering the external needs of the organization concerned.
constantly changing, so that the decision-making process is often not optimal in producing
strategic decisions. The results of the actual problems faced by educational institutions
cannot be resolved optimally (Bahri, 2019).
      The world of Islamic education in Indonesia today is facing various tough challenges.
Among these challenges are globalization in the fields of culture, ethics and morals, as a
result of technological advances (transportation and information), and the low level of social
capital, the low quality of education in Indonesia, and macro-national problems, which
involve multidimensional crises in both the economic and social fields, politics, morals,
culture and so on (Maya, 2017).
      Various ideas and actions have been taken to resolve the various problems and failures
above, such as the actualization of schools, leading Islamic schools, and Islamic education
with an integrated system. The implementation of education with an integrated system has
been running optimally in recent years and is in demand by the public, where this integrated
system requires additional learning time, so it is commonly known as now with the term
model school or Full Day School program, namely full day school.
      At present, new strategies have begun to emerge to answer the problems above, for
example the existence of a local initiative to improve the situation, namely the Full Day
School Program which has been widely implemented by private schools in various cities in
Indonesia (Wicaksnono, 2018). In the end, this school was able to become an elite school or
favorite school with better quality education than public schools.


                                                                                                   90

 Manurung, O., Wijaya, C., & Siregar. A.Z.                 Educational Research in Indonesia (Edunesia)

                                                                  https://doi.org/10.51276/edu.v3i1.216




      In addition, there are indications that the world of Islamic education is experiencing
failure, namely failing to humanize humans, failing to shape humans according to the vision
and mission of their creation. This failure has implications for the materialistic education
process, far from Islamic values and has a weak character (Ismail, 2016).
      Islamic education inevitably has to be involved and play a role in overcoming and
resolving the various challenges and failures mentioned above. It's just that the Islamic
education system first evaluates and then re-actualizes and repositions even in the field of
Islamic education, by synchronizing and collaborating with National Education policies to
free the various challenges and failures above.
      The root of the problem above lies in the materialistic education system coupled with
a capitalistic economy, hedonistic culture, opportunistic politics, and individualistic social
order, all of which are based on secularism, far from religious values. So that there is a need
for repositioning, and re-actualizing the Islamic education system, both paragdimatically,
conceptually and in application (Subaidi, 2014; Primarni, 2016).
      Various ideas and actions have been taken to resolve the various problems and failures
above, such as the realization of schools, leading Islamic schools, and Islamic education with
an integrated system. The implementation of education with an integrated system has been
running optimally in the past few years and is in demand by the community, where this
integrated system requires additional learning time, so it is commonly known today as a
model school or Full Day School program, namely a full day school.
      At present, new strategies have begun to emerge to answer the problems above, for
example the existence of a local initiative to improve the situation, namely the Full Day
School Program which has been widely implemented by private schools in various cities in
Indonesia. In the end, this school was able to become an elite school or favorite school with
better quality education than public schools.
         The Full Day School learning system is one of the creations and innovations of
learning to create a superior, innovative and creative school with an integrated learning
system based on faith and piety, as well as science and technology. The beginning of the
implementation of this learning system is due to the increasing number of single-parents
and the number of parent career activities, as well as the fact that most students spend most
of their free time outside the home and use it for activities that are not useful. This is an
indicator of problems that arise to immediately find alternative solutions. This condition
makes education experts think hard to formulate a new paradigm of education in the context
of optimizing free time with positive activities.
         The Full Day School program has recently begun to grow rapidly in various schools,
and has even become a trend as a quality school. Some schools have actually implemented
this system as it should be. In it, the school equips itself with various facilities and programs
(content) in such a way, so that the atmosphere makes children feel enjoy being at school,
without having to lose time to play. However, there are also schools that only implement
this program as a trend and prestige, moreover they only follow the program launched by
the government, without paying attention to the readiness of the various components in the
school.
         The management of the Full Day School model in the teaching and learning process
in schools is very precise and effective in giving birth to students who have complete
personalities (integrated between general knowledge, Islamic insight and Islamic character),
because children at elementary school age are in the operational-concrete phase and

                                                                                                     91

 Manurung, O., Wijaya, C., & Siregar. A.Z.               Educational Research in Indonesia (Edunesia)

                                                                https://doi.org/10.51276/edu.v3i1.216




operational phase. - formal, there are objective facts that are conducive to educating and
directing their whole personality.
      One of the reasons why parents see the Full Day School program as a new strategy, by
not giving homework to students, because they have been studying from morning to
evening. Along with today's developments, many schools and madrasas are competing to
improve their academic quality due to competitive demands and encouragement from the
government with all their programs and financial assistance. From this factor, there are
several public schools under the Ministry of National Education which have started to climb
up to improve themselves so that they become more qualified than in previous years.
      The integrated education system is run with the integration of several elements,
namely: first, integrating the mode of education in the family and community within the
school environment. The school is designed as a small Islamic environment through a
boarding school program for MTs/MA or Full Day School for MA. Second, integrating the
cognitive, affective and psychomotor domains. Third, integrating general education
(national) with Islamic education. Fourth, combining the classical learning process with the
surrounding environment, both mosques, laboratories, and the like. Fifth, combining the
process of mastering the science of life with tsaqafah Islamiyah and the formation of
syakhsyiyah Islamiyah.
      several elements of the integrated education system above, there are several elements
that have been applied in the education system in Indonesia today. The model school, the
Full Day School program, is more accurately characterized by the first element in the
integrated education system above, although in practice it is still related to several other
elements. So it can be assumed that the expectation of the Full Day School model is the
formation of a complete and integrated personality in students, meaning that there is
integrity between the science of life (general) and tsaqafah Islamiyah and is equipped with
an Islamic personality (character). At least it is hoped that Full Day School can be an
alternative solution in solving various problems, challenges, failures of National Education
and Islamic education in Indonesia today.
        The application of the full day school model in this study was carried out during the
full day teaching and learning process in elementary schools, from 06.45 to 15.00. The
teaching and learning process is a two-way knowledge transfer process. In the teaching and
learning process there are two different activities, namely teacher teaching and student
learning, where these two activities are very different. The existence of a full day school
model provides more time in the teaching and learning process, so that teachers can be more
innovative and creative in teaching, and students also have more time to study, worship and
interact socially in the school environment.

B. Method
      The method used in this research is descriptive qualitative. With the aim of describing
the phenomena that occur in the field as they are, then conclusions are drawn in order to
obtain a theory and are more concerned with the process of results, attempt to describe
systematically, factually and accurately about the facts in an area, the researcher acts as a
key instrument, as well as data collectors. Instruments other than humans can also be used
such as interview guides, observations, and field notes, as well as other tools such as photos,
recordings and documents, but their function is limited to support the research task.


                                                                                                   92

 Manurung, O., Wijaya, C., & Siregar. A.Z.                     Educational Research in Indonesia (Edunesia)

                                                                      https://doi.org/10.51276/edu.v3i1.216




     as an instrument. Therefore, the presence of researchers in the field for qualitative
research is absolutely necessary. Data collection techniques in this study were Quality
Checklist on Full Day School management, student learning interest and teacher creativity
at SMA As Syafi’iyah Medan, observation, interviews, documentation, and triangulation.
Observational data collection techniques were used to find out all Full Day School
management, student learning interests and teacher creativity at SMA As Syafi’iyah Medan.
More clearly the data collection technique is presented in Figure below.

                                                             Quality Checklist


                                                                 Observation
                                                                 on
                       Data collection
                                                                  Interview
                           technique

                                                               Dokumentation


                                                                 triangulation


                                    Figure 1. Data Collection Technique
      Information mining will use data source retrieval techniques in a purposive way,
namely data source retrieval techniques with certain methods. The data sources are
determined by certain methods, one of which is interviews, in this study interviews were
conducted with every teacher in the field of study. In addition to teachers, interviews were
also conducted with students.
      Checking the validity of the data in this study, it was carried out through the credibility
check stage and with the following techniques:

1. Persistent Observation
     In order to understand in-depth symptoms or events, repeated observations are made,
obtain valid data (valid) from data sources by increasing the intensity of meetings with
resource persons who are used as informants, and conducting research in reasonable
conditions and at the right time.

2. triangulation
      Check back the degree of confidence or information obtained by triangulation of
sources and techniques. Triangulation was carried out covering 4 main things, namely data
triangulation, research triangulation, theory triangulation and methodological
triangulation. Through this inspection technique, it is believed that the facts, data and
information can be accounted for and meet the requirements for the validity and reliability
of the data found.


                                                                                                         93

 Manurung, O., Wijaya, C., & Siregar. A.Z.                Educational Research in Indonesia (Edunesia)

                                                                 https://doi.org/10.51276/edu.v3i1.216




3. Member Check
       Peer discussions directly at the time of the interview and indirectly in the form of
delivering a summary of the results of the interviews that have been written by the
researcher. Member Check is the process of checking the data obtained by the researcher to
the data provider, the purpose of this member check is to find out how far the data obtained
is in accordance with what is given by the data provider.

C. Result and Discussion
Full Day School Management at SMA As Syafi'iyah Medan
      Based on the results of observations and interviews with principals, homeroom
teachers, students and guardians of students that the author conducted at SMA As Syafi'iyah
Medan, it can be seen that the management process for the full day school program as an
effort to improve character education for the 2019/2020 school year includes three stages,
namely: planning full day school learning, implementation of full day school learning, and
evaluation of full day school learning. Meanwhile, to improve the quality of education,
especially by implementing management functions.

Advantages of Full day School
1. Controlled Child Activities
      With the implementation of this system, the child will be in his school environment
longer or always under the supervision of his teacher when carrying out activities, so that
his activities can be more controlled than he is outside school.

2. Habituation of Children in Worship
      As a religious country, of course, many activities are carried out every day as a means
of strengthening their spiritual abilities, especially for Muslim children who can perform the
Zuhur prayer in congregation, even adding tadarus and other religious activities.

3. Language Application
       The longer time at school allows children to apply foreign languages (English,
Arabic, Mandarin. This will really help his future to get along and learn more widely with
international languages.

4. Talent Development
        Every child has their own talents and interests, so it takes the right time and place to
develop them, longer and varied school activities can channel the talents and interests of
these children if they can be facilitated by the school.

5. Group Study
       It often happens that children find it difficult when they have to do a task in groups,
because of the problem of the distance between each house or the lack of means of
transportation, with this system, children will easily gather if they have to be assigned to
group work.

                                                                                                    94

 Manurung, O., Wijaya, C., & Siregar. A.Z.               Educational Research in Indonesia (Edunesia)

                                                                https://doi.org/10.51276/edu.v3i1.216




6. Moral Cultivation
     The moral or moral decline that is happening today can be reduced by learning and
habituation of good morals in schools. But usually hindered by the problem of short time in
school, so this system is deemed appropriate to overcome it.

7. Love the Environment
      The application of love for the environment will be maximized by inviting children to
equally care for and maintain their school environment with several activities that are useful
for environmental sustainability. Every system must have a gap, especially if it is realized
too late and cannot be overcome in the right way. So here are the disadvantages of the
system this is what you might feel.

Disadvantages of Full day School
1. High Stress Level
      Children will feel pressured and stressed because they are at school for too long, this
will happen if the school is not able to provide the right portion of time, when to rest and
when to do activities.

2. Consumption at school
     Longer time certainly requires more consumption, this problem will definitely arise,
especially for children with minimal economics to buy food at school. because the school
does not have the allocation of funds for this problem.

3. Time To Go to School
     In some areas, children travel long distances from home to school and even take
several hours, so this system will be very difficult for them.

4. Costs to be spent
    This system certainly requires more facilities and teaching staff, so of course it costs
money to fulfill it.

5. Lack of Teachers/Teachers
      As it is known that the unequal distribution of teacher allocations is the next problem,
there are many schools that have very few teaching staff, so this system will also not work.

6. Lack of School Facilities
     Let alone for carrying out additional activities such as sports and arts, for classroom
buildings each school often faces problems. Then this system will certainly not work well




                                                                                                   95

 Manurung, O., Wijaya, C., & Siregar. A.Z.               Educational Research in Indonesia (Edunesia)

                                                                https://doi.org/10.51276/edu.v3i1.216




Discussion
Full day School Management
        The final series of important learning systems is the assessment (evaluation) of the
success or failure of an education in achieving its goals, an assessment of the products
produced can be carried out. Learning evaluation is a systematic and continuous process or
activity to collect information about the process and learning outcomes of students in order
to make decisions based on certain criteria and considerations.

Efforts to Improve Student Character Education
         SMA As Syafi’iyah Medan in general in improving the character education of
students in the full day school class by providing continuous guidance to students as an
effort to improve student human resources, and SMA As Syafi’iyah Medan in determining
completeness at least provides an assessment of three domains, namely the domain of
cognitive, affective and psychomotor domains

Efforts to Improve Student Education and Teacher Creativity in Fullday School Learning
       In managing the full day school program, it must have 10 main elements (Goetsch &
Davis, 1994) the components of integrated quality management (MMTP) as follows:

    a. Focus on customer satisfaction, in MMTP both internal and external customers are
       driven. External customers determine the quality of graduates, while internal
       customers determine the quality, processes and environment associated with
       graduates.

    b. Obsession with quality, in organizations that implement MMTP customers
       determine quality, with that quality the organization must be obsessed with fulfilling
       what customers want which means that all employees try to carry out every aspect
       of their work.

    c. Scientific approach, this approach is needed, especially for designing work, in the
       decision-making process and problem solving related to the designed work.

    d. Long-term commitment is very much needed in order to make cultural changes so
       that the implementation of MMTP can run well.

    e. Teamwork, the MMTP organization applies teamwork, partnerships are forged and
       fostered, both between school members and outside the school.

    f.   Continuous improvement of the system, the existing system needs to be improved
         continuously so that the quality can increase.

    g. Education and training, is a fundamental factor with the education and training of
       every teacher and administrative staff will improve their technical skills. The essence
       of education and training for teachers is to improve their skills and professionalism.

                                                                                                   96

 Manurung, O., Wijaya, C., & Siregar. A.Z.                Educational Research in Indonesia (Edunesia)

                                                                 https://doi.org/10.51276/edu.v3i1.216




    h. Controlled freedom, involvement and empowerment of teachers and administrative
       staff in decision making and problem solving is very important because it can
       increase the sense of ownership and responsibility for the decisions made, and can
       enrich insight and views in a decision.

    i.   Unity of purpose, so that the MMTP can be implemented properly, the school must
         have a clear unity of purpose.

    j.   The involvement and empowerment of teachers and administrative staff, the
         involvement of teachers and administrative staff is important in the implementation
         of MMTP.

D. Conclusion
        Based on the results of research and data analysis regarding "Management Full Day
School at SMA As Syafi’iyah Medan” The author can conclude as follows;
        Full Day School Management at SMA As Syafi’iyah Medan. As an effort to improve
student character education at SMA As Syafi’iyah Medan includes stages, namely: planning
full day school learning, implementing full day school learning and evaluating full day
school learning. Learning planning is adjusted to the curriculum adopted by SMA As
Syafi’iyah Medan, namely the government curriculum, local curriculum and school
curriculum and preparation in the form of a syllabus and lesson plan. The implementation
of full day school learning consists of habituation activities, exemplary activities,
nationalism and patriotism activities as well as student creativity activities. Evaluation of
full day school learning in general SMA As Syafi’iyah Medan in determining mastery at
least provides an assessment of three domains, namely the cognitive, affective and
psychomotor.
        Efforts to Interest in Student Learning at SMA As Syafi’iyah Medan. By carrying out
all components of integrated education quality management, effective teamwork with the
principle of "teamwork" and effective leadership in accordance with integrated education
quality management. In addition, by maximizing the supporting factors for learning in the
classroom, namely having teachers as professional educators, the availability of teaching
aids or learning media, the availability of adequate facilities and infrastructure and students'
interest in learning.

References
Fahmi, A. (2019). Polarisasi Manajemen Strategik Pendidikan Dalam Implementasi Full Day
    School. Jurnal Visionary: Penelitian dan Pengembangan dibidang Administrasi Pendidikan,
    4(1).

Ismail, I. (2016). Character education based on religious values: an Islamic perspective.
     Ta'dib: Jurnal Pendidikan Islam, 21(1), 41-58.

Khori, A. (2016). Manajemen strategik dan mutu pendidikan Islam. Manageria: Jurnal
     Manajemen Pendidikan Islam, 1(1), 75-99.


                                                                                                    97

 Manurung, O., Wijaya, C., & Siregar. A.Z.               Educational Research in Indonesia (Edunesia)

                                                                https://doi.org/10.51276/edu.v3i1.216




Maya, R. (2017). Analisa Kebijakan Publik Konversi IAIN Menjadi UIN. Edukasi Islami: Jurnal
    Pendidikan Islam, 3(05).

Primarni, A. (2016). Pendidikan holistik: format baru pendidikan Islam membentuk karakter
     paripurna. Al Mawardi Prima.

Sari, W. I., Aliman, A., & Djuwita, P. (2017). Strategi Kepala Sekolah dalam Meningkatkan
      Disiplin Guru. Manajer Pendidikan, 11(3).

Subaidi, S. (2014). Konsep Pendidikan Islam dengan Paradigma Humanis. Tarbawi: Jurnal
     Pendidikan Islam, 11(2).

Umam, M. K. (2017). Analisis Lingkungan Strategik Dalam Corak Penyelenggaraan
   Pendidikan Islam. Al-Hikmah: Jurnal Kependidikan Dan Syariah, 5(1), 1-8.

Wicaksono, A. G. (2018). Fenomena Full Day School dalam Sistem Pendidikan Indonesia.
    Jurnal Komunikasi Pendidikan, 1(1), 10-18.

Widiyanto, M. K. (2016). Strategi rekruitmen dan seleksi sumber daya insani untuk meningkatkan
    produktivitas kinerja karyawan pada KJKS BMT Al-Hikmah Ungaran (Doctoral
    dissertation, UIN Walisongo).




                                                                                                   98