Current Trends in School Management:
     School Leadership in Education 4.0


              Münevver Çetin and İsmail Karsantık




Education is a dynamic and innovative process. Throughout history, it
has been affected by various social and scientific developments and has
been exposed to change and innovation, which have resulted in its present
form. The importance of preparing a training plan for increasing the
effectiveness of educational institutions and of determining the neces-
sary strategies for being able to apply those plans is increasing daily. The
prepared education plans are expected to contribute to the sustainability
of school development. Managing, changing, and improving organiza-
tional conditions; participating in decision making; and learning and
teaching strategies by appropriately evaluating organizational culture are
necessary in this context. Here, the biggest role falls upon school leaders.
Developing vision and mission, preparing and implementing school devel-
opment plans and strategies, improving organizational climate, creating



M. Çetin
Marmara University, Istanbul, Turkey
e-mail: mcetin@marmara.edu.tr
İ. Karsantık (B)
Recep Tayyip Erdogan University, Rize, Turkey
e-mail: ismail.karsantik@erdogan.edu.tr



© The Author(s) 2022                                                    197
Y. Alpaydın and C. Demirli (eds.), Educational Theory
in the 21st Century, Maarif Global Education Series,
https://doi.org/10.1007/978-981-16-9640-4_9

198   M. ÇETIN AND İ. KARSANTIK


communities that feel a sense of belonging to the institution, keeping
communication channels open, increasing and ensuring coordination,
developing critical thinking skills, being innovative, and managing change
most of all can be considered as the competencies expected from school
leaders of the twenty-first century. In today’s world where change happens
quickly, leaders prefer online methods that will facilitate the institution’s
adaptation to the environment more quickly for meeting the changing
needs of society. In this direction, the features of Education 4.0, which has
emerged as the current education paradigm, will bring education systems
closer to the center of life. This center is expected to have school culture
and values that include change in a way that can adapt to society. Educa-
tion 4.0 can be stated to have a structure that supports coordinated work
by replacing the competitive cultural understanding with the collaborative
cultural understanding. Having leaders contribute to the organization’s
adaptation to the use of technology in managerial processes by responding
to global needs is important.

  Historical Process of the Management Concept
As old as human history, the concept of management (Mandell et al.,
1981) emerged with changing perspectives, beliefs, and goals in different
civilizations and different fields (education, public, organization). The
concept of management, having succeeded in making a name for itself
by recognizing the Industrial Revolution, spread rapidly toward the end
of the eighteenth century, especially in Europe. When examining the
developmental process of management theories, they are seen to be
discussed under three headings (Etzioni, 1964): the classical manage-
ment approach, the human relations approach, and the structuralist
approach. While putting forward the scientific management theory based
on organizational efficiency, Taylor (1919) shared his belief that super-
vision activities should be maintained at a high level. Targeting the
maximum production capacity, Taylor stated that workforce losses might
be able to be minimized by following scientific methods. In this respect,
the classical management approach ignores the social and psycholog-
ical dimensions of the organization (Bursalıoğlu, 2010). Therefore, the
educational administrator of today can be stated to have moved away from
classical educational theories, to be sensitive to the social and psycholog-
ical dimensions of the school, and to have roles and responsibilities that

                        CURRENT TRENDS IN SCHOOL MANAGEMENT …         199


enable and direct the development of culture in communication with their
environment.
   Traditional management approaches can be stated to emphasize func-
tionality rather than social perspective. Functional hierarchical manage-
ment has been expressed as the basic management paradigm for nearly
200 years (Jamali, 2005). The classical management system can meet
needs when markets, products, and technologies change slowly (Turner &
Keegan, 1999). Rapid globalization has been one of the most striking
aspects of the new century, especially since the rapid development of
information technology in the last two decades (Brown, 1999). The
weaknesses and limitations of the system have gradually emerged with
globalization and technological innovations. The management paradigm
an administrator adopts is effective in overcoming those limitations. In
cases where administrators adopt the modern management paradigm,
the difficulties and limitations related to adapting to innovations are
considered to be overcome more easily.
   Establishing and developing relationships based on rationality are
important for managing change effectively. The new perspective on
management in the twenty-first century is based on the ability to cope
with constant change, not stability, and is built upon work networks,
changing partnerships, alliances, and technological advantages rather
than hierarchies (Carnall, 2003). The new management paradigm comes
together around teamwork, participation and learning, communication,
integration, cooperation and collaboration with stakeholders and suppliers
through close interaction; it adopts guiding principles that foster a new
understanding with evolving elements such as value creation, quality,
sensitivity, agility, innovation, integration, and team building (Jamali,
2005). New organizations consist of complex networks based on virtual
rather than vertical integration, interdependence instead of independence,
and mass privatization rather than mass production (Greenwald, 2001).
Effectively and efficiently managing those networks is possible in organi-
zations that are constantly changing and opposed to traditional education
and management paradigms.

           Management of Change in Schools
The rapidly changing technological, sociological, and economic environ-
ment creates new challenges for structuring and managing organizations

200   M. ÇETIN AND İ. KARSANTIK


(Jamali, 2005). Those changes can be considered as numerous mani-
festations of a paradigm shift currently occurring in management and
leadership approaches (Luksha & Kinsner, 2020). In this context, institu-
tions operating in the knowledge economy should benefit from increasing
knowledge, technology, and engineering developments as well as new
skills and dynamic competencies (Liyanage & Poon, 2002). As one of
those institutions, schools are open social systems that develop under the
influence of changes in most areas as being the communities of practice
that implement the innovations (Liyanage & Poon, 2002).
   When faced with new problems and new scientific models that force
them to produce solutions, communities of practice need a paradigm
shift (Kuhn, 2012). While the first of the rational or political strate-
gies to manage schools before the 1990s had assumed that schools
would change as a result of exposing educators to new programs or
new teaching methods, the second assumed that teachers and administra-
tors were either unable or unwilling to initiate change (Kowalski, 2000).
This is thought to be the reason why previous innovations had been
unable to radically change education, despite schools being open systems
importing new inputs from other systems for survival (Rodney, 2020).
In this case, the proposed changes are often rejected when they conflict
with the traditional role expectations of educators who resist innova-
tion (Sarason, 1996). When innovations are not adopted by practitioners,
the planned transformation is unrealizable. To prevent this, policies are
needed for explaining innovations to stakeholders and helping them adopt
the innovations.
   The process of managing school change today is quite complex. School
leaders play an important role as they are responsible for the management
and implementation of this complex process. Because managing change
consists of target-setting plans aimed at improving pre-determined stan-
dards, research on education system reforms is stated to have been focused
on short-term planning in the last two decades. However, short-term
planning needs to be incorporated into a longer-term planning frame-
work that supports the strategic development of a school, say a period
of 3–5 years (Davies & Ellison, 2003). When considering the goal to
be achieving school development, educational planning seems to focus
on establishing organizational structures that sustain change in educa-
tion, particularly for improving student learning outcomes while at the
same time contributing to a school’s capacity to manage change (Hoque

                        CURRENT TRENDS IN SCHOOL MANAGEMENT …          201


et al., 2011). Planning and structuring education in the context of inno-
vations is expected to be more effective as long as those focal points are
considered.
    Current thinking about the structuring of innovations is based on the
judgment that schools are complex social institutions and that the restruc-
turing of schools requires a social systems perspective (Chance, 2000).
By adopting new inputs, the educational institution makes innovation
a part of itself (Tyack & Tobin, 1994). Educational communities work
to develop an open climate with policies and structures that support
the participation of community members, educators, students, fami-
lies, and wider community members (Wang & Degol, 2016). Similarly,
making modular technology types that enable all stakeholders to access
learning will be possible if education policies allow such innovations
(Rodney, 2020). In this context, if schools and the environment are to
be improved, they should be considered as complex entities consisting of
interrelated and interacting parts. This point of view reveals the fallacy
of blaming the lack of education on a single factor. More importantly,
reforming education by manipulating only one or two elements of the
system has been demonstrated to be futile (Kowalski, 2000). Reforms
might not be possible to be successful until they start to be consis-
tent with policy arrangements, and social, technological, and economic
realities (Rodney, 2020). In this respect, it might be stated that the
successful realization of reforms depends on the coherence between
policies and realities. Realizing reforms seems more applicable in contem-
porary management paradigms that are open to innovation compared to
traditional management paradigms.

            Current Paradigms in Management
                 and School Leadership
The idea that dominates the traditional paradigm involves increasing
institutional productivity and managing available resources in a static
and stable technological environment (Khalil, 2000). This mechanical
orientation has dominated most institutions in the past and is still
common, especially in developing countries (Jamali, 2005). However,
while the traditional paradigm accepts labor as a concept to be bought,
consumed, and discarded when appropriate, the innovative management
approach requires empowerment, focus on teamwork, careful support for
and effective management of human resources (Jamali, 2005). The last

202   M. ÇETIN AND İ. KARSANTIK


decade has witnessed an important evolution of management paradigms
and approaches all over the world, and a transition has been stated
to occur from a centralized, hierarchy-oriented management paradigm
to a local, distributed, and network-oriented management paradigm
(Luksha & Kinsner, 2020). In this context, school management is
concerned with maintaining school activities, while school leadership also
includes concerns about individual development, shaping of their atti-
tudes and behaviors, and improving school performance (Bush & Glover,
2004). Pont et al. (2008) summarized school leaders’ duties as follows:

  1. Defining learning goals and evaluating student performance by
     setting school goals in accordance with national and international
     standards, using data to measure progress, and making necessary
     interventions to help students reach their potential.
  2. Using resources strategically and harmonizing all activities in the
     school to achieve the goal of excellence in teaching and learning.
  3. Interacting with other stakeholders and communities outside of
     school such as policy makers, universities, communities, and social
     institutions to create value through mutual support.

   School leadership is one of the areas of study addressed in the context
of current paradigms in educational administration. New paradigms and
approaches are stated to support organizational structures with less
management layers compared to rigid, multi-layered, and vertical hier-
archical organizations (Benveniste, 1994). In the age of Industry 4.0 in
particular, changing global conditions such as productivity requirements,
urgent need for continuous learning and advanced digital technologies
require new approaches to educational leadership (Lappalainen, 2015).
Although the need for effective school leadership is widely accepted
within the scope of Education 4.0, which is the reflection of Industry
4.0 on education, uncertainties exist about which leadership behaviors
are likely to produce positive results. In order to eliminate those uncer-
tainties, the necessary leadership competencies should be determined first
(Kin & Kareem, 2019). In this context, determining school leadership
competencies is considered important in terms of how schools adapt to
the age of Education 4.0.

                          CURRENT TRENDS IN SCHOOL MANAGEMENT …            203


   Leadership development research in recent years has been proceeding
toward determining the leadership competencies for achieving organi-
zational goals (Shet et al., 2017). In the most general sense, school
leadership can be stated to be related to strategic leadership in the context
of Education 4.0. The concepts of change and innovation are emphasized
in strategic leadership, and those key concepts are used to ensure the
sustainability of corporate development. The leaders who will provide the
conditions for strengthening communication networks, using technology
effectively, and ensuring knowledge management efficiently are needed
within the context of change and innovation in the field of education
management in Education 4.0.


   New Industry (Industry 4.0) and Education 4.0
Transformations and innovations in various fields from past to present
have also directed the changes in different fields. Industry 4.0 is also
considered one of the transformations currently taking place. It focuses
on developing systems that are compatible with the needs of people
and production through smart technologies based on individualization,
flexibility, localization, resource efficiency, automation, digitalization, and
networking (Lasi et al., 2014). Industry 4.0, which creates a global differ-
ence, brings some difficulties with it. Considering that difficulties such as
digital culture, lack of training, lack of support from other administrators,
undetermined economic benefits of investments in digital technologies,
and high financial investment requirements (Slusarczyk, 2018) affect all
areas of life, those should be carefully examined in terms of the future of
education and training.
   One of the paradigms shaping the future of education is the concept
of Education 4.0, which includes the use of technology in the teaching
and learning process and is inspired by Industry 4.0 (Anggraeni, 2018).
When examining the transformations in industry and education, the
period up to the present can be seen to have been handled through four
different paradigms (Demartini & Benussi, 2017). The Education 1.0
paradigm provides a traditionally explanatory model in which measure-
ment was mainly based on written and verbal evaluations. The Education
2.0 paradigm reveals the importance of projects developed with open-
source software technologies in the context of institutions and classrooms.
In Education 3.0, social networks play a key role in creating a more open
environment where students’ creativity and participation are encouraged

204   M. ÇETIN AND İ. KARSANTIK


outside of course and institutional boundaries. Finally, Education 4.0 is
presented as a rising paradigm and structure in which learning models are
adapted and customized according to learner profiles. In this context, the
Internet of Things (IoT), virtual reality (VR), augmented reality (AR),
and artificial intelligence (AI) are emphasized as the tools that provide
Education 4.0 (Popenici & Kerr, 2017). Among those tools, IoT is one
of the tools through which developing Internet technologies are reflected
onto education in many ways.
   The rapid spread of the Internet in the modern age has enabled the
structures and objects around individuals to use the Internet effectively.
One cannot deny IoT’s functionality in individuals’ lives as it is used
as one of the most important resources of the Industry 4.0 era. Tech-
nology integration in education has opened the doors of Education 4.0,
and Education 4.0 offers some models for how to use IoT. Bagheri and
Movahed (2017) stated that IoT usage in an education-oriented context
will improve students’ health status, classroom access, and teaching-
learning processes. As a result, Education 4.0 as offered by Industry 4.0
ensures that education is maintained in a more open-to-communication,
efficient, and student-centered context.
   In this context, the advantages of Education 4.0 can be defined as
follows (Kassim & Teng, 2018):

  • Education anytime and anywhere: Students can have interactive
    learning environments and tools.
  • Personalized learning: Learning autonomously will improve
    students’ individual learning process.
  • Project-based learning: As most employment focuses on applied
    areas, students are offered learning activities based on projects and
    case studies.
  • Mentoring: Even though the education system is in a virtual envi-
    ronment, the mentor is expected to facilitate the process. Mentoring
    helps students adapt to the system.
  • Learner autonomy: Students are responsible for learning processes.

   Those advantages facilitate the understanding of school leadership
functions in Education 4.0 and shape school leadership practices. School
leadership in Education 4.0 includes the different knowledge, skills, and
practices based on the characteristics of Education 4.0. When considering

                        CURRENT TRENDS IN SCHOOL MANAGEMENT …          205


knowledge, skills, and practices together, the competencies that school
leaders are expected to have become evident.


                   School Leadership in Education 4.0
Pedagogy in Education 4.0 has been developed to respond to the
demands of Industry 4.0 and has given new impetus to the transfor-
mations in education in terms of content, curriculum, and education
management (Kin & Kareem, 2019). This dramatic change has caused
changes in the future of education (Kassim & Teng, 2018). Managing
change involves the competence school leaders have to encourage change,
to enable and support others to change, and to make change sustainable
(Kin & Kareem, 2018). In the context of Education 4.0, school leader-
ship is regarded as a process that takes place within the framework of
technology, communication, cooperation, problem-solving, innovation,
professional development, and school leaders’ competencies.
   The change that first took place with Education 4.0 included directing
education in non-traditional ways with technology-based tools and
resources instead of traditional teaching materials (Tang et al., 2015). As
an example of this, technology leadership competencies and performance
evaluations are able to be done with technology tools (Banoğlu et al.,
2016). In this context, technology is regarded as one of the keywords
emphasized in Education 4.0.
   One of the biggest advantages of Education 4.0 is the ability to realize
effective and fast communication. Communication refers to how school
leaders can effectively advance their vision and beliefs through direc-
tion, words, and actions to achieve school goals (Smith & Riley, 2012).
Traditional management is based on theories from Fayol, Taylor, and
Weber, which are based on stability and therefore tend to determine
central decision-making processes and hierarchical communication chan-
nels (Jamali, 2005). Considering the need to implement quality processes
and improvement in schools, relationships and communication can be
thought of as the basic features in institutions (Jefferson & Anderson,
2017). Communication is also important in making decisions that facil-
itate transformation in schools because decision-making processes have
become more and more interactive (Smoliar & Sprague, 2003). In this
context, four of the conditions that leaders must provide in order to
develop a school environment that facilitates transformations are based

206   M. ÇETIN AND İ. KARSANTIK


on interpersonal relationships. Those conditions are listed as commit-
ment to collaborative planning, student and community involvement in
school policies and decisions, creation of effective coordination strate-
gies, and professional development (Ainscow et al., 2000). Accordingly,
communication can be stated to play a key role in today’s educational
paradigms. Keeping the communication channels open and managing the
communication process transparently facilitate cooperation in education
management and problem-solving.
    Transforming the education system from a system based on facts and
procedures to a system based on cooperation and active problem-solving
is the main feature of Education 4.0 (Kin & Kareem, 2019). Education
4.0 sets a different future level for today’s generation of students. Tech-
nology is changing the production system in human nature. Working in
the virtual environment while collaborating on productivity and devel-
oping new skills are trends in the emerging technological change in the
new era (Kassim & Teng, 2018). School administrators must respond
to those needs with sufficient competencies to be effective leaders who
can bring schools to the frontier of transformation. The task of a school
leader includes setting up systems that increase capacities and forming
collaborations to achieve teaching goals (Ng & Chan, 2014). Mean-
while, those collaborative structures support a school enriched in terms
of learning by affecting performance positively (Fullan, 2010). The new
educational approach provides a school environment where innovations
are encouraged, and students are located at the center of this process.
    Education 4.0 is believed to empower students in terms of innovations;
thus, increasing their success levels and learning outcomes. In addition, as
teachers and other professional staff are at the center of the educational
community, support and professional development for teachers is crucial
in any school development process (Díez et al., 2020). In order to meet
the increasing demands for excellence in education, school administrators
can become effective leaders by systematically and continuously gaining
new knowledge, skills, and abilities through effective professional devel-
opment programs or interventions (Kin & Kareem, 2019). Having leaders
who steer innovation adopt approaches that will keep school stakeholders
and themselves open to continuous improvement is important.
    Certain competencies exist that school leaders are expected to have in
order to achieve school leadership in the context of Education 4.0. Kin
and Kareem (2019) summarized those competencies as follows:

                      CURRENT TRENDS IN SCHOOL MANAGEMENT …           207


• Communication: Communication is the social issue in which real-
  izing differences in understanding among parties is the primary
  priority (Kin & Kareem, 2019). Communication is one of the basic
  building blocks of educational administration in the new paradigm.
• Collaboration: In the contemporary paradigm, education leaders
  assume school development and effectiveness to be more of a collec-
  tive initiative than an individual initiative (Kin & Kareem, 2019). In
  the context of Education 4.0, the school leader is expected to move
  away from being the sole decision maker and to involve others in the
  decision-making process in a way that increases the effectiveness of
  the school (Slater, 2005).
• Critical thinking: Critical thinking is a necessary component of
  school change because school leaders who are powerful critical
  thinkers can see events from different perspectives (Kin & Kareem,
  2019). School leaders who are critical thinkers are needed in the new
  paradigm.
• Creativity and innovation: Creativity is the ability to think differ-
  ently and design new ideas, methods, materials, products, and
  actions; innovation involves the creation of new combinations of
  new knowledge or old insights in order to make a concrete and
  useful contribution to increasing the effectiveness of the school
  (Mainemelis et al., 2015). In the new paradigm, school leaders have
  to be creative and innovative.
• Decision making: In the new paradigm, talented school leaders are
  defined as individuals who can optimize their beliefs, responsibilities,
  and obligations in order to make the right decisions to minimize
  negative consequences (Kin & Kareem, 2018).
• Problem solving: Since the school leaders are the individuals who
  spend a lot of time to solve instructional problems at school and
  whose performance in solving those problems has a visible effect on
  the academic success of students, leaders are assumed to need the
  skills to use certain procedures to help achieve those goals (Kin &
  Kareem, 2018).
• Entrepreneurship: Having school leaders be equipped with the
  competence of entrepreneurship is said to be important as it helps
  them be sensitive to contextual problems (Kin & Kareem, 2018).
• Technology: Although the age of Education 4.0 is all about inte-
  grating digital technology, the main task of school leaders with high

208    M. ÇETIN AND İ. KARSANTIK


Table 1    The features of Education 4.0 and school leadership

The features of education 4.0               School leadership

• Emphasis on a collaborative and           • Creating channels of communication
  problem-solving education system            and interaction with school
                                              stakeholders
• Focus on innovation in developing of      • Developing the capacity to change in
  the education system                        schools
• Benefiting from digital technologies      • Effective use of technology in school
                                              management
• Efficiency and continuous learning        • Creating and developing effective
                                              education communities
• Less bureaucratic processes               • Strengthening school capacity
• Flexibility, education independent from   • Creating rich and interactive learning
  time and space                              environments
• Focus on mentoring                        • Developing an effective mentoring
                                              system in schools
• Personalized education                    • Promoting learner autonomy
• Collective management                     • Ensuring participation in decision
                                              making in schools
• Digital literacy                          • Creating a digitalized schoo culture in
                                              a managerial and pedagogical context



      levels of digital literacy is how to increase the meaningful use of
      technology pedagogically (Kin & Kareem, 2018).

  Based on those explanations, the features of Education 4.0 and the
equivalence of those features in school leadership are summarized in
Table 1.


           Use of Internet-of-Things in Education Management
In the context of digitalization, changing traditional interaction models is
among the main topics of education (Frolova et al., 2020). The Internet
of Things (IoT) technology provides new opportunities and perspec-
tives to education in all aspects. In this context, modern education based
on digital technologies is a process in which not only knowledge and
skills but also self-awareness and personal values are produced (McLay &
Renshaw, 2020). IoT technology shows a radical break in educational
understanding from our past.

                        CURRENT TRENDS IN SCHOOL MANAGEMENT …          209


   IoT technology challenges the universal success models and reveals
new problems and solutions in the field of education as much as it sets
the background for the information technologies and communication
revolutions of the late twentieth century. IoT can provide meaningful
information about how and when students and school staff can access
the school (Rodney, 2020). This customized learning process enables
students to monitor their performance analytically (Kassim & Teng,
2018). IoT can also monitor students’ illnesses, sleep, and general
well-being for school attendance and demonstrate proactive approaches
that can support parents and school staff (Rodney, 2020). Bagheri and
Movahed (2017) stated that IoT technology plays an important role in
the following issues: monitoring the learning ecosystem through wearable
technologies students use; ensuring school security using classroom regis-
tration systems and digital ID cards; monitoring students’ health status
with smart wristbands or watches; contributing to the creation of the most
appropriate physical conditions for learning in the classroom with the help
of sensors and reducing training costs by conserving energy; increasing
comfort in the education process by creating appropriate physical condi-
tions in learning environments; individualized teaching and learning;
increasing student collaboration with mobile devices and virtual learning
environments. IoT is thought to change three basic features in the
current education system: the reduction of control-based hierarchies, the
replacement of financing and standardization-based homeostasis through
efficiency, and the more tightly linking educational purpose with student
learning (Rodney, 2020). The realization of that change can ensure a
quick and effective continuation of the managerial process, emphasize
individual assessment, and structure a student-oriented education system.
   IoT as a concept works in harmony with various technological struc-
tures. Those structures contribute to academic and social planning in
addition to monitoring processes. Technological structures are seen to
have importance in different fields such as data security, information
storage, provision of virtual learning environments, support for individual
learning, creation of new pedagogical paradigms, and rearrangement of
financial strategies. Various examples are found on the use IoT in educa-
tional administration and teaching. Quick Response (QR) codes are one
of the most common examples of IoT usage areas. QR codes which are
known as a two-dimensional barcodes, are the most frequent and afford-
able of identification technologies in the world and can store up to 7,089
characters of information (Budak et al., 2018). Those codes are also useful

210   M. ÇETIN AND İ. KARSANTIK


in associating any resource with an online resource. On the other hand,
its weak data security, degradation caused by harsh environments, and
read-only capability are the main weaknesses of this technology (Budak
et al., 2018). Students can receive academic and social feedback by scan-
ning QR codes with their smartphones (Mershad & Wakim, 2018). Radio
frequency identification (RFID) technology is another widely used area
in IoT. Unlike barcodes that need to be directed toward a scanner to
read, RFID tags can store a larger amount of data that can be quickly
transmitted, rewritten, and encrypted many times in addition to being
readable without line-of-sight requirements as long as they are within the
range of the reader (Budak et al., 2018). Shan et al. (2016) emphasized
RFID technology to have become widespread through mobile tech-
nologies and to contribute to the individualization of learning, based
on students’ position. Virtual reality (VR) is one of the technologies
whose usage rate has increased in today’s educational environments. IoT-
supported VR applications enable lesson simulations and the creation
of interactive learning environments (Mershad & Wakim, 2018). Arti-
ficial intelligence (AI) is the field of computer science that focuses on
the creation of intelligent machines that work and react like humans. AI
can be applied to support and improve learning in the creation of smart
classrooms that take advantage of IoT (Timms, 2016). AI also has the
abilities to learn the aspects and types of interactions as well as peda-
gogically relate them to relevant contexts, to help teachers more clearly,
understand students’ ways of thinking and to be able to easily direct
learning, and to share all the data it collects with relevant stakeholders
(i.e., students, teachers, administrators) so that metacognitive approaches
and possible areas that need to be improved can be deliberated. On the
other hand, blockchain technology is one of the prominent structures
with current educational uses. Blockchain technology is associated with
many stakeholders in the field of education such as students, teachers,
employers, and administrators. Tapscott and Tapscott (2017) stated that
educational institutions can benefit from blockchain technology in the
following areas: (1) ID and student records through secure management
of all data belonging to a student enrolled in a training program; (2) new
pedagogy by managing enrollments and saving data on courses chosen
by students and their learning interactions in order to identify learning
patterns, improve teaching, and reveal new learning models; (3) fees and
rewards for planning financial strategies and rewarding students for their
achievements; and (4) upper education institution model to restructure the

                         CURRENT TRENDS IN SCHOOL MANAGEMENT …          211


educational institution by bringing together the expectations of students
and employers on a common ground. As seen in the relevant examples,
the concept of IoT is used in various ways in educational institutions at
different levels. Integrating technology into education leads to paradigm
shifts in learning and education management. Those changes can be
stated to be effective at improving the education and training process.


                             Conclusion
This chapter which examines current educational management and
cultural trends addresses the competencies of twenty-first-century educa-
tional leaders, the role educational leaders have in cultural orienta-
tions, the differences between traditional management understanding
and current management paradigms, the use of technology and leaders’
managerial processes in educational administration, and IoT usage that
directly and indirectly affect the cultural structure all in the context of
Education 4.0. The focal points of the modern management paradigm
are improving academic performance, adopting a networked management
approach, and designing and adopting innovations and sustainability. The
belief in the traditional management paradigm, which is based on school
productivity and the stable and static use of resources, has been replaced
by microscale development, and school leaders’ emphasis on individual
development and local needs in this context. Considering that schools are
complex social structures, school administrators with traditional roles can
be stated to have difficulty adapting to global conditions. In this context,
initiating change and reducing resistance to change are within the scope of
the roles and responsibilities of school leaders. The formation of a school
culture that can adapt to new inputs and the development of this cultural
structure are also the responsibilities expected from school leaders. Educa-
tion 4.0 can also be said to strengthen the specified innovations and make
management processes more efficient.
    One of the innovations Education 4.0 brings is to adapt IoT to
the educational context. IoT technology can provide instant and multi-
dimensional information flow to students, teachers, parents, and admin-
istrators. While targets are achieved more quickly and effectively in this
context, the use of resources in a school can also be ensured to be kept
to a minimum. IoT usage and communications between stakeholders can
also be said to be more transparent and quicker. Effectively managing

212   M. ÇETIN AND İ. KARSANTIK


communication processes through the use of IoT, which has become one
of the tools of change, will also contribute to sustainable change.
   IoT seems important in adapting developing technology to education.
IoT’s contributions to the management processes and academic success
should not be ignored. IoT is emphasized to contribute to the decrease
in the hierarchical structure in the education system, to increase finan-
cial efficiency, and to increase students’ acquisitions. IoT, which provides
educational leaders with new roles and responsibilities, can also be said
will speed up information processing and communication processes. This
situation gives new perspectives to leaders and stakeholders and clearly
contributes to the production of values and the development of culture.
Suggestions for schools to be able to support new managerial and cultural
trends and adapt more easily to those trends are stated as follows:

  • When examining the relevant research, ensuring participation in
    decision-making in the initiation phase of change is believed to
    increase all stakeholders’ belief in change and their level of adapt-
    ability to change.
  • Considering that change occurs as a result of cultural development
    needs, the change in organizational structure should be handled
    together with the cultural change process. For this reason, having
    cultural development be at the center of the change process can be
    considered as a natural result.
  • In order for schools to cope with the ever-changing realities and
    adapt to the era, it seems important that leaders ensure their personal
    development and keep their knowledge and skills up to date.
  • Including adaptation to change, leadership competencies and skills,
    and cultural change processes in the strategic plans prepared in
    schools are important in terms of ensuring program integrity.



                               References
Ainscow, M., Beresford, J., Harris, A., Hopkins, D., Southworth, G., & West,
   M. (2000). Creating the conditions for school improvement: A handbook of staff
   development activities. Routledge.
Anggraeni, C. W. (2018). Promoting Education 4.0 in English for survival class:
   What are the challenges? Metathesis-Journal of English Language, Literature,
   and Teaching, 2, 12–24.

                            CURRENT TRENDS IN SCHOOL MANAGEMENT …               213


Bagheri, M., & Movahed, S. H. (2017). The effect of internet of things (IoT) on
   education business model. In Proceedings of 12th IEEE conference on signal-
   image technology and internet-based systems (pp. 435–441). Italy.
Banoğlu, K., Vanderlinde, R., & Çetin, M. (2016). Okul müdürlerinin teknoloji
   liderliği profillerinin okulların öğrenen örgüt kültürü ve teknolojik alt-yapısı
   bağlamında analizi: F@tih projesi okulları ve diğerleri. Eğitim ve Bilim,
   41(188), 83–98.
Benveniste, G. (1994). The 21st century organization: Analyzing current trends
   and imagining the future. Jossey-Bass.
Brown, T. (1999). Challenging globalization as discourse and phenomenon.
   International Journal of Lifelong Education, 18(1), 3–17.
Budak, A., Ustundag, A., Kilinc, M. S., & Cevikcan, E. (2018). Digital trace-
   ability through production value chain. In A. Ustundag & E. Cevikcan (Eds.),
   Industry 4.0: Managing the digital transformation (pp. 251–265). Springer
   International.
Bursalıoğlu, Z. (2010). Eğitim yönetiminde teori ve uygulama (7th ed.). Pegem
   Yayıncılık.
Bush, T., & Glover, D. (2004). Leadership development: Evidence and beliefs.
   National College for School Leadership.
Carnall, C. (2003). Managing change in organizations. Pearson Education.
Chance, E. (2000). The social dimension of public relations. In T. J. Kowalski
   (Ed.), Public relations in schools (2nd ed., pp. 165–182). Prentice Hall.
Davies, B., & Ellison, L. (2003). The new strategic direction and development of
   the school: Key frameworks for school improvement planning. Routledge.
Demartini, C., & Benussi, L. (2017, May/June). Do Web 4.0 and Industry 4.0
   imply Education X.0? IT Pro, 4–7.
Díez, F., Villa, A., López, A. L., & Iraurgi, I. (2020). Impact of quality manage-
   ment systems in the performance of educational centers: Educational policies
   and management processes. Heliyon, 6(4), 1–7. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
   heliyon.2020.e03824
Etzioni, A. G. (1964). Modern organizations. Prentice-Hall.
Frolova, E. V., Rogach, O. V., & Ryabova, T. M. (2020). Digitalization of educa-
   tion in modern scientific discourse: New trends and risks analysis. European
   Journal of Contemporary Education, 9(2), 313–336.
Fullan, M. (2010). All systems go: The change imperative for whole system reform.
   Corwin.
Greenwald, G. A. (2001). Roadmap for managers in the 21st century. Warner
   Books Publishers.
Hoque, K. E., Alam, G. M., & Ghani, M. F. A. (2011). Principal’s roles
   under school-based management that influence school improvement. The New
   Educational Review, 23(1), 311–324.

214    M. ÇETIN AND İ. KARSANTIK


Jamali, D. (2005). Changing management paradigms: Implications for educa-
   tional institutions. Journal of Management Development, 24(2), 104–115.
   https://doi.org/10.1108/02621710510579473
Jefferson, M., & Anderson, M. (2017). Transforming schools: Creativity, critical
   reflection, communication, collaboration. Bloomsbury.
Kassim, U. K., & Teng, P. K. (2018). Conceptual study on enhancement of
   education 4.0 from management perspective. In Proceedings of 10th interna-
   tional conference on language, education, and innovation. https://icsai.org/
   procarch/10iclei/10iclei-019.pdf
Khalil, T. M. (2000). Management of technology: The key to competitiveness and
   wealth creation. McGraw-Hill.
Kin, T. M., & Kareem, O. A. (2019). School leaders’ competencies that make a
   difference in the era of education 4.0: A conceptual framework. International
   Journal of Academic Research in Business and Social Sciences, 9(5), 214–225.
Kin, T. M., & Kareem, O. A. (2018). A comparative analysis on principal
   change leadership competencies in Malaysian high- and mediocre-performing
   secondary schools. Asia Pacific Journal of Education, 38(3), 394–413.
   https://doi.org/10.1080/02188791.2018.1476319
Kowalski, T. J. (2000). Cultural change paradigms and administrator communi-
   cation. Contemporary Education, 71(2), 5–10.
Kuhn, T. S. (2012). The structure of scientific revolutions. University of Chicago
   Press.
Lappalainen, P. (2015). Predictors of effective leadership in industry: Should
   engineering education focus on traditional intelligence, personality, or
   emotional intelligence? European Journal of Engineering Education, 40(2),
   222–233.
Lasi, H., Kemper, H. G., Fettke, P., Feld, T., & Hoffmann, M. (2014). Industry
   4.0. Business & Information Systems Engineering, 4, 239–242. https://doi.
   org/10.1007/s12599-014-0334-4
Liyanage, S., & Poon, P. (2002). Technology and innovation management
   learning in the knowledge economy. The Journal of Management Development,
   22(7), 579–602.
Luksha, P., & Kinsner, W. (2020). Transformation into a new education
   paradigm and the role of ecosystemic leadership. Cadmus, 4(2), 182–198.
Mainemelis, C., Kark, R., & Epitropaki, O. (2015). Creative leadership: A multi-
   context conceptualization. The Academy of Management Annals, 9(1), 393–
   482.
Mandell, S. L., Cowen, S. S., & Miller, R. L. (1981). Introduction to business:
   Concepts and applications. West Publishing Cooperation.
McLay, K. F., & Renshaw, P. D. (2020). Making ‘us’ visible: Using membership
   categorisation analysis to explore young people’s accomplishment of collective

                           CURRENT TRENDS IN SCHOOL MANAGEMENT …              215


   identity-in-interaction in relation to digital technology. British Educational
   Research Journal, 46(1), 44–57. https://doi.org/10.1002/berj.3565
Mershad, K., & Wakim, P. (2018). A learning management system enhanced
   with internet of things applications. Journal of Education and Learning, 7 (3),
   23–40.
Ng, S. W., & Chan, Y. F. (2014). Aspiring principals’ perceptions of applicability
   of acquired leadership capacities in the school context. International Studies
   in Educational Administration, 42(3), 85–101.
Pont, B., Nusche, D., & Hunter, M. (2008). Improving school leadership: Policy
   and practice (Vol. 1). OECD Publishing.
Popenici, S., & Kerr, S. (2017). Exploring the impact of artificial intelligence on
   teaching and learning in higher education. Research and Practice in Technology
   Enhanced Learning, 12(22), 1–13.
Rodney, B. D. (2020). Understanding the paradigm shift in education in the
   twenty-first century. Worldwide Hospitality and Tourism Themes, 12(1), 35–47.
   https://doi.org/10.1108/WHATT-10-2019-0068
Sarason, S. B. (1996). Revisiting the culture of the school and the problem of
   change. Teachers College Press.
Shan, Y. G., Wang, J. B., & Hao, F. (2016). Research on mobile learning model
   based on Internet of things. In Proceedings of 2nd international conference
   on education science and human development. ESHD. https://doi.org/10.
   12783/dtssehs/eshd2016/5202
Shet, S. V., Patil, S. V., & Chandawarkar, R. M. (2017). Framework for method-
   ical review of Literature on leadership competencies. Cogent Business and
   Management, 4(1). https://doi.org/10.1080/23311975.2017.1309123
Slater, L. (2005). Leadership for collaboration: An affective process. Interna-
   tional Journal of Leadership in Education, 8(4), 321–333. https://doi.org/
   10.1080/13603120500088745
Slusarczyk, B. (2018). Industry 4.0—Are we ready? Polish Journal of Manage-
   ment Studies, 17 (1), 232–248. https://doi.org/10.17512/pjms.2018.17.
   1.19
Smith, L., & Riley, D. (2012). School leadership in times of crisis. School
   Leadership and Management, 32(1), 57–71.
Smoliar, S. W., & Sprague, R. (2003). Technology support for communication
   and understanding. Journal of Decision Systems, 2(2), 123–139. https://doi.
   org/10.3166/jds.12.123-139
Tang, S. Y. F., Wong, A. K., & Cheng, M. M. H. (2015). The preparation
   of highly motivated and professionally competent teachers in initial teacher
   education. Journal of Education for Teaching, 41(2), 12–144. https://doi.
   org/10.1080/02607476.2015.1010875
Tapscott, D., & Tapscott, A. (2017). The blockchain revolution and higher
   education. Educause Review, 52(2), 11–24.

216    M. ÇETIN AND İ. KARSANTIK


Taylor, F. W. (1919). Scientific management. Routledge.
Timms, M. J. (2016). Letting artificial intelligence in education out of the box:
   Educational cobots and smart classrooms. International Journal of Artificial
   Intelligence in Education, 26(2), 701–712.
Turner, J. R., & Keegan, A. (1999). The versatile project-based organization:
   Governance and operational control. European Management Journal, 17 (3),
   296–309.
Tyack, D., & Tobin, W. (1994). The ‘grammar’ of schooling: Why has it been
   so hard to change? American Educational Research Journal, 31(3), 453–479.
Wang, M. T., & Degol, J. L. (2016). School climate: A review of the construct,
   measurement, and impact on student outcomes. Educational Psychology
   Review, 28(2), 315–352.




Open Access This chapter is licensed under the terms of the Creative Commons
Attribution 4.0 International License (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/
by/4.0/), which permits use, sharing, adaptation, distribution and reproduction
in any medium or format, as long as you give appropriate credit to the original
author(s) and the source, provide a link to the Creative Commons license and
indicate if changes were made.
    The images or other third party material in this chapter are included in the
chapter’s Creative Commons license, unless indicated otherwise in a credit line
to the material. If material is not included in the chapter’s Creative Commons
license and your intended use is not permitted by statutory regulation or exceeds
the permitted use, you will need to obtain permission directly from the copyright
holder.