Chapter 4
Japanese Education Reform Towards
Twenty-First Century Education

Shinichi Yamanaka and Kan Hiroshi Suzuki



Abstract This chapter describes an education reform towards twenty-first century
education in Japan. The Ad Hoc Council on Education which was established in
1984 by Prime Minister was the starting point of the reform. Japanese society was
also undertaking a transition from twentieth century industry to twenty-first century
industry. Education reform was a part of it. That was the reason this education
reform involved national wide debate including industry people, union people, mass
media people, politicians as well as education people. This education reform covers
all aspects of education, that is contents, teachers, facilities, school management
system, education administration system and fundamental laws. At first this chapter
focuses on reform of national standard curriculum from 1990 until 2020. The basic
stance of this reform was that the teaching style must take the transition from cram-
ming to help students acquiring the ability to learn and think on their own. And then
other reforms such as introduction of national academic ability test, reform of
teacher training system, reform of university entrance examination and reform of
school management system are also described. This chapter describes the continu-
ous efforts and challenges during this education reform.



4.1 Overview

Japan is currently undertaking reforms in school education toward twenty-first cen-
tury education. These comprehensive reforms include a wide range of changes, such
as reform of national curriculum standards, a new school evaluation system, intro-
duction of a national academic performance test, teacher training, reforms in univer-
sity entrance examinations and admission policies, and improved coordination
between schools and society.


S. Yamanaka (*)
KADOKAWA DWANGO Education Institute, Tokyo, Japan
e-mail: shinichi_yamanaka@dwango.co.jp
K. H. Suzuki
University of Tokyo and Keio University, Tokyo, Japan

© The Author(s) 2020                                                              81
F. M. Reimers (ed.), Audacious Education Purposes,
https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-030-41882-3_4

82                                                         S. Yamanaka and K. H. Suzuki


   These reforms aiming to better prepare students for the twenty-first century
began in the 1980s. The starting point was a report by the Ad Hoc Council on
Education set up by the Prime Minister in 1984. The report stressed that respect for
the individual should be the fundamental principle upon which education reforms
are built. It urged Japan to shift its focus from standardized, conventional rote learn-
ing towards learning that would help children develop the flexible and independent
mindsets needed to think, judge, and take responsibility for their actions. After the
report, Japanese education began to steer towards twenty-first century education
with comprehensive policies to ensure the success of new approaches to teaching
and learning.
   However, the process of transforming into a twenty-first century education sys-
tem has not been without challenges. For example, when Japanese students scored
low on the PISA (Program for International Student Assessment) in 2003 and 2006,
the public blamed the curriculum reform as the main reason for the decline and
claimed public education should focus on helping children acquire academic knowl-
edge. Nevertheless, Japan didn’t alter the direction of its educational reform.
Instead, in response to mounting public criticism, the National Assessment of
Academic Ability was introduced in 2007. The purpose was to assess children’s
academic performance as a basis for further reforms. Since 2009, efforts such as
employing more teachers, including assigning more teachers to schools with aca-
demic and behavioral problems, and introducing morning reading sessions at
schools were implemented nationwide and have begun to demonstrate success. In
2012, Japanese children achieved the highest total PISA score among all the mem-
ber states of the OECD.
   On the other hand, although students’ academic performance had improved,
issues such as low motivation to learn and self-esteem remained. Further, the gov-
ernment had to consider making further changes to social and employment struc-
tures to prepare for anticipated technological advancements (such as artificial
intelligence [AI]) and discussions of the OECD Education 2030.
   With these conditions in mind, the Ministry of Education, Culture, Sports,
Science and Technology (MEXT) thoroughly reviewed the abilities and skills which
children should aim to acquire and subsequently revised the National Curriculum
Standards. The new standards will be implemented from 2020 to 2022 and include
active learning (i.e., independent and interactive in-depth learning) in all school
courses. The standards also include new subjects such as scientific exploration, gen-
eral exploration, public comprehensive history, and comprehensive geography. The
government has also improved university entrance examinations by reforming the
selection process to evaluate applicants’ broader competencies beyond academic
ability and the mere quantity of their knowledge.
   Furthermore, MEXT implemented reforms in teacher training programs in line
with changes in the National Curriculum Standards: launching the induction train-
ing system; introducing the teacher’s license renewal system; and improving train-
ing programs for working teachers to enhance their skills and abilities.
   As for coordination between schools and society, the government established the
School Management Council System (Community Schools) to incorporate local

4   Japanese Education Reform Towards Twenty-First Century Education                83


communities’ needs into school management. Additionally, a reform of the teaching
certificate system aimed to employ people who were in non-teaching careers as full
or part-time teachers.
   The reform toward twenty-first century education is closely connected to the
transition underway in the larger Japanese society. After the Meiji Restoration in
1868, when Japan became a modern nation-state, Japan focused on industrialization
as a mean of national development to “catch up” with Western developed countries.
A similar process has also occurred with the Japanese education system before and
after World War II. In the 1980s, when Japan’s GDP was the second highest in the
world, Japan had to begin setting its own goals for prosperity without imitating the
model of Western countries.
   Recently the world has also undergone a great transformation due to globaliza-
tion and the development of information and communications technology (ICT),
including AI. To adapt to these major social changes and establish a twenty-first
century education system, Japan has continued to prioritize education reforms.



4.2 Structure of the Chapter

All countries are now facing similar challenges to their societal and educational
institutions due to the information revolution, globalization, and environmental
changes. In response to these changes, Japan has been making comprehensive edu-
cation reforms since the 1980s to bring its education system to the twenty-first cen-
tury. This chapter starts by explaining the background of the educational reform in
Japanese society and education.
   Second, the chapter describes the National Curriculum Standards. Reform of the
Curriculum was the starting point of the education reform in Japan. The National
Curriculum Standards stipulate objectives, content, time allocation and course of
study for each subject for each school level: primary, junior, and senior high schools.
The revision of the National Curriculum Standards also required the revision of
textbooks, as well as changes to teacher training, teaching facilities, and numbers of
teachers. Based on these reforms, revision of the National Curriculum Standards
was implemented to each local government and school.
   Third, this chapter describes the National Assessment of Academic Ability for
students which has been conducted by MEXT since 2007. The aim of the assess-
ment is to measure students’ academic achievement and identify any weaknesses
with national and local educational policies, including the National Curriculum
Standards.
   Fourth, this chapter discusses the reform of University Entrance Examination. In
Japan, the university entrance exam is still focused on assessing the amount of aca-
demic knowledge students acquired in school education. All efforts to reform pri-
mary and secondary education are in danger of failure unless the university entrance
exam is successfully reformed.

84                                                                S. Yamanaka and K. H. Suzuki


   Finally, the chapter describes the reform of the educational administrative sys-
tem, including the relationship between national and local government and the part-
nership between schools and local communities.
   This chapter is mainly based on the papers of the Central Council for Education
and its sub-committees in MEXT, as well as reports of the Education Rebuilding
Council and other education councils established in Cabinet Office.
   Generally speaking, Education Councils established in Cabinet Office make rec-
ommendations on educational reform, then the Central Council for Education
(CCE) established in MEXT makes more concrete recommendation taking into
account of them. MEXT carries out educational policies based on the CCE’s
recommendations.



4.3 Background of the Reforms

4.3.1 Ad Hoc Council on Education1

In the 1980s, the Ad Hoc Council on Education stated that Japan’s education system
needed to be transformed from the twentieth to the twenty-first century. The Ad Hoc
Council on Education was established as an advisory panel to the Prime Minister to
support education reforms that were not only beneficial to educators, but also to
society as a whole and the people of Japan. The Ad Hoc Council on Education was
created in response to a deteriorating education system. The problems included chil-
dren’s problematic behaviors such as bullying, school violence, and truancy;
psychological and physical pressure placed on students due to the excessively com-
petitive entrance examinations; and schools’ inaction in the face of problematic
teachers.
    Two sets of issues were identified as causes of this deteriorating state of educa-
tion: issues with the whole Japanese society and the Japanese school education in
particular.




1
    The reports of Ad Hoc Council of Education Reform are as follows.
Monbusho, (1985, June), The First Report on Education Reform, The monthly journal of Monbusho,
   p. 50–76.
Monbusho, (1986, April), The Second Report on Education Reform, The monthly journal
   of Monbusho, p. 27–129.
Monbusho, (1987, April), The Third Report on Education Reform, The monthly journal
   of Monbusho, p. 4–91.
Monbusho, (1987, September), The Forth Report of Education Reform (Final Report), The monthly
   report of Monbusho, p. 8–49.
See also, Monbusho, (1989), Japanese Government Policies in Education, Science and Culture
   1989, http://www.mext.go.jp/b_menu/hakusho/html/hpae198901/index.html

4   Japanese Education Reform Towards Twenty-First Century Education                85


4.3.2 Issues in Japanese Society

Japan undertook industrialization in the 1860s during the Meiji period and achieved
dramatic economic growth after World War II. By 1968, Japan’s GNP ranked sec-
ond highest in the world. These achievements came with the economic mechanisms
of mass production, mass distribution, and mass consumption. The results were
people were lifted out of poverty and became wealthier; had an improved standard
of living; lived in peace; had a higher standards of welfare, education and culture;
had enhanced public safety; and a higher average life expectancy. In the 1970s,
however, developed nations, including Japan, suffered the side effects of wealth,
including environmental, resource and energy problems; the disintegration of large
family units and local communities due to urbanization; and the growth of the num-
ber of nuclear families. Japan’s natural ecosystems and living environments suf-
fered damage, people’s physical and emotional health declined, and stress and
frustration levels increased. Furthermore, as people’s values became increasingly
diverse and relative, traditional values lost their influence. This weakened the unify-
ing power in society and made it difficult for people to form close interpersonal
relationships and connect with nature. These pathological and sociocultural phe-
nomena had an enormous impact on children’s lives.
   In the twentieth century, Japan successfully adopted the science and technology
industries that were the fruit of Western developed nations’ research and develop-
ment efforts. After becoming the nation with the world’s second largest economy,
Japan found itself needing to explore new scientific and technological creations.
This marked Japan’s transition from following the model of Western countries’
industrialization to setting its own goals without a model.
   On the other hand, the growing tide of internationalization required Japan to
work with foreign countries to deal with global issues shared across national bor-
ders, including international economic issues and environmental problems. This
meant that Japan could no longer focus only on its own interests in international
settings, as it had from the Meiji period until the post-war economic growth period.
The country now needed to actively contribute to international peace and prosperity
and help solve various problems across the globe.
   Moreover, advances in information technology resulted in a transition from con-
ventional hardware to software, which involved further development of information
technology, AI and integrated systems. This change indicated an individual’s ability
to process information, make choices, and share information would rise to a higher
level of importance. This technological progress fundamentally changed the sys-
tems to produce, distribute and consume knowledge, information and technologies
in both education and research. This change led to the need to nurture intellectual,
productive, creative and emotionally-healthy individuals, rather than those with
standardized skills and intelligence.
   As these facts indicate, Japan’s education reforms launched in the 1990s also
involved efforts to keep up with the maturation of society, internationalization, and
advances in science and technology, which were all phenomena shared across

86                                                       S. Yamanaka and K. H. Suzuki


developed countries in the 1970s and 1980s. The reforms also aimed to transition
the country from the age of pursuit of the Western model to the future-oriented,
creative society geared for international services. The education reforms were also
expected to adjust to the rapid changes that the whole society was undergoing.
Hence, it was essential to clearly define the actor of the reforms and their specific
responsibilities to ensure coordination between society and the education system.



4.3.3 Issues with Japan’s Education System

The following two problems were identified as the major contributing factors to
Japan’s deteriorating education system: (a) Excessively competitive university and
high school entrance examinations and “cramming-style” education that focused on
rote learning; (b) The inflexible, standardized educational approaches and the non-­
transparent culture of the education system which leads schools and the board of
education to conceal ‘bad news’ from the outside world. For example, a school will
generally not disclose the existence of bullying.
    After Japan adopted the modern school education system in 1872, school educa-
tion thrived rapidly due to people’s enthusiasm for education and growing national
income. In the 1980s, the high school enrollment rate reached ninety-four percent
and the college enrollment rate reached thirty-seven percent. The improvement in
equality of educational opportunity for public and higher education served as the
driving force of Japan’s economic growth. To achieve society’s goal of catching up
with Western developed countries, school education focused on teaching science,
technology, and other knowledge from the Western countries. This led to standard-
ized learning approaches centered on the “cramming-style” rote learning.
    The excessive competition in entrance examinations further drove the education
system to focus on rote learning. Before World War II, government agencies and
major corporations favored employees who were alumni of specific universities and
determined their employees’ salaries and benefits according to their educational
backgrounds. This school record-oriented employment favoring alumni of specific
elite universities remained after the war. Major corporations had “designated school
systems” in which they gave preference to job applicants from prestigious universi-
ties. While the college enrollment rate was rising, competition for admission to
these prestigious universities became increasingly intense because of the preferen-
tial treatment given to job applicants from those universities. University entrance
examinations in Japan tend to focus on scores that applicants have obtained in aca-
demic achievement tests in order to maintain objectivity and fairness in the selection
process. Hence, applicants needed to achieve high scores in entrance examinations
to be accepted at prestigious universities. This fact prompted high school education
to adopt rote learning as an approach to score high in university entrance examina-
tions. The competition for admission to prestigious universities led to competition
among junior high school students aspiring to enroll at prestigious senior high
schools. Competition in entrance examinations took hold of students in their early

4   Japanese Education Reform Towards Twenty-First Century Education               87


teens. This fierce competition took away the joy of learning and the time to have fun
with friends and families from children, which had serious adverse effects on chil-
dren’s physical and psychological development. The negative aspects of industrial-
ization in the modern world also had a negative impact on children’s psychology.
The excessive competition in university and high school entrance examinations
overly distressed students, including much younger children, physically and psy-
chologically. These factors were believed to have caused emotional disturbances
which led to problem behaviors, including bullying.
    The Ad Hoc Council on Education emphasized the importance of helping chil-
dren develop their creativity and ability to think and express themselves. The
Council stated that these were the qualities and abilities needed to handle rapid
changes in society with flexibility and a positive attitude. It proposed that schools
should teach students to apply the knowledge and information they acquired to their
own thinking processes, creative efforts, and self-expression because Japan would
need more creative talent with individuality in the twenty-first century.
    The Council developed the following proposal to prepare students for the twenty-­
first century:
–– Set clear goals for school education and change teaching content in order to help
   children develop their qualities and abilities as the foundations of their lifelong
   learning, which will lead to twenty-first century education
–– Adopt diverse assessment approaches that value children’s individuality
–– Implement reforms in the university and high school entrance examinations so
   that applicants’ abilities are evaluated on multiple dimensions
–– Establish a framework for responsibility in school education and coordination
   with society
    The conventional approach of teaching content and methods was not the only
issue the Ad Hoc Council on Education’s report raised as the problem in Japanese
education. The report severely criticized the secretive nature of Japanese schools in
their preference for concealing problematic information such as that pertaining to
bulling, use of physical punishment by teachers, sexual harassment by teachers and
the line, which hindered early detection of the deteriorating education system and
damaged public trust in schools and teachers. To provide a solid twenty-first century
education, it was vital to establish responsible and trustworthy educational admin-
istrative systems and school management systems.
    The report also stated that the government should review the rigid authorization,
standard and guidance system by the national and local government and promote
deregulation. The goal of these efforts was to eliminate excessive standardization,
unnecessary focus on details and the exclusive nature of schools; all of which char-
acterized educational administration in general. These reforms would encourage
creative approaches in the classroom and dynamic teaching that would value chil-
dren’s individuality. The Council also proposed that schools as education providers
and municipal boards of education should act more autonomously, independently
and responsibly and take initiative in order to ensure their freedom, autonomy and
self-reliance. Hence, a basic outline of education should be compiled from the

88                                                        S. Yamanaka and K. H. Suzuki


National Curriculum Standards and other requirements specified by the national
government, and more options should be offered to schools and the boards of educa-
tion. This would encourage schools and boards to act at their own discretion in
developing various systems and trying new approaches.
    In Japan’s educational administrative system, the local board of education has
authority and responsibility over school education. The Council’s report criticized
the boards of education for lacking the necessary sense of responsibility, mission,
autonomy, initiative, and vision for twenty-first century education. The report iden-
tified the reason for the inaction was a lack of awareness that the boards should act
on their own initiative and responsibility. This was attributed to the deep-rooted
mindset of educators that school education was granted by the national government,
even in the post-war period when local governments became the major actors of
education. The report also stated that educational institutions and school educators
tended to regard each other as family. This meant they favored the exclusive nature
of schools that kept problems hidden and unresolved under the guise of “educa-
tional considerations”. They also waited for upper echelons to make decisions and
give them instructions so they would do nothing different than others. They valued
the stability and continuity of education. For these reasons, the institutions and edu-
cators were not likely to change.
    As specific measures to revitalize the boards of education, the Council proposed
to improve the selection and training of members; establish a framework for respon-
sibility for complaint handling procedures; take proper action to handle incompe-
tent and problematic teachers; and coordinate with the governor and mayor’s offices.
It also proposed establishing a framework of responsibility for school management
and ensuring principals fully exercise their leadership.
    The Council stated that the decentralization of the educational administrative
system and school management system, along with the establishment of a frame-
work of responsibility, was key to Japan’s efforts toward twenty-first century
education.



4.3.4 Recent Issues in Japan

The Ad Hoc Council on Education in the 1980s identified problems in Japan’s edu-
cation at the time and proposed a direction for educational reform. However, mod-
ern Japanese society is considerably different from that of 30 years ago. Nevertheless,
the Council for the Implementation of Education Rebuilding, which was established
in 2013, identified the same problems as the Ad Hoc Council 30 years prior and
proposed the government continue the educational reforms toward twenty-first cen-
tury education. The agenda of the 2013 Council included reforms in curricula, edu-
cational administrative systems, university entrance examinations, and partnerships
between schools and local communities.
   The following sections examine to what extent the reforms for twenty-first cen-
tury education have been implemented since the 1980s, their outcomes, and what

4   Japanese Education Reform Towards Twenty-First Century Education                  89


reforms are currently in progress. This includes reforms in curricula, university
entrance examinations, educational administration, school management, and the
reform of the National Assessment of Academic Ability.



4.4 Curriculum Reforms

Japan has National Curriculum Standards that specify requirements for curricula.
MEXT revises them almost every 10 years. The National Curriculum Standards
establish the legal framework of duties and responsibilities to maintain a level of
education prescribed for elementary, junior high and senior high school education.
It covers general requirements for curricula, objectives, teaching content for each
subject, key points of teaching, time allocation and course structure on a subject by
subject basis. Examining the revisions to the National Curriculum Standards helps
demonstrate how twenty-first century education is implemented in the framework of
a school curriculum.



4.4.1 Reforms in the 1990s

MEXT revised the Courses of Study to incorporate the proposals by the Ad Hoc
Council on Education in order to prepare Japan’s school education for the twenty-­
first century. The revised National Curriculum Standard was implemented from
1992 to 1994.2 The National Curriculum Standards in the 1990s emphasized the
importance of “viewing children’s academic performance from a new perspective.”
This meant educational guidance should motivate children to learn independently
and help them develop the qualities and abilities to think, judge and express them-
selves. In other words, the revised Standard were designed to help children volun-
tarily identify problems and take initiative in thinking, judging and expressing
themselves. Therefore, teachers were encouraged to adopt teaching approaches
which focused on children’s individuality, hands-on learning and problem-based
learning. National and municipal projects were launched to provide workshops for
teachers, prepare documents which explain the pedagogy of the new approach, and
offer models of teaching at model schools designated for pedagogical research. All
of these efforts were to promote school education based on the “new perspective on
academic ability.” Another initiative was the introduction of the new subject, “life


2
 National Curriculum Standards Database (2014), National Institute for Educational Policy
Research
https://www.nier.go.jp/guideline/h01e/index.htm
https://www.nier.go.jp/guideline/h01j/index.htm
https://www.nier.go.jp/guideline/h01h/index.htm

90                                                           S. Yamanaka and K. H. Suzuki


environment studies”, to first and second graders in elementary schools. However,
while some schools effectively implemented the new approach, many schools had
difficulty making the transition from a teaching style focused on the acquisition of
knowledge to the application of knowledge. MEXT revised the National Standard
Curriculums to address this challenge in the 2000s.



4.4.2 Reforms in the 2000s

The National Curriculum Standards developed in the 2000s3 took further steps to
achieve the purposes of the curriculum reforms in the 1990s. It stated that children
in the twenty-first century need to acquire “a zest for life”. In order to foster this zest
for life, “Period of Integrated Study” was introduced to cultivate competencies to
think, make judgement, express and act by oneself through cross-curricular and
project-based learning. Additionally, teaching content allotted to each subject were
reduced to make time for students to think and study by themselves. The National
Curriculum Standards in the 2000s represented a shift from a teaching style focused
on helping students cram for exams to helping students acquire the ability to learn
and think independently. The Curriculum Standards stated that school education
would focus on helping children develop “a zest for life” built upon “the qualities
and abilities to find issues, learn and think on their own, use their initiative in mak-
ing decisions and taking action and find better solutions”, “a sense of true humanity
that encompasses self-discipline, the ability to cooperate with others, empathy and
emotional health to let external events touch their hearts” and “the health and stam-
ina to stay resilient throughout the life.”
    The National Curriculum Standards listed several examples of themes for the
newly introduced “Period of Integrated Study,” such as international understanding,
information and the environment. Schools were allowed to freely decide what to do
during the class hour according to their students’ interests, and thus the Standards
did not dictate a particular content or pedagogy for this period. Schools were encour-
aged to engage students in integrated studies by actively introducing learning activi-
ties for: problem-solving in cooperation with others; using written or visual materials
to express their views and opinions; outdoor activities in natural settings; volunteer
activities; arts and crafts; observation and experiment; and hands-on learning such
as research tours.
    These curriculum reforms did not develop smoothly. The reforms in the 2000s
introduced a five-day school week, which resulted in a reduction in the overall


3
 National Curriculum Standards Database (2014), National Institute for Educational Policy
Research
https://www.nier.go.jp/guideline/h10e/index.htm
https://www.nier.go.jp/guideline/h10j/index.htm
https://www.nier.go.jp/guideline/h10h/index.htm

4   Japanese Education Reform Towards Twenty-First Century Education                      91


number of instructional hours. Since schools also had to adopt new hours for inte-
grated study, hours for other subjects including mathematics, science and Japanese
were reduced by 15%. In addition, teaching content decreased by 30% in order to
give students a time to study by themselves.
    The dramatic reduction in the content of curricula resulted in a decline in chil-
dren’s academic performance. The public severely criticized the reduced instruc-
tional hours as “Yutori (relaxed) Education” that would weaken the basis of Japan’s
strength. “The Period of Integrated Study” was also criticized as a part of “Yutori
Education” that led to the decline in academic performance. Moreover, in the PISA
2003 and 2006, the ranking of Japanese students’ scores for reading performance
dropped to 14th and 15th place from the 8th in 2000, and the scores for mathematics
dropped to 6th and 4th place from 1st in 2000. The media reported the results as “the
PISA shock,” and the public strongly demanded the “Yutori Education” be abol-
ished. The criticism was connected to Japan’s sluggish economy during the period
called “the lost two decades” that came after the collapse of the “bubble economy”
in the 1990s. In 2010, China’s GDP ranked 2nd and Japan’s GDP fell to 3rd place.
With the rise of other emerging economies, the Japanese public was deeply con-
cerned that Japan might be losing its global competitiveness. The criticism of
“Yutori Education” led to the revision of the Courses of Study in the 2010s and the
introduction of the National Assessment of Academic Ability. Yet, this period did
not set back the general direction towards twenty-first century education.



4.4.3 Reforms in the 2010s

Following the severe criticism of the National Curriculum Standards in the 2000s,
MEXT made partial amendments in 2003. The partial amendments were mainly to
allow textbooks to include content not stated in the Curriculum Standards Courses,
since the content of textbooks had declined by 30% compared to the previous one.
The full amendments were made in the 2010s.
    The National Curriculum Standards were revised in the 2010s in accordance
with reports by the Council for Education Rebuilding established in 2006 on the
initiative of the Prime Minister and reports recommended by the Central Council for
Education at MEXT based on the Education Rebuilding Council’s reports. The
Education Rebuilding Council’s report in 20074 stated that Japan’s school education
faced extremely serious problems and that it was not an exaggeration to say that
public education was in dysfunction. These problems included children’s declining
academic ability, bullying, truancy, school violence, school education without lead-
ership, and the lack of a sense of responsibility at schools and boards of education.
The report also pointed out that since these problems had already been raised

4
 Education Rebuilding Council (2007, January 24), Education Rebuilding by Society as a Whole-
First Step toward Rebuilding the Public Education System,- First Report, Cabinet Secretariat.
https://www.kantei.go.jp/jp/singi/kyouiku/houkoku/eibun0124h.pdf

92                                                                 S. Yamanaka and K. H. Suzuki


20 years ago, school education was losing trust from children’s guardians and
the public.
   The Council’s report made the following proposals regarding the curricula: (a)
Review Yutori Education to give priority to help children acquire a solid foundation
of learning, including basic reading, writing and mathematical ability, especially in
compulsory education, and increase the class hours by 10%. (b) Aim to help chil-
dren learn to apply the knowledge they acquired. The Central Council for Education
recommended detailed measures based on this report.
   The report stated that it would always be important to help develop the basic
foundations of learning for the twenty-first century and foster children’s qualities
and abilities to find issues; learn and think on their own; use their initiative to make
decisions and act based on the decisions; and find solutions. What was equally
important for children was to develop a “a zest for life” which encompassed the
ability to cooperate with others, empathy, a sense of true humanity, health and stam-
ina. As for academic ability, the report emphasized the importance of helping chil-
dren acquire all three elements of academic ability, namely knowledge and skills;
the ability to think, judge and express; and motivation to learn. Japan’s education
should overcome the conflict between “yutori” (the twenty-first century education
for knowledge application) and “rote learning” (the twentieth century education for
memorization of knowledge). The discussion also referred to international educa-
tion movements, including the key competencies the OECD put forward as qualities
people need to develop in a “knowledge-based economy” and the idea of education
suggested by the United Nations for sustainable development.
   In 2008 and 2009, MEXT revised the National Curriculum Standards5 on the
basis of the report by the Central Council for Education to specify the following: (a)
Aim to further foster “a zest for life” of children. Help them acquire and apply
knowledge and skills and develop the ability to think, judge and express themselves
independently (the twenty-first century academic proficiency); (b) Increase instruc-
tional hours at elementary and junior high school by 10 percent to expand teaching
content; (c) Slightly decrease hours for the “Period of Integrated Study,” yet main-
tain it and develop it as a part of curriculum.




5
    National Curriculum Standard Database, National Institute for Educational Policy Research,
https://www.nier.go.jp/guideline/h19e/index.htm
https://www.nier.go.jp/guideline/h19j/index.htm
https://www.nier.go.jp/guideline/h20h/index.htm

4   Japanese Education Reform Towards Twenty-First Century Education                        93


4.4.4 Reforms in the 2020s

The New National Curriculum Standards to be implemented from 2020 to 2022
were announced in 2017. The revisions made for the 2020s were based on the report
by the Central Council for Education in December 2016.6 The new National
Curriculum Standards are the developed version of the curriculum reforms toward
twenty-first century education which began in the 1990s. The revised National
Curriculum Standards feature teaching methods as well as the goal of education and
teaching content.
    The Central Council for Education’s report stated that the National Curriculum
Standards had always been focused mainly on “what teachers have to teach” and
that this convention must be changed to specify “what students will be able to do
and how can they learn.” To make the transformation, it is vital to adopt the perspec-
tive of “independent and interactive in-depth learning” and active learning. This will
help children to develop a deep understanding of what they learned in connection
with their life and how society works; acquire qualities and competencies which
will be required in their future; and continue to learn throughout their lives.7
    Based on this recommendation, the new National Curriculum Standards8 incor-
porated the following new features: (a) Descriptions of all subjects it specifies, with
(i) Knowledge and skills to acquire, (ii) Skills to develop the ability to think, judge
and express oneself, and (iii) Motivation to learn and the sense of humanity which
should be fostered; (b) Provisions for the way classroom teaching should be
improved from the perspective of independent and interactive in-depth learning and
active learning as “learning methods” shared across all subjects.
    While curriculum reforms in the 2000s and 2010s have been implemented, Japan
improved its ranking in international academic ability assessments. For example, in
PISA 2006, Japan ranked 12th, 10th and 6th in reading, mathematics and science,
respectively. These rankings improved to 8th, 9th and 5th in 2009; 4th, 4th, and 4th
in 2012; and 8th, 5th, and 2nd in 2015. This demonstrates that academic perfor-
mance by children in Japan as measured by international standards is improving.
When examining the overall results among OECD member states, Japan’s total
score ranked 1st in 2012 and 2015.

6
  Central Council for Education (2016, December 21), Improvement of National Curriculum
Standards for Kindergardens, Elementary Schools, Lower and Upper Secondary Schools, and
Schools for Special Needs Education (Recommendation), MEXT. http://www.mext.go.jp/b_menu/
shingi/chukyo/chukyo0/toushin/1380731.htm
7
  Central Council for Education (2016, December 21), ibid., Section 1, Chapter 3 and Chapter 4.
8
  Ministry of Education, Culture, Sports, Science and Technology (2017–2018, March),
National Curriculum Standard for ElementarySchool, http://www.mext.go.jp/component/a_menu/
   education/micro_detail/__icsFiles/afieldfile/2019/09/26/1413522_001.pdf
National Curriculum Standard for Lower Secondary School, http://www.mext.go.jp/component/a_
   menu/education/micro_detail/__icsFiles/afieldfile/2019/09/26/1413522_002.pdf
National Curriculum Standard for Upper Secondary School, http://www.mext.go.jp/component/a_
   menu/education/micro_detail/__icsFiles/afieldfile/2019/09/26/1384661_6_1_2.pdf

94                                                        S. Yamanaka and K. H. Suzuki


4.4.5 Curriculum Reforms and Assessment

The curriculum reforms towards twenty-first century education began in the 1980s.
From the beginning, however, educators as well as the public expressed concern that
education focused on knowledge application might lower students’ levels of aca-
demic ability. Hence, MEXT needed to prove that the reforms would not lead to a
decline in children’s academic ability. Especially after the curriculum reforms in the
2000s, they were severely criticized by the public for leading the “Yutori Education”
and were forced to examine children’s academic ability and measure improvements
based on facts.
   Another challenge was how to assess students’ ability to apply knowledge, rather
than merely acquire knowledge. The OECD PISA survey played a significant role
in Japan in regard to this challenge. The PISA survey aims to assess how capable
children are in applying knowledge they have acquired to address different real-life
issues. Educators in Japan considered the questions in the PISA 2000 survey to be a
good model to assess this kind of ability.
   Given this background, MEXT introduced the National Assessment of Academic
Ability in 2007 to assess the outcomes and problems in the curriculum reforms.



4.5 The National Assessment of Academic Ability
     and Decentralization

The National Assessment of Academic Ability was launched in 2007. This was
partly a response to the criticism to the revised National Curriculum Standards in
the 2000s. It was also proposed as part of the structural reforms in the compulsory
education system, which were triggered by the argument about the national govern-
ment’s subsidy for compulsory education.
    Japan’s compulsory education consisted of elementary and junior high school,
and municipalities are responsible for establishing these schools. Public schools
account for ninety-six percent of all elementary and junior high schools in Japan.
This means that public schools play a major role in Japan’s compulsory education.
The national government subsidizes compulsory education to ensure equal opportu-
nities for compulsory education and maintain a high level of education nationwide.
Under this system, the national government covered half the costs of salaries for
teachers at elementary and junior high schools across Japan. This maintained high
level of salaries for public elementary and junior high school teachers everywhere
in the country, enabling schools to employ teachers with solid qualifications regard-
less of the municipalities’ financial conditions. In the 2000s, however, government-­
led reforms toward decentralization were in progress. The changes involved
structural reforms in the national and local governments’ finances, which aimed to
curtail the national government’s subsidies to local governments and transfer

4   Japanese Education Reform Towards Twenty-First Century Education                    95


financial resources to local governments for the purpose of promoting their auton-
omy. Since the national government’s subsidy to compulsory education was huge,
the subsidy was a primary target of the reform. As a result, the law was revised so
that the national government would cover one-third of the costs of salaries for teach-
ers at public elementary and junior high schools.
    Along with discussion of the reform of the national subsidiary system, the
Central Council for Education reviewed the relationship between MEXT and pre-
fectural and municipal governments as well as subsidiary systems. In the report
published in 2005,9 they stated that the government should carry out the following
structural reforms in Japan’s compulsory educational system: (a) The national gov-
ernment would take responsibility for setting goals of the compulsory education and
providing infrastructure necessary to achieve the goals; (b) Municipalities and
schools would have more autonomy and responsibility as a result of decentraliza-
tion; and (c) The national government would take responsibility for reviewing the
outcomes of school education to ensure the quality of compulsory education. In
other words, the national government would be responsible for providing founda-
tional educational inputs (e.g., covering one-third of the costs of salaries for teach-
ers at public elementary and junior high schools, establishing the National
Curriculum Standards, etc.), municipalities and schools would implement the pro-
cess (e.g., classroom teaching), and the national government would review school
outcomes in order to ensure the quality of compulsory education.
    The National Assessment of Academic Ability was proposed as a tool to imple-
ment the PDCA (Plan, Do, Check, Act) cycle of the structural reforms of compul-
sory education. It also served to check the outcome of the curriculum reforms. Since
the survey was introduced as part of the reforms in compulsory education, it was
conducted as a national test for students in elementary and junior high schools.
    MEXT conducted the National Assessment of Academic Ability for students in
sixth and ninth grades. These assessments measure students’ achievements in math-
ematics and Japanese language. Each test consists of Sections A and B. Section A
mainly asks questions designed to test students’ ability to acquire knowledge, while
Section B tests students’ ability to apply knowledge. In 2015, the survey also began
a triennial test in science. A triennial test in English will be started in 2019.
    The National Assessment of Academic Ability covers all public elementary and
junior high schools across Japan (there should have been a sampling survey from
2010 to 2013 but this was canceled in 2011 due to the Great East Japan Earthquake
and tsunami). It has played a significant role in enabling the government to examine
the progress of reforms in curricula and the compulsory education system. For
example, the Central Council for Education, which proposed the revision to the
Courses of Study for the 2020s, stated10 that the results of the National Survey

9
 Central Council for Education (2005, October 26), Creating Compulsory Education in New Era
(Recommendation),         MEXT.         http://www.mext.go.jp/b_menu/shingi/chukyo/chukyo0/
toushin/1212703.htm
10
   Central Council for Education (2016, December 21), Part 1 Section 1 of Improvement and
Necessary Measures of National Curriculum Standards for Kindergardens, Elementary Schools,

96                                                         S. Yamanaka and K. H. Suzuki


coupled with international tests including PISA showed a narrowing gap between
underachieving prefectures’ scores and the national average. This indicates that aca-
demic achievement has improved nationwide under curriculum reforms and other
efforts to improve the quality of education. This evidences strongly supports the
direction of the curriculum reforms.
   The National Survey also assesses educational conditions, teaching methods and
students’ motivation for learning. Hence, it is used for analysis to improve many
areas in education policy. Furthermore, questions in Section B, which was designed
to assess the ability to apply knowledge, helped to improve the quality of classroom
lessons to adapt to teach knowledge application.
   Since 2019, the National Survey no longer has Sections A and B and gives inte-
grated questions to assess the ability to acquire and apply knowledge. This change
is based on the new National Curriculum Standards11 which include three interre-
lated pillars: “skills and knowledge”, “the ability to think, judge and express one-
self”, and “the motivation to learn and a sense of humanity”. Using the integrated
questions to assess academic ability aims to help schools understand the idea of the
National Curriculum Standards and the MEXT’s message about the curriculum
reforms.
   A survey of academic proficiency that covers senior high school students is set
for 2019 as a “basic assessment of academic ability for senior high school students.”
Unlike the National Survey for elementary and junior high school students, this
survey will not be prepared and conducted by MEXT. The government will adopt
tests produced by a private company that meets MEXT’s requirements, and schools
will choose an academic ability assessment at their own discretion. This process is
expected to enable the implementation of the PDCA cycle of reviewing the out-
comes of the education reforms to make improvements in senior high school
education.



4.6 Reforms in University Entrance Examinations

The curriculum reforms have been in progress to enable elementary and secondary
school education to develop twenty-first century skills. However, it would be diffi-
cult to provide a twenty-first century education for senior high school students pre-
paring for university entrance examinations, as the abilities required to pass the
exams are those developed by conventional twentieth century education. The col-
lege enrollment rate in Japan is over fifty percent, which means university entrance
examinations heavily influence senior high school education. Therefore, a wide
range of changes have been made to the entrance examination to better assess the


Lower and Upper Secondary Schools, and Scools for Special Needs Education, MEXT. http://
www.mext.go.jp/b_menu/shingi/chukyo/chukyo0/toushin/1380731.htm
11
   See 36.

4    Japanese Education Reform Towards Twenty-First Century Education                       97


ability to apply knowledge. However, as noted by various national councils for
reforms in university entrance examinations, these efforts have not worked well
enough. Fundamental changes to the university entrance examinations are needed to
better align with the reforms for twenty-first century learning at the elementary,
junior and senior high school levels.
   MEXT plans to introduce further changes in university entrance examinations
2021. These changes are part of reforms in high school and university education
which address integrated change in senior high school education, the selection of
university applicants and university education. What underlies these changes is the
awareness that university examinations still focus too heavily on how much knowl-
edge applicants have acquired and too little on how well they apply solutions. The
transition of Japan’s education system to the twenty-first century will make little
progress unless university entrance examinations also evolve.12
   In 1979, Japan introduced the common primary examination administered by the
National Center for University Entrance Examinations. The new examination sys-
tem had a massive impact on senior high school education, particularly on what
students were required to learn to pass the exams, because all public universities
adopted the new system. In the 1980s, the Ad Hoc Council on Education proposed
changes in the common primary examination system. Based on the proposal, the
system was replaced by the National Center Test for University Admissions in 1990,
and private universities also adopted this new system. Before these systems were
introduced, university entrance examinations included so-called “knotty” or “tricky”
questions that had nothing to do with the teaching content of senior high school
education. This made high school students’ exam preparation excessively difficult.
The common primary examination and the National Center Test were introduced to
address this overly demanding exam preparation process and to implement a system
to select applicants who fulfilled the National Curriculum Standards for senior high
school. Public universities, which hold two-stage selective examinations, have
adopted the systems as their preliminary exams. Private universities have also
adopted the National Center Test as their general entrance examinations. In 2015,
527 public and private universities (90% of all universities in Japan) used the
National Center Test. As the number of applicants taking the Test has risen to
560,000 (about 80% of university applicants), the National Center Test has played
an important role in the progress of reforms in university entrance examinations.
   However, the National Center Test consists of fill-in-the-bubble exams to assess
the knowledge and skills applicants have memorized. Hence, it will be reformed to
be a “Standardized Test for University Admissions” scheduled to start in January
2021. The new standardized test is designed to evaluate applicants’ “knowledge and
skills” and “ability to think, judge and express themselves.” While the National
Center Test was a set of fill-in-the-bubble exams, the new test will also include

12
  See, Council for Reform on the System of Articulation of High Schools and Universities (2016,
March 31), The Final Report by the Council for Reform on the System of Articulation of High
Schoolsand Universities, MEXT. http://www.mext.go.jp/component/b_menu/shingi/toushin/__
icsFiles/afieldfile/2016/06/02/1369232_01_2.pdf

98                                                         S. Yamanaka and K. H. Suzuki


short-answer questions. Moreover, fill-in-the-bubble exams will be designed to
assess not only applicants’ memorized knowledge but also their ability to think and
make decisions. The new standardized test in 2021 is expected to have a significant
impact on senior high school education and promote the progress of twenty-first
century education.



4.7 Decentralization of Education and Maintenance
     of Education Standards

A twenty-first century education should help students become individuals who view
society and the world from a broad perspective and contribute to the improvement
of society and the international community. Education should foster children’s qual-
ities and abilities to face reality and become involved in society and the world. To
implement education that meet this demand, it is vital for schools and boards of
education to have autonomy and discipline within the framework of the school sys-
tem. Autonomy and discipline will help schools and boards of education use their
ingenuity to optimize their local school education.
    The outline of Japanese educational system is as follows. MEXT regulates the
educational system from childhood education to higher education and responsible
for higher education institute. Municipal boards of education are responsible for
public elementary and junior high schools, and prefectural boards of education are
responsible for public senior high schools. School principals are responsible for
curriculum planning and day-to-day educational activities, which provides schools
with autonomy and discipline in a wide range of areas.
    However, the prefectural boards of education have a strong influence on educa-
tion at public elementary and junior high schools because prefectural governments
cover all costs of salaries for teachers at municipal elementary and junior high
schools, and they also have the authority to manage personnel affairs at municipal
schools. Moreover, because the subsidies of the national government to compulsory
education cover one-third of the personnel costs of teachers at public elementary
and junior high schools (prefectural governments paid the remaining two-third),
educators tend to adhere to the education standards set by the national government.
In other words, educators were excessively conscious of the national policy and
preferred to stick to it. In addition to this culture, many educators believed that fol-
lowing the state policy and standards would make it easier for them to ensure
accountability to children’s guardians and avoid criticism.
    The education reforms launched in the 1980s toward twenty-first century educa-
tion also made changes to the education system in order to transfer authority and
responsibility to schools. The transfer started from the national government to pre-
fectural governments and then to municipalities and schools. However, these
reforms also faced difficulties due to the attitudes deeply rooted in the educa-
tional world.

4    Japanese Education Reform Towards Twenty-First Century Education                    99


    Further, allowing schools and local governments to have autonomy generated
educational gaps between regions. Several systems were introduced to narrow these
inter-regional gaps. The National Assessment of Academic Ability was launched as
a system for reviewing the effects of education. Additionally, the School Management
Council System (Community Schools) was designed to encourage local communi-
ties to participate in school management to ensure the quality of education in
their region.
    The school evaluation system was proposed by the Central Council for
Education13 in MEXT and the National Commission on Educational Reform14 in the
Cabinet Office. Since 2002, it has been a system for schools to ensure the quality of
education to a variety of stakeholders. In 2006, provisions were added to the School
Education Act to establish it as a legal system. The provisions specify the following:
(a) Schools are required to self-evaluate their educational activities and school man-
agement and publish the results; and (b) Schools are required to make an effort to
conduct a third-party evaluation by children’s guardians, local residents and other
people related to schools and to publish the evaluation results. Active publication of
the school information was also prescribed.
    Schools are required to set their goals for education and launch educational
activities aligned to the goals for twenty-first century education specified in the
National Curriculum Standards. They also need to self-evaluate the progress of their
efforts toward the goals and publish the evaluation results. Schools which adopt a
third-party evaluation will have an extra evaluation to conduct, and the results must
be published as well. The school evaluation system aims to help schools review
their educational activities and management to guide improvements. It is also
expected that schools, children’s guardians and local communities share the goals of
education so that they will work together to enhance the quality of education.
    The School Management Council is a system that provides children’s guardians
and local residents an opportunity to become involved in the development of basic
policies on school management and teacher personnel affairs. It was established as
a legal system in 2004 on the basis of proposals by the Cabinet’s National
Commission on Educational Reform15 and MEXT’s Central Council for Education.16
The system became a legal obligation in 2017. The School Management Council at
each school consists of children’s guardians and local residents. The functions of

13
   Central Council for Education (1998, September 1), Local Education Administration in the
Future (Recommendation), MEXT. http://www.mext.go.jp/component/b_menu/shingi/toushin/__
icsFiles/afieldfile/2013/12/18/1342455_1.pdf
14
   The National Commission on Educational Reform (2000, December 22), Report by the National
Commishion on Educational Reform – 17 Proposals for Changing Education, Cabinet Secretariat.
https://japan.kantei.go.jp/education/report/pdfs/report.pdf
15
   The National Commission on Educational Reform (2000, December 22), Report by the National
Commission on Educational Reform – 17 Proposals for Changing Education, Cabinet Secretariat.
https://japan.kantei.go.jp/education/report/pdfs/report.pdf
16
   Central Council for Education (2004, Narch 3), School Management in the Future
(Recommendation), MEXT. http://www.mext.go.jp/component/b_menu/shingi/giji/__icsFiles/
afieldfile/2014/03/19/1345472_001.pdf

100                                                             S. Yamanaka and K. H. Suzuki


the Council are: (a) To approve basic school management policies developed by the
school principal; (b) To state their opinion about school management to the school
principal and the board of education; and (c) To state its opinion about the assign-
ment of teachers to the board of education.
   The School Management Council is expected to make schools accessible to local
communities so that school management incorporates the views and opinions of
local communities. This will ensure reforms toward twenty-first century education
garner support and help from local communities.



4.8 Education Reform in Japan Now and the Future

Japan has been working hard to transform its education from twentieth century edu-
cation to twenty-first education in these 40 years. And its reforms have brought
fruitful results.
    For example, “Education Policy in Japan” of OECD (2018) highly evaluates
Japanese education. It states “Compare to other OECD countries Japan’s education
system is one of the top performers among both youth and adult population. Japanese
students have among the best performance in scientific, mathematics and reading
literacy in the OECD Programme for International Student Assessment (PISA). --
These excellent results are linked to an environment conductive to learning in
schools and beyond, with a high quality of engagement by teachers and strong sup-
port from families for effective delivery of well-rounded (holistic) education.”17
    On the other hand, the OECD report also pointed out that “this transition may
require adaptation of the curriculum, teaching and school practices and of student
assessments, such as university entrance examination”18 and recommends that to
“Prioritize the curriculum reform through a strategy that sustain alignment across
interdependent components and communicate its value to stakeholders. This
includes adapting existing assessments to reflect the new curriculum and investing
in teachers’ training and initial teacher education to reinforce their capacity to adapt
their practices to the revised curriculum.”19
    It also recommends that to “Preserve the provision of well-rounded holistic edu-
cation by enhancing school organization and school-community partnerships.
Review the role and training of school leaders in light of 2030 objectives. Focus on
management practices and partnerships with local communities on supporting the
introduction of the new curriculum and alleviating teacher’s workload.”20



17
   OECD (2018), Education Policy in Japan: Building Bridges Towards 2030, Reviews of National
Policies for Education, OECD Publishing, Paris, p. 15. https://doi.org/10.1787/9789264302402-en
18
   OECD (2018), ibid. p. 16.
19
   OECD (2018), ibid. p. 17.
20
   OECD (2018), ibid. p. 17.

4    Japanese Education Reform Towards Twenty-First Century Education                        101


   I think these recommendations are to the point. Japanese education reform has
been carried out as a part of social transition of Japanese society, from twentieth
century-style society to twenty-first century-style society. That is the reason why its
discussion has been involving not only education world people but also wide range
of society including parents, local community, business and labor community. And
to maintain and enhance school-community partnership and discussion among all
stakeholders should be the 1st priority for the successful advancement of education
reforms.
   As for the individual school education, many Japanese schools are referred to as
a model of twenty-first century education. For example, Andreas Schleicher fea-
tures a lesson in Hiroshima Nagisa High School in Japan as a carefully designed
creative leaning time.21 He also describes Kosen School in Japan as a very success-
ful case to develop cross-curricular capabilities through their unique blend of
classroom-­base and hands-on project-based learning.22 N High School in japan was
invited by OCCAM’s Infopoverty World Conference as a new school that uses ICTs
to provide high quality education at a low cost and post-graduation opportunities.23
   On the other hand, the OECD report also pointed out that “The magnitude of the
(curriculum) reform should not be minimized” “there are risks that proactive, inter-
active and authentic leaning may be adapted only as superficial change”24 as a chal-
lenge of Japanese education reform. I think this is a very important point. Curriculum
reform is a starting point. How to implement is a further important and difficult task.
Schools and teachers are expected to play the leading part. Twenty-First century
education expects students to attain competencies and skills to think, make judge-
ment and act by themselves. Also, each school should be a twenty-first century
education school. That is schools should recognize how they can cultivate compe-
tencies and skills of their students to lead better life and interact with society and the
world. And based on their recognition, think, make judgement and express (imple-
ment twenty-first century education) by themselves. Education system should sup-
port efforts of each school and teacher to become a main player.




21
   Schleicher, A (2018), World Class: How to build a twenty-first-century school system, Strong
Performers and Successful Reformers in Education, OECD Publishing, Paris. p. 103. https://doi.
org/10.1787/4789264300002-en
22
   Schleicher, A (2018), ibid., p. 242.
23
   The Observatory on Digital Communication (OCCAM) (2019, April 12), XIX Infopoverty
World       Conference       Final      Declaration,   OCCAM.          http://www.occam.org/news/
xix-iwc-final-declaration/
24
   OECD (2018), Education Policy in Japan: Building Bridges Towards 2030, Reviews of National
Policies for Education, OECD Publishing, Paris, p. 157. https://doi.org/10.1787/9789264302402-en

102                                                             S. Yamanaka and K. H. Suzuki


References

Ad Hoc Council on Education. (1985, June). The first report on education reform. The Monthly
   Journal of Monbusho. pp. 50–76.
Ad Hoc Council on Education. (1986, April). The second report on education reform. The Monthly
   Journal of Monbusho. pp. 27–129.
Ad Hoc Council on Education. (1987a, April). The third report on education reform. The Monthly
   Journal of Monbusho. pp. 4–91.
Ad Hoc Council on Education. (1987b, September). The forth report of education reform (Final
   report). The Monthly Journal of Monbusho. pp. 8–49.
Central Council for Education. (1998, September 1). Local Education Administration in the Future
   (Recommendation), MEXT. http://www.mext.go.jp/component/b_menu/shingi/toushin/__ics-
   Files/afieldfile/2013/12/18/1342455_1.pdf.
Central Council for Education. (2004, March 3). School Management in the Future
   (Recommendation), MEXT. http://www.mext.go.jp/component/b_menu/shingi/giji/__icsFiles/
   afieldfile/2014/03/19/1345472_001.pdf.
Central Council for Education. (2005, October 26). Creating Compulsory Education in New
   Era (Recommendation), MEXT. http://www.mext.go.jp/b_menu/shingi/chukyo/chukyo0/
   toushin/1212703.htm.
Central Council for Education. (2008, January 17). Improvement of National Curriculum Standards
   for Kindergartens, Elementary Schools, Lower and Upper Secondary Schools, and Schools for
   Special Needs Education (Recommendation), MEXT. http://www.mext.go.jp/b_menu/shingi/
   chukyo/chukyo0/toushin/1380731.htm.
Central Council for Education. (2016, December 21). Part 1 Section 1 of Improvement and
   Necessary Measures of National Curriculum Standards for Kindergardens, Elementary
   Schools, Lower and Upper Secondary Schools, and Schools for Special Needs Education,
   MEXT. http://www.mext.go.jp/b_menu/shingi/chukyo/chukyo0/toushin/1380731.htm.
Council for Reform on the System of Articulation of High Schools and Universities. (2016, March
   31). The Final Report by the Council for Reform on the System of Articulation of High Schools
   and Universities, MEXT. http://www.mext.go.jp/component/b_menu/shingi/toushin/__ics-
   Files/afieldfile/2016/06/02/1369232_01_2.pdf.
Education Rebuilding Council. (2007, January 24). Education Rebuilding by Society as a Whole-­
   First Step toward Rebuilding the Public Education System,- First Report, Cabinet Secretariat
   https://www.kantei.go.jp/jp/singi/kyouiku/houkoku/eibun0124h.pdf.
Kariya, Takehiko. (2018 December). ‘Daigaku seiakusetu’ niyoru monndaisettei to iu to <mon-
   dai> ( <Problem> of Problen Setting as “ Belief in university as fundamentaly evil” ) (2018
   December), Chapter 2 of Part 1 of “50 nennme no ‘Daigaku kaikai’ 20 nenngono daigakusaisei
   (50th year of University dismantling, University reborn in 20”, Edited by Ikuya Sato, Kyoto
   University Press.
MEXT. (2017–2018, March). National Curriculum Standard for Elementary School, Lower
   Secondary School, Upper Secondary School. http://www.mext.go.jp/component/a_
   menu/education/micro_detail/__icsFiles/afieldfile/2019/09/26/1413522_001.pdf,
   http://www.mext.go.jp/component/a_menu/education/micro_detail/__icsFiles/afield-
   file/2019/09/26/1413522_002.pdf,        http://www.mext.go.jp/component/a_menu/education/
   micro_detail/__icsFiles/afieldfile/2019/09/26/1384661_6_1_2.pdf.
MEXT, National Curriculum Standards Database. (1947–2017). National Institute for Educational
   Policy Research https://www.nier.go.jp/guideline/.
Monbusho. (1992). Gakusei Hyakuniju nenshi (One hundred and twenty years history of
   Japanese education). Tokyo: Gyousei. http://www.mext.go.jp/b_menu/hakusho/html/others/
   detail/1318221.htm.
Monbusho (Ministry of Education, Sports and Culture). (1989). Japanese Government Policies
   in Education, Science and Culture 1989. http://www.mext.go.jp/b_menu/hakusho/html/
   hpae198901/index.html.

4   Japanese Education Reform Towards Twenty-First Century Education                           103

OECD. (2018). Education policy in Japan: Building bridges towards 2030 (Reviews of National
   Policies for Education). Paris: OECD Publishing. https://doi.org/10.1787/9789264302402-en.
Schleicher, A. (2018). World class: How to build a 21st-century school system. Strong perform-
   ers and successful reformers in education. Paris: OECD Publishing. https://doi.org/10.178
   7/4789264300002-en.
The National Commission on Educational Reform. (2000, December 22). Report by the National
   Commission on Educational Reform – 17 Proposals for Changing Education, Cabinet
   Secretariat. https://japan.kantei.go.jp/education/report/pdfs/report.pdf.
The Observatory on Digital Communication (OCCAM). (2019, April 12). XIX Infopoverty
   World      Conference       Final    Declaration,    OCCAM.         http://www.occam.org/news/
   xix-iwc-final-declaration/.




Open Access This chapter is licensed under the terms of the Creative Commons Attribution 4.0
International License (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/), which permits use, sharing,
adaptation, distribution and reproduction in any medium or format, as long as you give appropriate
credit to the original author(s) and the source, provide a link to the Creative Commons licence and
indicate if changes were made.
    The images or other third party material in this chapter are included in the chapter’s Creative
Commons licence, unless indicated otherwise in a credit line to the material. If material is not
included in the chapter’s Creative Commons licence and your intended use is not permitted by
statutory regulation or exceeds the permitted use, you will need to obtain permission directly from
the copyright holder.