International Journal of Islamic Thought and Humanities
Published by Sekolah Tinggi Agama Islam Taruna Surabaya
Vol. 2 No. 2 September 2023, Pp. 249 - 263
DOI: https://doi.org/10.54298/ijith.v2i2.130




     Islamic Boarding School Management System In Increasing
     The Competitiveness Of Islamic Boarding Schools In Jambi
                             Province

                                               Tabroni
                                   UIN Sulthan Thaha Saifuddin Jambi
                                       dahlantabroni@gmail.com

                                           A Husein Ritonga
                                   UIN Sulthan Thaha Saifuddin Jambi
                                      husein_ritonga@yahoo.com

                                           Kasful Anwar Us
                                   UIN Sulthan Thaha Saifuddin Jambi
                                     kafulanwarus@uinjambi.co.id


                  Received: 17-09-2023        Reviewed: 18-09-2023        Accepted: 23-09-2023

Abstract
This research presents the management system of Islamic boarding schools in increasing competitiveness in Jambi
province. This research, which uses a qualitative approach with observation, interview and documentation
techniques, was conducted at Pondok Karya Pembangunan Al-Hidayah Jambi, Pondok Pesantren Sheikh Maulana
Qori Bangko, and Pondok Pesantren Zulhijjah in Muara Bulian. The results of this study that the Islamic Boarding
School Management System in increasing competitiveness (1) The Sheikh Maulana Qori Bangko Islamic
Boarding School conducts first, the formation of a good Islamic boarding school organizational structure Second,
the formation of a working meeting at the beginning of the year. The working meeting is directly led by the Kiai
of the boarding school. Third, the plenary meeting discusses the determination of the work procedures of the board
of students, establishing a work program. Fourth, planning the realization of the boarding school management
system program (2) Karya Pembangunan Al-Hidayah Jambi boarding school, namely conducting stage I
organizational decision objectives, Stage II formulating the current situation, Stage III identifying facilities and
obstacles and Stage IV developing a series of activities (3) Pesantren Zul Hijjah Muaro Bulian formed a pesantren
academic development team. Then the team analyzed the pesantren. The team then held a meeting to determine
efforts to increase the potential and efforts to improve the boarding school.
.
Keywords: Systems, Management, Islamic boarding schools, Competitiveness


Introduction
      Islamic boarding schools are the oldest Islamic educational institutions developed by
Indonesian society (Sakir, 2016). In principle, Islamic boarding schools are a cultural product
of the Indonesian Islamic community which is fully aware of the importance of education for
native people who grow naturally (Muhajir, 2022). Regardless of where the tradition and
system is adopted, it will not affect the unique (distinctive) pattern that has taken root and lives


                                                                                                               249

International Journal of Islamic Though and Humanities,          Vol. 2 No. 02 September 2023


and develops in society to this day (Wulandari, 2020). Basically, Islamic boarding school is a
traditional Islamic educational dormitory where students live together and study under the
guidance of one (or more) teachers who are better known as "Kyai". Pesantren is the oldest
Islamic educational institution in Indonesia (Masturaini, 2021).
       The existence of Islamic boarding schools as the oldest Islamic educational institutions
in Indonesia, has grown and developed since the time of the spread of Islam and has played a
large role in educating people's lives (Mochtar, 2015). It is hoped that Islamic boarding schools
are not only capable of developing the Islamic personality of Muslims, but are also capable of
bringing about social change and improvement. The influence of an Islamic boarding school
is very positive if its alumni have returned to society by bringing various changes and
improvements to the lives of the surrounding community (Iskandar, 2019).
       The presence of modern Islamic boarding schools cannot be separated from initiatives
coming from various Islamic circles in the country. Ideas for establishing a new model of
Islamic boarding school that are development-oriented do not only come from regional
governments (Governor and Regent). The initial idea of establishing a new model of Islamic
boarding school emerged from the time the Ministry of Religion was led by Mukti Ali in the
70s until well into the 80s These ideas continued (Abizar, 2019).
       As an educational institution in the form of an Islamic boarding school, whether it still
carries a traditional or modern style, good management is required (Rizkiani, 1907). The
continuity of an Islamic boarding school's journey as an educational institution really depends
on the Islamic boarding school management system that is run. So of course the management
system implemented will also have implications for all activities of the Islamic boarding school
itself (Asmuki & Aluf, 2018). This shows that whether or not the education implemented in an
Islamic boarding school is implemented depends on the management system built by the
Islamic boarding school in question. In this matter, Husnul Yaqin stated that "the ability of an
Islamic boarding school to survive and continue to exist today is closely related to the education
system that was built" (Rohman, 2017).
       Management of Islamic boarding schools must be broadly based on important elements,
including the vision and mission of Islamic boarding schools which are in accordance with the
philosophy of Islamic education, the functional organizational structure of Islamic boarding
schools, partnerships and good services, planning and development of Islamic boarding
schools, management and supervision of human resources, dynamics in carrying out strategies.
learning, strengthening practical curriculum (Nurmaliyah et al., 2023) , efficient management
of learning resources, management and maintenance of Islamic boarding school facilities
(Zulfatun & Arifin, 2017).
       The distinctive characteristics of educational management in Islamic boarding schools
prioritize the development of morals through the study of classical books. Even Islamic
boarding schools maintain the traditional teaching system that existed before Islamic boarding
school institutions were legalized in law. The role of the kyai is very important as a figure who
is very knowledgeable and wise in making decisions (Masturaini, 2021).
       In Indonesia there are Islamic boarding schools which are famous for being influenced
by factors such as boarding schools, mosques, teaching classical books, santri, kiai and alumni
(Priatmoko, 2019). The boarding school is a characteristic of the Islamic boarding school
tradition which has become an identity because providing a boarding house involves the fame


                                                                                              250

Islamic Boarding School Management System In Increasing The Competitiveness Of Islamic
Boarding Schools In Jambi Province -Tabroni, A. Husein Ritonga, Kasful Anwar Us

of a kyai and the depth of knowledge about Islam from far away places. To gain knowledge
from the kyai, students must live in the kyai's residence. The mosque is a means to educate
students in the practice of prayer, sermons, and teaching classical books (Martin van
Bruinessen, 1990).
       Teaching classical books to students who wish to become scholars, they can develop
skills in Arabic through sorogan and recitation before they go to Islamic boarding school. The
classic books taught in Islamic boarding schools consist of nahmu (syntax), sharaf
(morphology), fiqh, ushul fiqh, hadith, tafsir, monotheism, Sufism, and ethics as well as dates
and balaghah. Santri in the Islamic boarding school tradition are classified into two groups,
namely mukim santri and kalong santri. Resident students are students who come from outside
the area and live in huts. Kalong students are students who come from the Islamic boarding
school environment, they live in their own homes, not in the Islamic boarding school
(Fathurrochman et al., 2021).
       The Islamic boarding school component will function optimally by implementing
management in every implementation. Therefore, the role of the leader must be able to change
the behavior of all members and realize the Islamic boarding school's vision and mission. The
management works sincerely at the Islamic boarding school. By spending time, thought and
energy to achieve the results of developing Islamic boarding schools (Isroani & Nguyen, 2023).
       Management in a large organization leads to control actions (Iskandar et al., 2019; Juni
& Somad, 2014; Syafaruddin, 2003; Yukl, 2010). Success provides the ability to control and
provide long-term control as a stakeholder in an organization so that every activity is focused
on the object and moves in accordance with established guidelines (Winarsih, 2017).
Managerial work at an Islamic boarding school as a complete organization with many system
building components involves all management functions. The management of modern Islamic
boarding schools in providing professional education also refers to general managerial theory
(Sakir, 2016). As described as follows:




                  Figure 1 . Essential Nature of Managerial Work (Mullins, 2010).
      By distinguishing 'managing' from 'doing' in this way researchers can view management
as aiming at clarifying and planning work, organizing the distribution of activities and tasks to
others, direction of subordinate staff and controlling the work performance of others (Badrudin


                                                                                             251

International Journal of Islamic Though and Humanities,              Vol. 2 No. 02 September 2023


& Nurdin, 2019). It provides an easy description and summary of managerial work as clarifying
goals, planning, organizing, directing and controlling as shown above. The degree of emphasis
placed on these different activities may vary greatly, from one manager to another. Some
managers tend to spend more time on certain activities than others. The application of these
activities reflects a variety of organizational situations, management practices, and managerial
styles (Kraines, 2010).
      The dynamics of Islamic boarding school management affect various aspects including
students, learning, facilities and infrastructure, leadership patterns, and institutional
management systems. Santri who live in Islamic boarding schools have developed a santri
culture based on knowledge and charity. Because among them they are familiar with the
proverb "al-ilmu bila amalin ka as-syajari bila samarin" which means "knowledge without
practice is like a tree without fruit." This is a reflection of the views and attitudes of the students
regarding the knowledge they seek (El-Syirazi., 2010).
      The development conditions of Islamic boarding schools have recently experienced
significant improvement. Education at Islamic boarding schools currently occupies an
important position for parents when deciding on the right educational institution to develop
their child's character. A growing trend in Islamic boarding schools is to organize Salafi
learning with strong yellow book teachings accompanied by general learning that follows the
governance of national education administration. Therefore, researchers chose three Islamic
boarding schools as representatives from three districts in Jambi province. The Islamic
boarding schools consist of the Al Hidayah Islamic Boarding School in Jambi City, the Zulhijah
Muaro Islamic Boarding School in Bulian Batanghari and the Syakh Maulana Qori Merangin
Islamic Boarding School.
      The dynamics of competitive ability must continue to be improved to be able to carry out
the implementation of Islamic boarding schools in the province, which sometimes experience
ups and downs every year. The more Islamic boarding schools there are, the higher the level of
competitiveness of Islamic boarding schools so that they become institutions that are truly
worthy of the public's trust. Its existence, which was once placed in the number two position
as a choice for quality education at the national standard, has triggered a very rapid Islamic
boarding school management movement. Many Islamic boarding schools are improving their
management systems to display competitive capabilities that are not left behind by general
education institutions.
      In 2020, the condition of Islamic boarding schools is at an improving level, in more detail
can be seen from the following table (Kanwil, 2023):
                    Table 1. Number of Islamic Boarding Schools in Jambi Province
                        Total
 Total        Total Non Islamic                                 Education       Education       Unit
                                           District Name
 Mukim        Residents Boarding                                units           Organizer
                        School
    1340         452          7            Kerinci                    1                  6
    8935         683         43            Moaning                    4                  39
    2329         939         28            Sarolangun                                    28
    4188         676         23            Day Trunk                  1                  22
    4040         785         25            Muaro Jambi                                   25



                                                                                                   252

Islamic Boarding School Management System In Increasing The Competitiveness Of Islamic
Boarding Schools In Jambi Province -Tabroni, A. Husein Ritonga, Kasful Anwar Us

   4160         1190           13        West Cape Jabung          3                 10
   931          251             9        East Cape Jabung                            9
   4305         328            28        Bungo                     1                 27
   7087         1675           35        Tebo                      1                 34
   6190         1487           17        Jambi City                4                 13
    19           0              1        Sungaifull City                             1

       Management of Islamic boarding school physical resources is an important element that
must be considered as per the standards of national educational institutions. The urgency of
educational facilities and infrastructure is emphasized in the National Education System Law
No. 20 of 2003, Chapter social, emotional and psychological aspects of students (Sisdiknas,
2003).
       The Islamic boarding schools in the research area include the PKP Al-Hidayah Islamic
boarding school in the city of Jambi, Zulhijah Muara Bulian, and Sheikh Maulana Qori
Merangin. As a consideration, the researchers chose the three Islamic boarding schools in
strategic areas. The researcher's capacity as well as the research time schedule limits can reach
the research location appropriately.
       There are several reasons why researchers chose the three Islamic boarding schools,
including looking at the achievements of each Islamic boarding school. Islamic boarding
schools have produced many quality student graduates. This can be seen from the number of
alumni of the PKP Al-Hidayah Islamic boarding school who successfully graduated and
continued their education in Egypt with the provision of a foreign language, namely Arabic.
Likewise, many alumni of the Sheikh Maulana Qori and Zulhijah Muara Bulian Islamic
boarding schools have successfully continued their education at various other tertiary
institutions. Not just continuing their education, many students have become scholars or
founders of various educational institutions as well as figures and leaders of government
agencies.
       Santri are the main element of an Islamic boarding school. Santri or also known as
students in general education institutions. The aim of providing education in Islamic boarding
schools is not much different from national education. Law of the Republic of Indonesia
Number 20 of 2003 concerning the National Education System states that national education
functions to develop abilities and shape the character and civilization of a dignified nation in
order to make the nation's life more intelligent, aimed at developing the potential of students
to become human beings who believe and are devoted to God Almighty. One, noble character,
healthy, knowledgeable, capable, creative, independent, and a democratic and responsible
citizen (Sisdiknas, 2003).
       Researchers looked at other advantages of the three Islamic boarding schools in terms of
facilities and infrastructure. The PKP Al Hidayah Islamic boarding school has a permanent
building equipped with learning facilities. The Islamic boarding school environment is very
closely guarded by a security team. The Sheikh Maulana Qori Islamic boarding school also has
a large building area and is still undergoing the development process. Various facilities are
provided to support the comfort of students and ustadz in their activities in the Islamic boarding
school environment. The Zulhijah Muara Bulian Islamic boarding school is located in a very


                                                                                              253

International Journal of Islamic Though and Humanities,          Vol. 2 No. 02 September 2023


strategic area and has adequate facilities and infrastructure for student activities. The location
of the boarding school is integrated with the community village so that the Islamic boarding
school management is able to monitor the use and development of facilities together with the
community around the Islamic boarding school.
      Furthermore, regarding learning, the three Islamic boarding schools organize religious
and general science learning programs. The religious knowledge taught includes learning the
yellow book, while general knowledge is given in the national education system. The PKP Al
Hidayah Islamic boarding school provides PKP Al Hidayah Early Childhood Education, PKP
Al Hidayah Madrasah Ibtidaiyah, PKP Al Hidayah MTs, and PKP Al Hidayah MA. The
Zulhijah Muara Bulian Islamic boarding school provides Madrasah Tsanawiyah (MTs)
education at the Zulhijjah Islamic Boarding School, Early Middle School (SMP) Zulhijjah
Islamic Boarding School, Madrasah Aliyah (MA) Zulhijjah Islamic Boarding School. The
Syekh Maulana Qori Merangin Islamic boarding school also provides education at Syekh
Maulana Qori MTs, Syekh Maulana Qori MA, and Syekh Maulana Qori Islamic College.
      Islamic boarding schools have complex institutional elements. To manage all these
components effectively and efficiently is determined by the management used to achieve the
goals. Therefore, researchers found a phenomenon that is worthy of further study regarding the
implementation of Islamic boarding schools. The increasing number of Islamic boarding
schools in each region is accompanied by the large number of people from various levels who
have entrusted their children to study at Islamic boarding schools. The researcher wants to
discuss how the Islamic boarding school management system is implemented in Jambi
province so that its existence is recognized by the community and government and its
management meets national education standards. Based on the theory and assumptions of the
problems above, it is necessary to conduct research with the title Islamic Boarding School
Management System in Increasing the Competitiveness of Islamic Boarding Schools in Jambi
Province.

Literature review
      In the academic world, a literature review or literature review is a very important form
of study. The literature review in this research refers to (Amadin, 2021) research published in
the journal MADINASIKA. The results of the research show that Islamic boarding school
education in an effort to achieve competitive advantage must innovate in order modernization
of education and learning, implementation of modernization is carried out in all aspects of the
curriculum, competitive advantage in education is realized in the form of graduate
achievements in the fields of science, language and entrepreneurship.

Research method
      This research uses a qualitative approach, which is a research approach that requires a
deep and comprehensive understanding of the object under study to answer problems and
obtain data which is then analyzed and obtain research conclusions in certain situations and
conditions (Faisal, 1982; Sugiyono, 2019). Using observation, interview and documentation
techniques. The qualitative approach is directed at the setting and individual as a whole, so it
is not justified to isolate individuals or organizations into variables or hypotheses, but it is
necessary to see them as part of a whole. Through research, a person attempts to find, explain


                                                                                              254

Islamic Boarding School Management System In Increasing The Competitiveness Of Islamic
Boarding Schools In Jambi Province -Tabroni, A. Husein Ritonga, Kasful Anwar Us

and describe facts, events and reality. Good research does not start from mere conjecture,
wishful thinking, imagination or hallucinations . The Islamic boarding schools in the research
area include the PKP Al-Hidayah Islamic boarding school in the city of Jambi, Zulhijah Muara
Bulian, and Sheikh Maulana Qori Merangin. As a consideration, the researchers chose the three
Islamic boarding schools in strategic areas. The researcher's capacity as well as the research
time schedule limits can reach the research location appropriately.

Result/Findings and Discussion
Islamic Boarding Schools is being Improved Competitiveness at the Syekh Maulana Qori
Bangko Islamic boarding school
       The management process is a group of basic activities that are integrally related, which
are carried out in management in general, namely the planning process , organizing process ,
implementation process and control process , in order to achieve a goal effectively and
efficiently. In terms of quality development planning carried out at the Sheikh Maulana Qori
Islamic boarding school has made good planning by creating a well-structured work program.
       Planning is a process that defines the goals of the organization, creates strategies used to
achieve the goals of the organization, and develops plans for organizational work activities.
Planning is an important process for all management functions because without planning the
functions of organizing, controlling and directing will not be able to run.
       Based on the results of observations and interviews conducted at the Syekh Maulana Qori
Islamic boarding school, the planning process carried out at the Syekh Maulana Qori Islamic
boarding school was to start forming structures, holding work meetings, plenary meetings to
discuss determining the work procedures of the santri council, determining work programs
(work programs), as well as discuss and establish Islamic boarding school regulations, program
realization.
       The first is the stage of forming an Islamic boarding school organizational structure, both
simple and comprehensive in preparing the division of tasks and authority within an
organization. This is also explained in the Guidelines for the Development of Islamic Boarding
Schools as follows:
     1. The grouping of work into organizational units is based on the similarity in the nature
        of the implementation of their respective tasks.
     2. Maintaining a comprehensive and single function for each organizational unit by
        emphasizing achieving integrated activities.
     3. Emphasizes coordination in work departments and implementation of activities
        throughout the organization.
     4. Placing important main functions and tasks at the appropriate organizational level, as
        well as equivalent functions at the same level .
     5. Provide opportunities for reasonable expansion of activities through existing
        organizational units.
     6. Determine channels of organizational command and responsibility through line and staff
        command lines.
     7. With good organization, work implementation and implementation of Islamic boarding
        school planning will have the most precise parts. The selection of people is carried out
        objectively according to their abilities in their respective fields. The organization



                                                                                              255

International Journal of Islamic Though and Humanities,              Vol. 2 No. 02 September 2023


        functions as a tool rather than management to achieve the goals expected by an Islamic
        boarding school (Interview with Kyai on September 4 2022)
      Second is the formation of work meetings, where work meetings are held at the beginning
of the year and at the end of the year. The work meeting is directly chaired by the Kiai of the
Islamic boarding school, the formation of the work meeting is determining when and where
the work meeting will be held. So that work meetings can be carried out well (Interview with
Management 05 September 2022).
      The third is a general meeting to discuss determining the working procedures of the santri
council, determining work programs, as well as discuss and establish Islamic boarding school
regulations (Interview with Teacher 05 September 2022).
      Fourth is program realization, planning program realization is a very important thing in
the Islamic boarding school management system, program realization must be achieved in
accordance with the plans made by the Islamic boarding school (Interview with Teacher 05
September 2022).
        Based on the description of the internal and external environmental analysis at the
Syekh Maulana Qori Islamic boarding school, the SWOT analysis study is as follows:

      Table 2. SWOT Analysis Sheikh Maulana Qori Bangko Islamic boarding school
                             Strength/Strength:                   Weaknesses:
      Internal factors      1. The location of the Islamic        1. Leadership in the form of
                                boarding school is strategic         a collegial collective
                                and easily accessible at a           influences       the    work
                                geographical level.                  system.
                            2. Have a visionary leader.           2. The available expert
                            3. Has a formal education level,         human resources in the IT
                                MTs and MA                           field are still limited.
                            4. Have professional teachers .       3. There is no data storage
                            5. The infrastructure is very            and processing system for
                                good.                                Islamic boarding school
                            6. Islamic boarding school               data yet.
                                curriculum is integrated with     4. Student         management
                                the madrasah.                        factors
                            7. Has superior tafsir and
                                tahfidz activities/programs.
                             Opportunity                          Threat
                             1. Making superior Islamic
                                boarding schools based on the     1. modern Islamic boarding
                                transformative          Islamic      school which is quite
                                paradigm.                            close to the other cottages.
                             2. Parents can send their            2. The Islamic boarding
                                children to Islamic boarding         school is surrounded by a
                                schools on an ongoing basis          number of state and
                                from MI to MA                        private Islamic boarding
                             3. Parents have a high level of         schools
                                trust in sending their children   3. Acceleration.
                                to Islamic boarding schools,         technological progress .
                                especially at MTS.
                             4. Collaboration with related
                                organizations/agencies that
                                have the same vision and
                                mission



                                                                                                    256

Islamic Boarding School Management System In Increasing The Competitiveness Of Islamic
Boarding Schools In Jambi Province -Tabroni, A. Husein Ritonga, Kasful Anwar Us


       External Factors

Islamic Boarding Schools is being Improved Competitiveness in the Pondok Karya
Pembangunan Al-Hidayah Jambi Islamic boarding school
       The management process is a group of basic activities that are integrally related, which
are carried out in management in general, namely the planning process , organizing process ,
implementation process and control process , in order to achieve a goal effectively and
efficiently (Azhari & Kurniady, 2016; Robbins, 2010). In terms of quality development
planning carried out at Pondok Karya Pembangunan Al-Hidayah Jambi has made good
planning by creating a well-structured work program.
       Planning is a process that defines the goals of the organization, creates strategies used to
achieve the goals of the organization, and develops plans for organizational work activities.
Planning is an important process for all management functions because without planning the
functions of organizing, controlling and directing will not be able to run.
       Based on the results of observations and interviews conducted at Pondok Karya
Pembangunan Al-Hidayah Jambi, the process of implementing planning determination was
carried out in 4 stages. The stages carried out are as follows:




   Figure 2. Four basic stages of planning Karya Pembangunan Al-Hidayah Jambi Islamic
                                       boarding school

      In the planning process for the Al-Hidayah Jambi Development Pondok Karya uses four
basic stages of planning, namely:
      The first stage is setting a goal or set of goals. Planning begins with decisions about the
wants or needs of the organization or work group. Without a clear goal formulation, the
organization will use its resources ineffectively.
      The Islamic boarding school leader explained that:

         "First of all, Pondok Karya Pembangunan Al-Hidayah Jambi determines and determines the goals
         Pondok Karya Pembangunan Al-Hidayah Jambi wants to achieve. By determining this goal, we can
         carry it out according to what was planned so that we can determine what competitiveness needs to
         be improved and developed as well as deficiencies that need to be corrected as well as the potential of
         the Islamic boarding school. So that both the vision, mission and goals of the Islamic boarding school
         are reflected in its future orientation, reflecting the ideals and competitiveness of the Islamic boarding
         school (Interview with Kyai on 09 October 2022).


      The second stage formulates the current situation. Understanding the organization's
current position of the goals to be achieved or the resources available to achieve the goals is
very important, because the plan's goals concern the future. Only after the current state of the
organization has been analyzed can plans be formulated to outline further planned activities.


                                                                                                               257

International Journal of Islamic Though and Humanities,                      Vol. 2 No. 02 September 2023


This second stage requires information, especially financial data and statistical data obtained
through communication within the organization.
Based on this description, the formulation of the current situation according to Deputy Director
1 (3 October 2022) is that:

         "The formulation of the current situation is carried out by observing and analyzing what are the
         strengths or uniqueness of Islamic boarding schools, what advantages Islamic boarding schools have
         both in terms of human resources/mudarris or mudarrisah councils, curriculum, and infrastructure
         they have.” (Interview with Deputy Director on October 3 2022).

     The results of the formulation of the current situation can be used as consideration in
making decisions and policies in designing the Al-Hidayah Jambi Development Pondok Karya
planning system in increasing competitive ability. As explained by Deputy Director 2 (3
October 2022), that:

         "The results of the formulation of the current situation will of course give us (both the board of
         directors and boarding school administrators) an idea of what are the characteristics/strengths,
         weaknesses or obstacles. Apart from that, we can see what opportunities there are for Islamic boarding
         schools so that what we have to plan or work towards is clearly illustrated. To increase competitive
         ability, of course the challenges and demands are increasingly higher." (Interview with Deputy
         Director 2 on 03 October 2022).

      The third stage identifies all conveniences and obstacles. All strengths and weaknesses
as well as conveniences and obstacles need to be identified to measure the Islamic boarding
school's ability to achieve its goals. Therefore, it is necessary to know the internal and external
environmental factors that can help Islamic boarding schools achieve their goals, or that may
cause problems. Although difficult to do, anticipating circumstances, problems, and
opportunities and threats that may occur in the future is an essential part of the planning
process. Explained by the Director (4 October 2022), that:

         "The strengths possessed by Pondok Karya Pembangunan Al-Hidayah Jambi, which are certainly
         unique to Islamic boarding schools, are the Al-Quran, the Yellow Book and Language (Arabic and
         English). Therefore, we began to develop a model for transforming the Al-Quran in education
         (tilawah, tazkiah and ta'lim). This method is believed to be a method that is truly successful in building
         a leap in the quality of human resources. Apart from that, the Islamic boarding school itself has formal
         Islamic boarding schools from PAUD, MI, MTS to MA which are accredited.” (Interview with
         director 4 on October 4 2022).

      The fourth stage develops a plan or series of activities to achieve goals. The final stage
in the planning process includes the development of various alternative activities to achieve
goals, the assessment of these alternatives and the selection of the best (most satisfactory)
alternative from the existing alternatives. After identifying the conveniences and obstacles, the
Islamic boarding school develops existing plans to achieve the desired goals. As explained by
the Director (3 October 2022) that:

         "Islamic boarding schools develop plans that have been made by involving all human resources in the
         Islamic boarding school, not only human resources are involved but students are also involved in
         developing existing plans. By involving everyone, competitiveness can be increased in accordance
         with existing needs” (Interview with director 2 on 03 October 2022).




                                                                                                                258

Islamic Boarding School Management System In Increasing The Competitiveness Of Islamic
Boarding Schools In Jambi Province -Tabroni, A. Husein Ritonga, Kasful Anwar Us

   Based on the description above at Pondok Karya Pembangunan Al-Hidayah Jambi, the
SWOT analysis study is as follows:

 Table 3. SWOT Analysis Karya Pembangunan Al-Hidayah Jambi Islamic boarding school
                             Strength/Strength:                Weaknesses:
       Internal factors
                            1. The location of the Islamic     1. The available expert
                               boarding school is strategic        human resources in the
                               and easily accessible at a          IT field are still limited.
                               geographical level.             2. There is no data storage
                            2. Have a visionary leader.           and processing system for
                            3. Has a formal education level,      Islamic boarding school
                               starting from PAUD, MI,            data yet.
                               MTs and MA                      3. management factors .
                            4. Have professional teachers .    4. There is no ki'ai yet.
                            5. The infrastructure is very      5. Management
                               good.                              development must be
                            6. Islamic boarding school            approved by the regional
                               curriculum is integrated with      government.
                               the madrasah.
                            7. Has                  superior
                               activities/programs Tafsir,
                               Tahfizd and development of
                               Arabic and English.
                             Opportunity                       Threat

                            1.   Making superior Islamic 1.        modern Islamic boarding
                                 boarding             schools      school which is quite
                                 internationally competitive.      close to the other
                            2. Parents can send their              cottages.
                                 children to Islamic boarding 2.   The Islamic boarding
                                 schools on an ongoing basis       school is surrounded by a
                                 from MI to MA                     number of state and
                            3. Parents have a high level of        private Islamic boarding
                                 trust in sending their            schools
                                 children to Islamic boarding 3.   Acceleration
                                 schools, especially at MTS        technological progress
                                 and MA
                             4. Collaboration with related
                                organizations/agencies that
                                have the same vision and
                                mission .
                             5. Collaboration with Al-Azhar
       External Factors         Cairo, Yemen and Türkiye.

Islamic Boarding Schools is being Improved Competitiveness at the Zul Hijjah Muaro
Bulian Islamic boarding school
       The management process is a group of basic activities that are integrally related, which
are carried out in management in general, namely the planning process , organizing process ,
implementation process and control process , in order to achieve a goal effectively and
efficiently (Tichy et al., 1982). In terms of quality development planning carried out at the Zul



                                                                                                 259

International Journal of Islamic Though and Humanities,                     Vol. 2 No. 02 September 2023


Hijjah Muaro Bulian Islamic boarding school has made good planning by creating a well-
structured work program.
       Based on the results of observations and interviews conducted at the Zul Hijjah Muaro
Bulian Islamic boarding school, the management process that occurs at this Islamic boarding
school is joint management . The head of the Islamic boarding school mentions the term " To
Gether Management" . With the understanding that everything done by this Islamic boarding
school is done together, with the division of tasks between each in accordance with the decree
that has been determined (Interview with Kyai on November 4, 2022).
       The planning process carried out at the Zul Hijjah Muaro Bulian Islamic Boarding School
is to start a work program and the Islamic Boarding School Revenue and Expenditure Budget
Plan (RAPBPP) is prepared as a guide for implementing activities in the management and
development of Islamic boarding schools.
         The first in the planning system is the diagnosis stage where various information and
study materials are collected through environmental analysis. This step is carried out by
stakeholders using a simple analysis which leads to a SWOT analysis where identification,
observation and detailed analysis of things that influence the achievement of the vision and
mission and goals of the Islamic boarding school are carried out. This process identifies internal
and external problems, looks at the strengths, potential, weaknesses and threats faced by
Islamic boarding schools. SWOT analysis is seen as an effective strategic planning method for
evaluating this.
         Internal environmental analysis aims to analyze the strengths and weaknesses of Islamic
boarding schools. The strengths that are possessed will continue to be maintained and become
the hallmark of the Islamic boarding school, while the weaknesses are a collective task so that
they can be overcome so that they have minimal influence on achieving the goals of the Islamic
boarding school. External analysis is carried out to see the potential and threats that Islamic
boarding schools have, so that the potential can be utilized optimally while threats can be
overcome so that goals can be achieved optimally. Explained by the Head of the Lodge (4
November 2022), that:

         “First of all, an Islamic boarding school academic development team was formed. Then the team
         carried out an analysis of the Islamic boarding school, but perhaps we did not produce a complete
         written analysis document. The team then held a meeting to determine what competitive strengths
         needed to be improved and developed, as well as deficiencies that needed to be corrected and the
         potential of the Islamic boarding school. So that both the vision, mission and goals of the Islamic
         boarding school are reflected in its future orientation, reflecting the ideals and competitiveness of the
         Islamic boarding school.” (Interview with Kyai on November 4, 2022).

       Based on the description of the internal and external environmental analysis at the Zul
Hijjah Muaro Bulian Islamic boarding school, the SWOT analysis study is as follows:

         Table 4. SWOT Analysis Zul Hijjah Muaro Bulian Islamic boarding school
                                 Strength/Strength:              Weaknesses:
       Internal factors         1. The location of the Islamic
                                   boarding school is strategic 1. Leadership in the form of a
                                   and easily accessible at a      collegial        collective
                                   geographical level.             influences    the     work
                                2. Have a visionary leader.        system.
                                3. Has formal education levels,
                                   MTs, SMP and MA which



                                                                                                              260

Islamic Boarding School Management System In Increasing The Competitiveness Of Islamic
Boarding Schools In Jambi Province -Tabroni, A. Husein Ritonga, Kasful Anwar Us

                                 are integrated with the          2. The available expert
                                 community environment.              human resources in the IT
                              4. Have professional teachers .        field are still limited.
                              5. The infrastructure is good.      3. There is no data storage
                              6. Islamic boarding school             and processing system for
                                 curriculum is integrated with       Islamic boarding school
                                 the madrasah.                       data yet.
                              7. Has                   superior   4. Student         management
                                 activities/programs such as         factors.
                                 MTS and Aliyah learning in
                                 the mornings during middle
                                 and high school, tafsir and
                                 tahfidz.
                               Opportunity                        Threat
                               1. Making superior Islamic
                                  boarding schools based on       1. modern Islamic boarding
                                  the transformative Islamic         school which is quite
                                  paradigm.                          close to the other
                               2. Parents can send their             cottages.
                                  children to Islamic boarding    2. The Islamic boarding
                                  schools on an ongoing basis        school is surrounded by a
                                  from MI to MA                      number of state and
                               3. Parents have a high level of       private Islamic boarding
                                  trust in sending their             schools
                                  children to Islamic boarding    3. Acceleration.
                                  schools, especially at MI          technological progress
                                  Andalan
                               4. Collaboration with related
                                  organizations/agencies that
                                  have the same vision and
       External Factors           mission



Conclusion
      The Islamic Boarding School Management System is being improved Competitiveness
Islamic boarding schools in Jambi Province, namely (1) Syekh Maulana Qori Bangko Islamic
boarding school , first carried out the formation of the Islamic boarding school organizational
structure both simple and comprehensive in preparing the division of tasks and authority within
an organization . Second, the establishment of a working meeting at the beginning of the year.
The work meeting was chaired directly by the Kiai of the Islamic boarding school. The third is
a general meeting to discuss determining the working procedures of the santri council,
determining work programs, as well as discuss and establish regulations Islamic boarding
school. Fourth, planning for program realization is the core effort in the Islamic boarding
school management system. Program realization must be achieved in accordance with the plans
made by the Islamic boarding school. (2) The Karya Pembangunan Al-Hidayah Jambi Islamic
boarding school is carrying out phase I t organizational decision objectives, Phase II Formulating the
current situation , Stage III identify conveniences and obstacles and Stage IV develop a series of
activities (3) Zul Hijjah Muaro Bulian Islamic boarding school form an Islamic boarding school
academic development team. Then the team carried out an analysis of the Islamic boarding



                                                                                                  261

International Journal of Islamic Though and Humanities,        Vol. 2 No. 02 September 2023


school. The team then held a meeting to determine what competitive strengths needed to be
improved and developed as well as deficiencies that needed to be corrected and the potential
of the Islamic boarding school.

References
Abizar, M. (2019). Pluralisme dalam Pandangan Mukti Ali. Ishlah: Jurnal Ilmu Ushuluddin,
     Adab Dan Dakwah, 1(2), 185–212.
Amadin, A. (2021). Pola Pendidikan Berbasis Pondok Pesantren Dalam Upaya Mencapai
     Keunggulan Kompetitif. Jurnal MADINASIKA Manajemen Dan Keguruan, 2(2), 112–
     121.
Asmuki, A., & Aluf, W. Al. (2018). Pendidikan Karakter Di Pesantren. Edupedia, 2(2), 1–10.
     https://doi.org/10.35316/edupedia.v2i2.325
Azhari, U. L., & Kurniady, D. A. (2016). Manajemen pembiayaan pendidikan, fasilitas
     pembelajaran, dan mutu sekolah. Jurnal Administrasi Pendidikan, 23(2), 26–36.
Badrudin, B., & Nurdin, R. (2019). Sim (Sistem Informasi Manajemen) Kurikulum Perguruan
     Tinggi Keagamaan Islam Berbasis Cms Wordpress. Ta’dib, 22(1), 1.
     https://doi.org/10.31958/jt.v22i1.1416
El-Syirazi., A. M. (2010). Landasan Etika Belajar Santri. Sukses Bersama.
Faisal, S. (1982). Metodologi Penelitian Pendidikan. Usaha Nasiona.
Fathurrochman, I., Danim, S., Anwar AB, S., Kurniah, N., & Hajja Ristianti, D. (2021).
     Theoretical Review of the Implementation Islamic Boarding School Curriculum
     Management in Indonesia. International Journal of Education Research and
     Development, 1(1), 1–15. https://doi.org/10.52760/ijerd.v1i1.2
Iskandar, W. (2019). Analisis Kebijakan Pendidikan Dalam Perspektif Madrasah. Al-
     Madrasah:         Jurnal     Pendidikan       Madrasah        Ibtidaiyah,     4(1),    1.
     https://doi.org/10.35931/am.v4i1.109
Iskandar, W., Yusuf, M., & Annisa. (2019). Prototipe Supervisi Pendidikan Dan Kinerja
     Kepala Sekolah/Madrasah Dalam Rangka Peningkatan Mutu Pendidikan. Jurnal Islamic
     Education Manajemen, 4(2), 163–180. https://doi.org/10.15575/isema.v4i2.6195
Isroani, M. H. M. F., & Nguyen, V. C. (2023). Lembaran Ilmu Kependidikan Development of
     Prophetic Education Curriculum Management in Student Boarding Schools. Lembaran
     Ilmu Kependidikan, 52(1), 1–8. https://doi.org/https://doi.org/10.15294/lik.v52i1.43822
Juni, D., & Somad, P. R. (2014). Manajemen supervise dan kepemimpinan kepala sekolah.
     Alfabeta.
Kanwil, L. K. P. J. (2023). Aplikasi Sistem Informasi Pada Madrasah Aliyah di Provinsi Jambi.
     Kemenag Jambi. https://jambi.kemenag.go.id/page/file/LKj_Kanwil_2022_ok.pdf
Kraines, G. (2010). Accountability leadership : how to strengthen productivity through sound
     managerial leadership. Franklin Lake: The Career Press.
Martin van Bruinessen. (1990). Kitab Kuning : Books in Arabic Script Used in the Pesantren
     Milieu ( Comments on a New Collection in the KITLV Library ) [ 1 ]. 146.
Masturaini. (2021). Penanaman Nilai Nilai Moderasi Beragama Di Pondok Pesantren (Studi
     Pondok Pesantren Shohifatusshofa NW Rawamangun Kecamatan Sukamaju Kabupaten
     Luwu Utara). Pascasarjana IAIN Palopo, April, 5–24.
Mochtar, H. (2015). The Nahdlatul ‘Ulama And Politics in Indonesia : Acase Study Of Ahlu
     Sunnah Wal-Jama’ah In Jombang Regency. Journal of Education and Social Sciences,
     2((Okt) ISSN 2289-9855), 02.
Muhajir, A. (2022). Inclusion of pluralism character education in the Islamic modern boarding
     schools during the pandemic era. Journal of Social Studies Education Research, 13(2),
     196–220. www.jsser.org%0AJournal


                                                                                          262

Islamic Boarding School Management System In Increasing The Competitiveness Of Islamic
Boarding Schools In Jambi Province -Tabroni, A. Husein Ritonga, Kasful Anwar Us

Mullins, L. J. (2010). Management & Organisational Behaviour. Ninth Edition Prentice Hall.
Nurmaliyah, Y., Aripin, S., & Nurdiansyah, N. M. (2023). 2013 Curriculum: Implementation
     of Islamic Religious Education Learning in Schools for Children with Special Needs.
     International Journal of Islamic Thought and Humanities, 2(1), 124–138.
     https://doi.org/10.54298/ijith.v2i1.83
Priatmoko, S. (2019). The Internalization of Wasathiyah Values In Inclusion Madrasah: A Case
     Study of Integrated Madrasah Ibtida’iyah of Ar-Roihan Malang. Al-Bidayah: Jurnal
     Pendidikan Dasar Islam, 11(2), 358–378. https://doi.org/10.14421/al-bidayah.v11i2.521
Rizkiani, A. (1907). Pengaruh Sistem Boarding School Terhadap Pembentukan Karakter
     Peserta Didik (Penelitian di Ma ’ had Darul Arqam Muhammadiyah Daerah Garut). 10–
     18.
Robbins, S. P. (2010). Fundamentals of Human Resource Management, Tenth Edition. John
     Wiley & Sons.
Rohman, F. (2017). Pembelajaran Fiqih Berbasis Masalah Melalui Kegiatan Musyawarah Di
     Pondok Pesantren Al-Anwar Sarang Rembang. Al-Tadzkiyyah: Jurnal Pendidikan Islam,
     8(2), 179–200.
Sakir, M. (2016). Pendidikan Islam Dalam Sistem Pendidikan Nasional. Cendekia: Jurnal
     Kependidikan             Dan            Kemasyarakatan,             12(1),         103.
     https://doi.org/10.21154/cendekia.v12i1.370
Sisdiknas, (2003). Sistem Pendidikan Di Indonesia Dari Berbagai Aspek.
Sugiyono. (2019). Metode Penelitian Pendidikan (Kuantitatif, Kualitatif, Kombinasi, R&D dan
     Penelitian Pendidikan). Alfabeta.
Syafaruddin. (2003). Manajemen Mutu Terpadu Dalam Pendidikan Indonesia. Grasindo.
Tichy, N. M., Fombrun, C. J., & DeVanna, M. . (1982). Strategic human resource management.
     Sloan Management Review, 23, 47–61.
Winarsih, S. (2017). Kebijakan dan implementasi manajemen pendidikan tinggi dalam
     meningkatkan mutu pendidikan. Cendekia, 15(1).
Wulandari, A. P. (2020). “Pendidikan Islam Berasaskan Moderasi Agama di Pondok
     Pesantren Nurul Umahat Kotagede Yogyakarta”,. UIN Sunan Kalijaga Yogyakarta.
Yukl, G. A. (2010). Leadership in organization. Prentice Hall.
Zulfatun, S., & Arifin, Z. (2017). Implementasi Pengembangan Kurikulum Di Smp
     Muhammadiyah Boarding School ( Mbs ) Yogyakarta. Tadris, 12(1).




                                                                                        263