Research on Humanities and Social Sciences                                                              www.iiste.org
ISSN 2224-5766 (Paper) ISSN 2225-0484 (Online)
Vol.10, No.16, 2020


       Assessment of the Performance of School Management
    Committees (SMCs) Towards the Attainment of Quality Basic
      Education in the Tarkwa-Nsuaem Municipality of Ghana
    Theophilus Andoh-Robertson1*        Samuel Effah2    Thomas Bright Eshun3    Miss Angelina Kwasi4
1.Head, Guidance and Counselling Unit, University of Mines and Technology (UMaT), P. O. Box 237, Tarkwa,
                                                    Ghana
      2.Head, Audit Unit, University of Mines and Technology (UMaT), P. O. Box 237, Tarkwa, Ghana
   3.Snr. Assistant Registrar, University of Mines and Technology (UMaT), P. O. Box 237, Tarkwa, Ghana
 4.Headmistress, UMaT Basic School, University of Mines and Technology (UMaT), P. O. Box 237, Tarkwa,
                                                    Ghana

Abstract
The study sought to assess the performance of School Management Committees (SMCs) towards the attainment
of Quality Basic Education in the Tarkwa-Nsuaem Municipality through the views of education officials, head
teachers, teachers and SMC Members. A descriptive survey design was adopted for the study. A stratified
sampling and simple random sampling techniques were adopted to select a sample size of two hundred and thirty
(230) respondents. Questionnaire and interview guides were used to collect data from the respondents, validated
by the researchers and analyzed by the use of descriptive statistics. The findings indicated that SMCs’ had good
performance on almost all performance indicators, however, were not doing enough to ensure financial
accountability in schools. Also there was weak statistical correlation between SMCs performance and academic
performance in the Municipality. Finally, it was recommended that SMCs should be given the needed support
including regular training, especially, on financial accountability. Also much effort is needed to be done by
SMCs in the Tarkwa-Nsuaem Municipality (TNM) to ensure quality basic education. Conclusively, the good
performance of SMCs is therefore one of the major sureties to attaining quality basic education in Tarkwa
Nsuaem Municipality. It is hoped that the findings will serve as tools for change of practice of supervision of all
stakeholders in the delivery of quality basic education in public basic schools.
Keywords: Quality Basic Education, Assessment, Performance. School Management Committee, School-
Community, FCUBE, School Budget Hearing.
DOI: 10.7176/RHSS/10-16-03
Publication date:August 31st 2020

1. Introduction
1.1 Background to the Study
The importance of education has never been doubted or contradicted in any part of the world. It is treasured in
society because it provides the tool for imparting knowledge and skills. It cultivates values, morals, character and
develops the intellect. Strategies and methods required in imparting knowledge are many and varied. One of
such strategies was the coordinated effort provided through the partnership activities of the community and the
School Management Committees (SMCs). The activities of SMCs are critical at the basic school level where
teachers and school management have to cope with young children and adolescents in the development of their
intellect and personality. The SMCs play critical roles in enforcing standards, developing and maintaining school
infrastructure, and creating a partnership between teachers, pupils and district authorities to bring about needed
changes (Ghana Education Service [GES], 2001).
       According to Akyeampong (2005), after the new structure of Education Reform had been put in place in
1987, government introduced an education sector policy in 1996 known as “Free Compulsory Universal Basic
Education (FCUBE) in line with Article 25 of the 1992 constitution of the Republic of Ghana. FCUBE
represented the effort to ensure that all children of school-going-age received free and compulsory ‘quality’
primary education by 2005. The new policy helped to create a motivation for a coordinated sector programme
providing a framework for donor support to education, and a drive for educational decentralization with greater
recognition of the important role of community participation in school management for school
improvement. FCUBE was developed on the basis of three cost components:
    i.     Improving quality of teaching and learning through the review and revision of teaching materials, new
           measures on teacher incentives, and a focus on in-service teacher training.
   ii.     Strengthening management at both central and district levels; and
  iii.     Improving access and participation especially through schemes that encouraged girls’ participation at
           primary level.
       Ironically, there has not been a commensurate improvement in quality teaching and learning at the basic


                                                        18

Research on Humanities and Social Sciences                                                             www.iiste.org
ISSN 2224-5766 (Paper) ISSN 2225-0484 (Online)
Vol.10, No.16, 2020

schools. Increased funding has not in any way contributed to improvement in quality in terms of literacy and
cognitive abilities of the basic pupils (Owolabi, 1999). Owolabi further observed that the present level of quality
basic education in many schools is insufficient to impart sustainable literacy and knowledge, skills and habits
required for full social and economic participation in society. To stem the tide of low quality teaching and
learning which often results in low school performance, School Management Committee has been identified as a
strategic intervention towards improvement in school performance (Opare, 1999).
      It is worthy of note, that the issue of educational management is not a contemporary one in Ghana. In this
regard, various initiatives and interventions have been made so that the basic school pupil who is the focus of all
educational policies really benefit. It is for this reason that the community which has immediate contact with the
child is ever called upon to assist in school management; hence, the establishment of School Management
Committees (SMCs) for schools by an Act of parliament in 1994 alongside the introduction of FCUBE policy in
Ghana.

1.2 Statement of the Problem
Various educational reviews and reforms and the desire of the community to be involved in school management
culminated in the introduction of systems, interventions and structures from the Municipal Education Office to
the school community. Most of these strategies were to ensure effective school management that will yield high
accountability and improvement in quality education delivery in the country. Amongst them is the School
Management Committee (SMC).
      The SMC is a Committee designated under the Ghana Education Service Act of 1994. It is a school
community-based organization aimed at strengthening community participation as a means of facilitating quality
education delivery (Osei-Owusu and Sam, 2012). The SMC is a representation of the entire school community of
a particular school or cluster of schools. The school community therefore becomes its constituency. Azeem
(2010) on school management systems in Ghana showed that school governance was generally weak. For
instance, few parents and SMC/PTA members involved themselves in school financial management, though the
opportunities for participation existed. SMCs lacked knowledge of financial issues.
Inferring from the expected roles of SMCs, one would want to see a vibrant SMC in school communities
collaborating the activities and efforts of the basic school head. It is worthy of note that the performance of the
SMCs in most public basic schools in Tarkwa-Nsuaem-Municipality (TNM) have not been assessed to determine
its effectiveness. It is for these reasons that the researchers sought to assess how SMCs have performed vis-à-vis
their objectives and also the challenges that confront them in the Municipality.

1.3 Purpose of the Study
The main aim of the study was to examine the performance of SMCs in public basic schools in the Tarkwa-
Nsuaem Municipality. The study sought to analyse the role of SMCs towards quality basic education in the
public basic schools in TNM.

1.4 Research Questions
     The study was guided by the following research questions:
    i.   What is the level of performance of SMCs in achieving quality basic education in TNM
   ii.   What is the relation between SMC performance and academic performance (quality basic education) in
              TNM?
  iii.   What are the challenges of SMCs in the Tarkwa-Nsuaem Municipality?

1.5 Significance of the Study
The study is beneficial, not only to the schools but also has the strength of contributing a wealth of information
to existing literature on school management in basic schools. The study will draw attention and serve as a
reminder to the school heads and other stakeholders, of the critical important roles of the SMC and the need to
resource them. It is hoped that the findings will serve as tools for change of practice of supervision of all
stakeholders in the quality of basic education in public basic schools.
     Furthermore, the findings would galvanize schools whose SMCs are dormant and thus influence their
modus operandi in the schools-communities. It is believed that this will help shape and inform stakeholders’
perception about SMC. The findings of the study will bring the attention of head teachers, GES and the
government to appreciate the role of SMCs in school management and this will initiate national debate and
revive the wheel for effective monitoring of the activities of the SMCs in schools.

1.6 Delimitation of the Study
The study was restricted to only the performance of School Management Committees in public basic schools so
that in-depth analysis could be carried out. Geographically, it was delimited to only public basic schools in the


                                                        19

Research on Humanities and Social Sciences                                                              www.iiste.org
ISSN 2224-5766 (Paper) ISSN 2225-0484 (Online)
Vol.10, No.16, 2020

Tarkwa-Nsuaem Municipality.

1.7 Definition of Terms
Effectiveness: It is the extent to which the set goals or objectives of a school programme are accomplished.
Assessment: involves the measurement of performance against a set of criteria.
School Management Committee (SMC): it is a representation of the entire school community of a particular
school or cluster of schools.
School Community: made up of the political/ traditional leadership of an area, PTA/SMCs, Town Development
Committees, Non-Governmental Organizations, the religious bodies and the residents in that area.
School Budget Hearing: A platform that allows various stakeholders to make inputs to the school budgets and
find possible ways of funding it.

2. Review of Related Literature
Conceptually, the framework for this study sought to look at the established indicators of school management
performance that influenced the delivery of quality basic education. In this regard, the attitudes of both the basic
school heads and SMC members were brought into sharp focus, how SMCs operated in the schools, the form of
school related supports that SMCs should enjoy and the kind of school environment SMCs need to operate from
were very crucial in quality education delivery.

3. Methodology
The study sought to analyze the operations of School Management Committees (SMC) in the Tarkwa-Nsuaem
Municipality. This chapter dealt with the procedures employed to undertake the study. It specifically outlines the
research design, the population, sample and sampling procedures, the research instruments, data collection
procedures data analysis plan and profile of the study area.

3.1 Research Design
A research design can be seen as the vehicle that enables the researchers to be transported from a state of
ignorance to a state of knowledge. The study was both qualitative and quantitative by nature. It was located
within the descriptive survey design. The researchers used the descriptive research design because it is flexible
and allowed the researchers to discover new issues related to the study. The study design was also a combination
method that permitted the use of both quantitative and qualitative techniques to gather and analyse data. The
appropriateness of the study design lied in the fact that it was concerned with the present status of a phenomenon
and purports to give accurate description of activities, objects, or process and persons; the nature of prevailing
conditions, practices, attitudes and trend that are developed (Amedahe & Asamoah- Gyimah, 2005).
      The purpose of the design was to observe, describe and document aspects of a situation as it naturally
occurred. For this study, since the conditions or events either existed already or have occurred (i.e. how the
SMCs have operated since their inception), the researchers selected relevant variables for analysis of their
relationships. This was done taking cognisance of the objective of the study.

3.2 Population
The population for the study was all SMCs and five (5) Senior Education Officers in the Tarkwa-Nsuaem
Municipality. The Municipality has been zoned into eight (8) different educational circuits. These are Tarkwa,
Nsuaem North and South, Benso, Fiase, Akyeampim, Nsuta, and Dompim Circuits. The Municipality also has
over 120 fully functional public basic schools with 85 SMCs. Each SMC is made up of 9 members. Hence, the
total population for the study was 770.

3.3 Sample and Sampling Procedure
In all, 25 SMCs were sampled in addition to five (5) Municipal Education Officers and this yielded a total
sample size of One Hundred and Thirty (230) respondents. Consequently, proportional stratified sampling and
purposive sampling methods were used to select respondents for the study. Stratified sampling method allowed
grouping the population according to certain characteristics that contributed to the representativeness of the
sample. For instance, it guided in selecting SMCs from each of the eight (8) circuits; urban/rural community
schools. After the stratification, a simple random sampling technique helped to select the required percentage of
the population from each stratum (circuit) to form the sample.
      The lottery method, a type of simple random technique was employed to select individual SMCs from the
various strata. As a result, SMCs selected were; 4 from Tarkwa and 3 each from Nsuaem North and South;
Benso, Fiase, Akyeampim; Nsuta, and Dompim Circuits respectively. It is important to stress that the method
ensured that each SMC stood the chance of being selected. According to Amedahe and Asamoah-Gyimah (2005),
the technique is appropriate to use when the population of study is similar in characteristics of interest. Sampling


                                                        20

Research on Humanities and Social Sciences                                                             www.iiste.org
ISSN 2224-5766 (Paper) ISSN 2225-0484 (Online)
Vol.10, No.16, 2020

technique ensured that respondents from each public basic school stood an equal and independent opportunity of
being selected.

3.4 Instruments
In collecting data for the study, the researchers employed the use of questionnaires, structured interview guides
and observation checklists. These instruments were stable, consistent and a uniform measure, without variation
and can be completed at the respondent’s convenience (Amedahe & Asamoah-Gyimah, 2005). The population
for the study was largely literates (Teachers, GES Officials) hence, questionnaires were therefore convenient to
use.
      The instruments were in three categories, i.e. A, B and C. Category ‘A’ contained questionnaires for
Education Officers, heads and teachers that require information on the operations of SMC towards quality basic
education in Tarkwa-Nsuaem Municipality. This contained both close-ended and open-ended questions for
respondents which sought their views on School Management and their role to ensure school effectiveness. The
instruments were developed and modified into Likert’s four-point response rating scale ranging from Strongly
Agree (4 points), Agree (3 points), Disagree (2 points) and Strongly Disagree (1 point). This was for the
purposes of ensuring that every respondent expressed an opinion about the issues being raised. Category B and C
were an observational checklist and the interview guides for SMC based on the topic under study. The interviews
sought the opinions of these personnel on the operations of SMCs towards quality education in Tarkwa-Nsuaem
Muinicipality.

3.5 Validity and Reliability of the Instruments (Pilot Testing)
To test the reliability and validity of the research instruments, pilot- testing was conducted in the University of
Mines and Technology Basic School (UBaS), a privately owned basic school in the Tarkwa-Nsuaem Education
Directorate of the Western Region. The choice of UBaS for the pilot testing was because it had so much
commonality with the chosen area schools. The pilot test unearthed the flaws, in terms of wording, poor choices
and ambiguities in the instruments. This promoted the reliability and validity of the instruments.
A correlation coefficient using the Cronbach’s coefficient was computed to ascertain the reliability of the
instruments. The Cronbach’s alpha values obtained were .71 for Appendix A, Education Officials questionnaires
and .70 for Appendix B, interview guide for SMC members; an indication of a high reliability of the instruments.

3.6 Data Collection Procedure
The researchers personally administered the questionnaires and the interview guides to the respondents and again
collected the completed items. This was done after the researchers had presented a letter of introduction from the
district education office to the visiting schools. This exercise was done within a period of 5 weeks in 2020. For
the interviews, prior appointments were booked with the respondents and each one of them was interviewed at
the appointed date and time. In all, 160 questionnaires and 70 interview guides were administered. This resulted
in the high return rate of the instruments. The researchers were able to retrieve 88.5% of completed
questionnaires and interview guides.

3.7 Data Analysis Procedure
Analysis of the data entailed both quantitative and qualitative techniques. Patton (as cited in Inkoom, 2003)
observed that qualitative analysis transforms data into findings without any formula. The Likert four-point
response rating scale was scored in this order: Strongly Agree (4 points), Agree (3 points), Disagree (2 points)
and Strongly Disagree (1). Discretion can be offered but the final determination remains unique for each
researcher. Quantitative data were analyzed using appropriate test statistics such as frequencies and the Pearson
Product Moment Correlation on relationships and associations. There was also a descriptive analysis of the
essential component of most of the data to determine the relationship between variables. The interview data was
analysed using percentages, means and Pearson product Moment Correlation. The findings were summarized
according to the variables being measured and presented in a form that makes easy understanding. Fairness was
the hallmark in interpreting and communicating the findings which was based on majority views, nature of
research questions and purpose of the study.

3.8 Profile of the Study Area
The Tarkwa Nsuaem Municipality as one of the Districts in the Western Region of Ghana is located between
Latitude 400’N and 500 40’N and Longitudes 10 45’ W and 20 10’W. It is bounded to the north by the Wassa
Amenfi East District, to the south by the Ahanta West District, to the West by the Nzema East Municipal and to
the East by Mpohor Wassa East. The municipality has a total land area of 2354 km. The district is one of the
richest in Ghana in terms of natural resources. Like, Obuasi in the Ashanti Region of Ghana, gold is its major
natural resource. There is also a Manganese Mine at Nsuta a suburb of Tarkwa. The Aboso Glass Factory, which


                                                        21

Research on Humanities and Social Sciences                                                         www.iiste.org
ISSN 2224-5766 (Paper) ISSN 2225-0484 (Online)
Vol.10, No.16, 2020

was set up by Ghana's first President, Osagyefo Dr. Kwame Nkrumah, though now defunct is also in the
Municipality. The Tarkwa Gold Mine is situated some four kilometers west of the town of Tarkwa. The district
also has the Region's only public university - the University of Mines and Technology, Tarkwa.
     According to the Ghana 2010 population and housing census, Tarkwa Nsuaem Municipality recorded a
population of 90,477 representing 3.8 percent of the Western regional population. The sex distribution of the
population indicates that there are more males (51.6%) than females (48.4%). The municipality is predominantly
rural with 69.7% of its population residing in the rural areas (Ghana population and housing census, 2010).

4. Results and Discussion
The major task of the study was to examine the performance of SMCs towards quality basic education in the
Tarkwa-Nsuaem Municipality. In pursuance of that, research instruments developed were to seek answers to
research questions and test some of the findings emerged from the review of related literature.

4.1 Demographic Characteristics of Respondents
The tables and figures below provide the characteristics of respondents involved in the study. These
characteristics include gender, age and occupations of respondents.
4.1.1    Gender of Respondents
Table 1 presents the data on the gender of respondents involved in the study. The data shows that 73% (168) of
the respondents were males while 27% (62) were females.
Table 1: Distribution of Gender of Respondents
Gender                                          N                            %
Male                                           168                           73.0
Female                                           62                          27.0
Total                                          230                         100.0
4.1.2    Occupation of Respondents
An analysis of members’ occupations is presented in Table 2.
Table 2: Frequency Distribution of Members’ Occupation
Occupation                                         N                            %
Farming                                           54                            23.5
Teaching                                         60                             26.1
Mining                                            86                             37.4
Other(specify)                                    30                             13.0
Total                                            230                            100.0
     The results from Table 2 indicate that 23.5% and 26.1%. of members were farmers and teachers
respectively.Mining 37.4% was the predominant occupation engaged by majority of SMC members. However,
the danger here is that, the high percentage of local miners on the SMC board, who were deemed not to have
enough time, might have participated very little during meetings and referred strong issues to more few groups
such as the teachers and farmers.

4.2 Performance Indicators of SMC
Research question 1 sought to establish the level of performance of SMCs in the Tarkwa-Nsuaem Municipality.
Table 3 presents the data collected.
Table 3: Distribution of Performance Indicators of School Management Committees
Performance                                                SA %      A%      D%      SD %    M      Std.
Organization/attendance of Executive meeting               16.5      26.5    20.0    37.0    2.23   1.12
Organization/attendance of General meeting                 40.0      49.6    10.0    0.4     3.29   0.66
Visit to School                                            33.5      34.3    23.9    8.3     2.93   0.95
Monitor pupil/teacher attendance                           40.0      22.2    29.1    8.7     2.93   1.02
Teacher Accommodation                                      21.3      17.0    30.4    31.3    2.28   1.12
Monitor Capitation grant                                   13.1      26.5    39.1    21.3    2.31   0.95
Settle disputes among Teachers                             47.8      30.4    15.7    6.1     3.20   0.92
Do minor repairs                                           48.7      22.2    8.7     20.4    3.11   1.07
Enrolment Drive & Retention                                26.1      51.7    13.9    8.3     2.96   0.86
Ensures Accountability                                     20.0      19.5    25.7    34.8    2.25   1.14
Note: N= 230, SA= Strongly Agree, A= Agree, D = Disagree, SD = Strongly Disagree
4.2.1     SMC Executive Meeting
From Table 3, majority (57.0%) of SMCs did not organize and attend executive meetings. The average
assessment indicates the performance was low (M = 2.23). This means members denied themselves the time to



                                                     22

Research on Humanities and Social Sciences                                                            www.iiste.org
ISSN 2224-5766 (Paper) ISSN 2225-0484 (Online)
Vol.10, No.16, 2020

meet as executives to deliberate on issues before taking them to general forum. The irregular attendance at
executive meetings also affected some members in their involvement in the implementation of programmes and
projects. This could have led to abandonment of programmes and projects earmarked. They failed to comply
with the directives that they should attend executive meetings at least once a term (GES, 2001).
4.2.2     SMC General Meeting
Again, from Table 3, 89.6% of the respondents said SMCs organized general meetings where parents and other
stakeholders were involved. At such meetings, issues affecting schools such as teaching and learning, school
discipline, school attendance, infrastructure and school performance might have been discussed. From the
sample, the average performance was (M = 3.29), which indicates good performance. The level of performance
was therefore high. This result conforms to GES (2001) directive that SMCs should organize general meetings at
least once a term where school policies are discussed. If the people were informed about policies, programmes
and projects, they would be empowered to monitor their implementation at the local level and make meaningful
contributions.
4.2.3     Visit to Schools by SMC
From Table 3, 67.8% of SMC members paid regular visit to schools as part of their routine activities. As they
visited the schools they were made to sign the Visitors’ Book. These visits perhaps afforded members the chance
to inspect school premises to be sure that teaching and learning took place in a safe and conducive atmosphere.
Such visits also could have allowed them to identify school infrastructural needs and where there was the need
for immediate repairs. The performance of the sample in terms of school visits was relatively high (M = 2.93, SD
= 0.95). The figures indicate a high performance by the sampled SMC members. The practice is in conformity to
GES (2001) directive that members should ensure that the premises of the school are in good sanitary and
structurally safe conditions.
4.2.4     Monitoring Pupil/Teacher Attendance
From Table 3, 62.2% of the respondents monitored school attendance. The average performance of SMC with
respect to monitoring pupils and teacher attendance was 2.93. The result indicates the sample agreed that SMC
monitored school attendance as spelt out by Attakpa & Ankomah, (1998); GES, (2001), that SMC should
monitor school attendance to ensure that school contact hours were being used effectively.
4.2.5     Teachers’ Accommodation
From Table 3, SMCs’ involvement in assisting newly posted teachers to secure residential accommodation was
found to be very low (38.3%). The average performance was 2.28 which fell below expectation. The figure
indicates a low performance. The result clearly contravenes and contradicts Buah-Bassuah (2004); GES (2001)
that SMCs should assist in securing accommodation for teachers especially newly posted ones.
4.2.6     Monitoring Capitation Grant
From Table 3, only few (39.6%) of the respondents said that they were involved in the monitoring of the
capitation grant. The sample as a whole indicated that the relative performance of SMCs in monitoring capitation
grant was low (M = 2.31). Several reasons might have accounted for this including lack of openness on the part
of some heads of schools, members poor knowledge in school finance. It became clear that most of the schools
did not inform SMC members how the grants were disbursed. This practice portrays weakness in school
governance and thus confirms Azeem (2010) that school governance was generally weak and that some SMCs
did not know that they had the right to enquire about school finance and failed to stop resource leakages.
4.2.7     Settlement of Disputes among Teachers
From Table 3, 78.2% of respondents said SMC members involved in disputes and conflicts settlement in the
schools whilst referring other serious disciplinary matters to the District Director of Education for action. These
mainly involved teachers, pupils and some members of the community. The average performance of the SMC
was 3.2 (SD = 0.92), which indicates a high performance. The result corroborates and is in pursuance of their
role in school management noted by Buah-Bassuah, (2004) and GES, (2001) that SMCs assisted heads in
resolving school conflicts. These conflicts occurred between pupils and teachers, between teachers and between
teachers and community members. The readiness of the conflict resolution moves by the SMCs helped the heads
in their management functions. These initiatives improved school-community relation.
4.2.8     Minor Repairs done by SMC
From Table 3, 70.9% of respondents said SMCs did carry out school minor repairs like repairs of windows,
doors broken furniture, replacements of school roofing sheets and other renovations works such as painting. The
average performance by the sample was 3.11. The value indicates appreciable performance.
4.2.9     SMCs’ Role in Enrolment Drive & Retention
From Table 3, 77.8% of SMC members were involved in school enrolment drive and retention. The average
performance was 2.96. This means majority of SMC members had taken the issues of providing quality basic
education as a major duty and commitment owed the schools in their jurisdiction. They organized community
forum to whip parents and community members’ interest in education. SMC members used reward of regular
pupils to ensure that pupils were retained in school. This finding validates Buah-Bassuah, (2004); Mensah, (2003)


                                                       23

Research on Humanities and Social Sciences                                                             www.iiste.org
ISSN 2224-5766 (Paper) ISSN 2225-0484 (Online)
Vol.10, No.16, 2020

& GES, (2001) that SMCs had involved themselves in activities that were aimed at increasing access and
participation.
4.2.10 SMCs’ Role in Ensuring School Accountability
From Table 3, 60.5% of the SMC members failed to assist in ensuring school accountability. The average
assessment was 2.25. The value indicates a weak performance. The many reasons adduced for this situation
were that, it was not within their purview and that enquiring into such issues often raised tension between them
and the school authorities. Others too, said that some of the heads did not engage them in school financial issues.
The finding shows that SMCs failed to perform their role to serve as checks and balances on the school
administration to stop leakages in resource flow as they occurred. This result contradicts Mensah, (2003);
Obeng-Darko, (2005) that SMC were to maintain proper books of accounts and provide financial information
required by management to control the effective implementation of the school grants, but corroborates Azeem
(2010) that few parents, SMC or PTA members involved themselves in school financial management, though the
opportunities for their participation existed. The poor knowledge of finances reduces public access to school
financial information.

4.3 Relationship between SMCs’ Performance and School Academic Performance
Research question 2 sought to find the relationship between SMC’s performance and school academic
performance. As a result, the Pearson’s Product –Moment Correlation Coefficient was computed to assess
whether there was a relationship between the performance of SMCs and school academic performance. The
result is presented in Table 4.
Table 4: Distribution of Relationship between Schools’ Performance and                    SMCs’ Performance
Average School Performance                                   Average SMC Performance
(Pearson) average school Performance         1.000                          .100
                   Sig. (2-tailed)                                                   .129
                   N                                   230                          230
                   SMC average performance       1.000                             1.000
                                                    .100
                                                      .129
                       N                             230                             230
     The result (i.e. r=0.100) from Table 4 indicates a weaker, positive correlation between rankings for the
variables. (r (230) = .100, p= .129 i.e. p >.05). The result implies that there is not much contribution of the
sampled SMCs towards the schools’ academic performance. Since the significant value was (p=.129) > .05, it
can be concluded that there is no significant statistical correlation between the two variables. This implies
improvements in the performance of SMCs were not very much correlated with school academic performance.
Nonetheless, SMCs’ performance might be one of the factors associated with school academic performance.
This substantiates the findings by Day and Lord, Kaiser, Hagan and Craig (as cited in Wikipedia, free
Encyclopedia, 2010) that management contributed to key organizational outcomes. Thus, the inputs SMCs’
make in the performance of their assigned roles in school management towards the attainment of quality basic
education would eventually affect school academic performance in a very minimal measure.

4.4 Challenges of SMC
Research question 3 sought to identify the factors that militate against the SMCs and their activities in schools-
communities. Table 5 presents the information obtained from the respondents.
Table 5: Distribution of Challenges of SMC
Challenges                                               N                                %
Shortage and transfer of teachers                               15                       6.5
Lack of funds                                                   15                       6.5
Irregular meetings and lack of commitment                       48                       20.9
Irregular training of members                                   41                      17.8
Absent of motivation for members                                57                      24.8
Lack of transparency in school finance                          47                      20.4
Other                                                           7                       3.1
Total                                                        230                        100.0
     From Table 5, the major challenges of the SMCs were identified to be absent of motivation for members
(24.8%), irregular meetings and lack of commitment (20.9%), lack of transparency in school finance (20.4%) as
well as irregular training of members (17.9%). The result confirms the opinion of Azeem, (2010) & Aheto-
Tsegah, (2009) that SMCs are confronted with several challenges leading to poor performance in some
communities.



                                                        24

Research on Humanities and Social Sciences                                                              www.iiste.org
ISSN 2224-5766 (Paper) ISSN 2225-0484 (Online)
Vol.10, No.16, 2020

5. Summary, Conclusions and Recommendations
5.1 Summary of Key Findings
The study assessed the performance of SMCs in Tarkwa-Nsauem Municipality (TNM). It employed the use of
descriptive research design and questionnaires and interview guides as research instruments in data collection.
After the quantitative analysis of the data collected, the following findings were made:
    i.   The SMCs performed majority (75%) of their activities. These activities which were also indicators of
         SMCs’ performance were general meetings, school visit, monitoring school attendance and capitation
         grant, helping teachers’ accommodations, ensuring school accountability, settles school disputes,
         enrolment drive and school retention. However, their performance on critical areas such financial
         accountability and attendance to executive meetings was very weak.
   ii.   Contrary to some studies, it was observed that there was a weak positive significant correlation between
         SMC performance and academic performance in schools.
  iii.   Some of the factors that militated against the performance of SMCs in the Municipality included but not
         limited to absent of motivation for members, irregular meetings and lack of commitment, lack of
         transparency in school finance, as well as irregular training of members leading partly to the inability of
         SMC members to ensure and insist on school financial accountability.

5.2 Conclusions
 From the foregoing findings, SMCs’ performance in the 10 performance indicators identified above is
computed to be 63.6% which is high indicated that SMCs’ had good performance on almost all performance
indicators. The study therefore did not support the opinion that school governance vis- a-vis SMC was generally
weak and ineffective as observed by Azeem (2010); Etsey et al. (2009). Thus one can conclude that SMC
sampled were active and were doing well in their areas of operation. Head teachers thus, need not to face school
challenges alone since they may have active and functional SMCs to rely on.
     The good performance of the SMCs in the Tarkwa-Nsuaem Municipality is perhaps an indication that
SMCs were not becoming a forgotten and dysfunctional phenomenon as depicted by earlier researchers. There
was however, a weak positive correlation between SMCs performance and school academic performance. This
meant that increases or decreases in SMCs’ performance did not significantly relate to increases in school
academic performance.
Conclusively, the performance of SMC is therefore one of the major sureties to attaining quality basic education
in Tarkwa-Nsuaem Municipality.

5.3 Recommendations for Policy and Practice
Based on the findings of the study, the following recommendations were proposed:
       i.    It was recommended that SMCs should be given the needed support including regular training,
            especially, on financial accountability. Also much effort is needed to be done by SMCs in the
            Tarkwa-Nsuaem Municipality (TNM) to ensure quality basic education. Stakeholders should
            appreciate the sacrifices made by committed members of the SMC. This intervention would
            increase and retain the zeal of members.
      ii.   The GES, Government, school authorities and the community should provide the necessary
            resources to SMCs so that those debilitating factors that have been bottlenecks and impeded the
            work of SMCs would be minimized. The practice of budget hearing which enables stakeholders to
            make inputs into school programmes should be encouraged by the school administration as
            community would make pledges in terms of resource mobilization to execute projects so designed.
     iii.   To ensure that school drop-outs and absenteeism were brought to the barest minimum, SMCs with
            the backing of the Unit Committees, Municipal Assembly and the Education Office should enact
            bye-laws that deal decisively with the issue of school absenteeism. Pupils who go contrary to such
            laws should be given measured punitive sanctions by the school administration to serve as deterrent
            to others.

5.4 Suggestions for Further Research
Based on the findings of the study, it is proposed that future studies should focus on the role of women in
educational decentralization towards the delivery of quality basic education in Tarkwa-Nsuaem Municipality.

References
Akyeampong, K. (2005). Whole school development in Ghana. http://portal.unesco.org/education/en/files.html
Amedahe, F. K., & Asamoah-Gyimah, K. (2005). Introduction to educational research. Cape Coast: Centre
     for continuing Education, University of Cape Coast.
Attakpa, S. K., & Ankomah, Y. A. (1998). Baseline study on the state of school management in Ghana. Journal


                                                        25

Research on Humanities and Social Sciences                                                        www.iiste.org
ISSN 2224-5766 (Paper) ISSN 2225-0484 (Online)
Vol.10, No.16, 2020

     of Educational Management, 1(1), 1-20.
Azeem, A.V.        (2010). An overview of the Africa education watch Ghana report. http://www.aew
     overview.pdf.adobe
Buah-Bassuah, R. (2004). Community participation in junior secondary schools in Twifo Praso Education
     District. Unpublished master’s Thesis, University of Cape Coast, Cape Coast.
Etsey, K., Smith, M. T., Gyamera, E., Koka, J., DeBoer, J., Havi, E. & Heyneman, S. P. (2009). Basic education
     in Ghana: Progress and Problems. http://pdf. Usaid.gov/pdf_docs/PNADQ657.pdf
Ghana Education Service (2001). Improving quality education through community participation: PTA/SMC.
     Handbook. Accra: CSA
Ghana Education Service (2009). Internal budget book: Budget statement & economic policy of the government
     of Ghana 1999- 2005. Accra: GES.
Inkoom, A. R. (2003). Teacher management and support services in basic schools in West Akim district of the
     Eastern Region. Unpublished master’s Thesis University of Cape Coast, Cape Coast.
Mensah, K. R. (2003). Community participation in the educational reform: The SMC factor in the Shama-
     Ahanta East Metropolitan. Unpublished Master’s Thesis, University of Cape Coast, Cape Coast.
Obeng-Darko, E. (2005). Head teachers and SMC chairmen attend workshop on capitation grant.
     http://www.ghanaweb.com/ghanahomepage
Opare, J. A. (1999). Academic achievement in private and public schools: Management makes the difference.
     Journal of Educational Management, 2 (2), 1-12.
Osei-Owusu, B. and Sam, F. K. (2012). Assessing the Role of School Management Committees (SMCs) in
     Improving Quality Teaching and Learning in Ashanti Mampong Municipal Basic Schools. Journal of
     Emerging Trends in Educational Research and Policy Studies (JETERAPS), 3(5):611-615.
Owolabi, S. O. (1999). Analysis of trends in Ghana’s school-going population. Journal of Educational
     Management. 2(1), 13-29
Patton, M. Q. (2002). Qualitative evaluation and research methods (3rd ed.). Newbury Park, CA: Sage
     publications.




                                                     26