Chapter 6
Understanding Leadership in Educational
Leadership Research in Finland

Saana Korva and Pikka-Maaria Laine




Abstract This systematic literature review focuses on previous academic research
on leadership in the context of the Finnish education system for minors, including
early childhood education and care through the secondary level. The aim is to exam-
ine how leadership is understood in the focal studies. This is accomplished by
acknowledging the leadership concepts of the studies, identifying the locus of lead-
ership in them and ontologically differentiating their understandings of collective.
According to the results, leadership was mostly defined as a collective, social phe-
nomenon in nature. Most of these studies drew from an entity-based ontology,
meaning that collective forms of leadership were seen as different types of leader-
ship the characteristics of which were studied. Only a few studies drew from pro-
cess ontology examining collective to be constituted within a flow of relations. The
results are discussed in light of international educational leadership research and
from the perspective of leadership research approaches in management and organ-
isation studies. Based on our study, we encourage the future research on educational
leadership to draw from various ontoepistemological approaches to strengthen the
understanding of educational leadership.

Keywords Educational leadership · Systematic literature review · Early childhood
education and care · Compulsory education · Finland




S. Korva (*)
Faculty of Education, University of Lapland, Rovaniemi, Finland
e-mail: saana.korva@ulapland.fi
P.-M. Laine
Faculty of Social Sciences, University of Lapland, Rovaniemi, Finland
e-mail: pikka-maaria.laine@ulapland.fi

© The Author(s) 2024                                                            103
R. Ahtiainen et al. (eds.), Leadership in Educational Contexts in Finland,
Educational Governance Research 23,
https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-031-37604-7_6

104                                                                     S. Korva and P.-M. Laine


Introduction

In the context of the Finnish education system, research on educational leadership has
increased over the past decade, and especially the research on social and collective
forms of leadership, such as distributed leadership, has seemed to flourish (e.g. Tian
et al., 2016). However, there is diversity of ontological understandings of collective
leadership, either as an entity or as a processual phenomenon. Therefore, the aim of
this study is to examine the understanding of leadership in the educational leadership
research in Finland. Our study focuses on empirical research in the context of the
Finnish education system for minors. We approach our research task by first acknowl-
edging the concepts used in the literature; second, by identifying the locus of leader-
ship; and third, by examining how collective is ontologically understood in the
research. Within collective leadership studies, we distinguish the ontological differ-
ences by drawing on the matrix of Ospina et al. (2020), in which the authors position
the studies on collective leadership to different categories, depending on whether the
collective is understood as drawing from an entity-based ontology or process ontol-
ogy. As our result, we distinguish the most commonly used concepts in the literature,
as well as position the previous research based on the locus of leadership – whether it
resides in individual, group or system – and based on the ontological understanding of
collective as a ‘type’ or ‘process’. Our study enables us to link educational leadership
within the historical trajectory and theoretical multidimensionality of leadership stud-
ies in the social sciences, such as management and organisation studies. By bringing
out the different ontological approaches towards leadership, we can increase the
understanding of different forms of collective leadership to encourage more explicit
and consistent ontoepistemological and methodological approaches within the field of
educational leadership.
    This study is accomplished via a systematic literature review focusing on empiri-
cal research in the areas of educational leadership, educational management and
educational administration in the context of the Finnish education system excluding
higher education from 2000 to 2020. Because there is still relatively little research
published in English, all articles that deal with leadership in the Finnish education
system1 for minors, that is, under the age of 18, including early childhood education

1
 In Finland, according to the Act on Early Childhood Education and Care (540/2018), early child-
hood education and care (ECEC) refers to the entirety of the child’s planned and goal-oriented
upbringing, teaching and care, with a particular emphasis on pedagogy. Every child has the right
to ECEC. At 6 years old, children participate in a one-year pre-primary education that became
mandatory in 2015, as set by the Basic Education Act (1998/628). After that, 7 years of age starts
a compulsory education, which ends when the young person has reached the age of 18 or com-
pleted secondary education (general upper secondary education or vocational education and train-
ing). The Compulsory Education Act (1214/2020), which extends compulsory education to
secondary education as well, entered into force in August 2021. Secondary education is free for
young people, stated by the law. Education at all these levels, in ECEC, pre-primary education and
compulsory education, are guided by the national core curriculums determined by the Finnish
National Agency for Education. The system forms an educational continuum from childhood until
adulthood, that is, up to the age of 18.

6   Understanding Leadership in Educational Leadership Research in Finland         105


and care (ECEC), pre-primary education, comprehensive school, general upper sec-
ondary education/school and vocational education and training (VET), were taken
into account. Finally, along with the established criteria for the systematic literature
review, 32 peer-reviewed empirical journal articles published between 2010 and
2020 were selected for the final analysis. No previous literature review has been
conducted focusing specifically on Finnish educational leadership at the different
levels of the education system for minors (see, e.g. Alava et al., 2012; Eskelinen &
Hujala, 2015; Risku & Kanervio, 2011). In the research on educational leadership,
the importance of context is essential because it has implications for how leadership
is conceptualised and how it is practiced in educational institutions and their soci-
etal context (Hallinger, 2018).
    The special features of Finnish educational leadership stem from the historical
development of the national education system, education policy, management prac-
tices and leadership culture at the municipal and local levels (see, e.g. Risku &
Kanervio, 2011). Educational leadership is characterised by strong confidence in
the competence of education professionals, which allows great degrees of freedom
for leading educational organisations in practice (Uljens & Nyman, 2013). Even
though organisations or unit-level management systems differ at different levels of
the education system, education activities must be led by highly educated profes-
sionals who have the qualifications of a teacher. Organisationally, early childhood
education and care is carried out in centres managed by an ECEC centre director.
ECEC centre directors often lead several units, usually two to three centres. Pre-­
primary education is organised in accordance with the municipality’s decision in an
ECEC centre, in a comprehensive school or at another suitable location. The desig-
nated leader of a comprehensive school or general upper secondary school is the
principal. VET, on the other hand, is often organised in regional consortia that
include several units. In VET, the management system is multilevel; the vocational
institution is managed by a person called the principal or director, and under the
principal, there are administration and managers of the VET fields and subfields. At
every level, teachers are responsible for (their own) teaching. In addition, teachers
are involved in leadership processes and can take on various formal and informal
leadership roles, such as team leader in ECEC and vice principal in comprehensive
schools. ECEC teachers and childcare nurses work in teams; at other levels, teach-
ers’ educational collaborations are linked to specific educational subjects or fields.
    Educational leadership can be seen as having specific features compared with lead-
ership in other fields. Educational organisations play a role in sustaining society by
providing cultural and educational continuity (Parsons, 1960, as cited in Seeck, 2008,
p. 20). The growing number of leadership models and different concepts reflect
researchers’ efforts to define and develop effective educational leadership from differ-
ent perspectives (Gumus et al., 2018). Because of societal, political, institutional and
cultural differences in different countries, educational leadership can be related to
different meanings and practices – even if it is described with similar concepts (Moos,
2013). In international research, different concepts, models and perspectives have
been attached to educational leadership at the different levels of education. According
to Gumus et al. (2018), the most studied educational leadership concepts in

106                                                                S. Korva and P.-M. Laine


international research have been distributed leadership, instructional leadership and
teacher leadership. Distributed leadership is argued as representing ‘one of the most
influential ideas to emerge in the field of educational leadership in the past decade’
(Harris, 2010, 55). However, in the context of educational organisations, distributing
leadership does not necessarily mean a weakening of the formal leadership positions
(see, e.g. Tian et al., 2016). Instructional leadership, which is also referred to by terms
such as pedagogical leadership, curriculum leadership or leadership for learning
(see, e.g. Bush, 2019) is ‘one of the most commonly studied’ models in educational
leadership (Gumus et al., 2018, p. 29). The model was originally very principal cen-
tred because it is based on the idea that the principal’s role is to guide and supervise
teaching and learning (Gumus et al., 2018; Hallinger & Murphy, 1985). Teacher lead-
ership is also based on the idea of the distribution of leadership with the particular
focus on teachers’ informal leadership roles (York-Barr & Duke, 2004). In addition to
these, the following concepts, amongst others, have also been used within educational
leadership in the literature: transformational leadership, technology leadership, trans-
actional leadership, ethical/moral leadership, charismatic leadership, administrative/
managerial leadership, strategic leadership, authentic leadership, visionary leader-
ship and servant leadership (Bush, 2019; Bush & Glover, 2014; Gumus et al., 2018).
    Leadership is a diverse and multidimensional phenomenon; there is not just one
definition of leadership, but many, which calls for research from different perspectives
(Crevani et al., 2010; Yukl, 2006). Still, educational leadership research has been
accused of conceptual fragmentation and is seen as theoretically fragile (Niesche,
2018; Oplatka, 2008). The roots of many of the models or concepts mentioned above
are not in the educational sciences; only some of them, such as instructional leader-
ship and teacher leadership, have been developed in the field (Wang, 2018). Since the
development of the research field of educational leadership in the 1950s, scholars
have borrowed concepts and theories from the social and behavioural sciences
(Oplatka, 2008; Heck & Hallinger, 2005). According to Wang (2018), one of the top
five ‘dominant framings’ for concepts in educational leadership research is organisa-
tion theory. However, as Wang notes (2018, p. 335), ‘building linkages to the concepts
on leadership and organisation studies is still in process’.
    In the current study, we analyse previous research based on whether it is more
traditional leader-centric research focusing on the actions and perspective of the
manager/management or whether the research object is collective leadership. Then,
to explore the boundaries of the research on collective leadership, we benefited from
the categorisation of Ospina et al. (2020), who demonstrate that collective forms of
leadership can ontologically be divided into entity-based ontological understanding
of a collective or process ontological understanding of a collective (see Table 6.1 in
Ospina et al., 2020, p. 443). When the collective is seen more as an entity, collective
leadership is seen as a ‘leadership type’ or model, which can be found in interper-
sonal relationships (such as shared leadership or team leadership) or in system
dynamics (such as distributed leadership). The entity-based research focuses on the
characteristics, influences and/or dynamics of collective leadership. A process onto-
logical understanding of collective leadership, in turn, understands leadership as
being constituted within the relations in a continuous process of relating. This
means that moments of leadership, such as directing, can be captured in the

6   Understanding Leadership in Educational Leadership Research in Finland                 107

Table 6.1 Inclusion and exclusion criteria for the searched publications
Inclusion criteria                                     Exclusion criteria
Peer-reviewed journal article                          Book chapter, academic dissertation,
                                                       project report
In English                                             In Finnish or in Swedish (or in other
                                                       languages)
Published 2010–2021 (before October)                   Published before 2010
Leadership in organisation as a main or one of the     Object of the study, e.g. leaders’
research object(s) of the study                        well-being
Focuses on Finnish educational leadership              Comparative study including data from
                                                       other countries as well
Empirical study                                        Theoretical study


momentarily stabilisation of relations. It is important to acknowledge that leader-
centric forms of leadership studies can also draw from process ontology. A study
that draws from process ontology requires methods that allow the researcher to
study how meanings are co-created within the flow of relational dynamics in situa-
tional interactions or in relation to system-level sociohistorical relations. In addition
to different ontological understandings of the term collective, the other axis on the
matrix by Ospina et al. (2020) describes the locus of leadership, which means
whether leadership resides in a group or a system.
    Inspired by Ospina et al. (2020), we created a framework that distinguishes stud-
ies based on the locus of leadership and ontology of the collective. We have extended
the locus of leadership dimension to consist also of a leader-centric view and
labelled the differences in collective ontology as ‘Collective leadership as a type’
and ‘Collective leadership as a process’. We have further divided the category of
‘Collective leadership as a type’ into two subcategories, such as ‘Leader’s view on
leadership’ and ‘Community’s view on leadership’. This distinction is made
because, even though leadership is understood as a collective phenomenon, a lot of
research is done from the leaders’ perspective. Even though it is well justified to
understand the viewpoints of the leader(s), we would also like to notice that carry-
ing out research only amongst leader(s) can be seen as strengthening leader centric-
ity within collective forms of leadership.
    This categorisation provides also the possibility to position research on educa-
tional leadership within the historical trajectory and theoretical multidimensionality
of leadership studies in the social sciences, such as management and organisation
studies. In this field, leadership research has evolved from traditional leader-centric
perspectives to post-heroic ones, in which leadership is seen as a collective phenom-
enon that actualises in social interaction (Alvehus & Crevani, 2022; Carroll et al.,
2008; Denis et al., 2012). As demonstrated above, leadership models that emphasise
forms of collective leadership, such as distributed leadership, are amongst the most
studied in the field of educational leadership (Gumus et al., 2018; Wang, 2018). This
differs from leadership studies in the field of management and organisation studies,
where the traditional understanding of leadership as residing in the leader still
remains strong, even though collective/plural forms of leadership have appeared in
the field to a stronger extent.

108                                                            S. Korva and P.-M. Laine


    The collective understanding of leadership has meant a shift from realistic and
post-positivistic science philosophical approaches to constructionist, processual
and practice-based approaches (Crevani et al., 2010). For example, within practice-­
based theorising, leadership is understood as collective and process-like by nature;
it is actualised in the constant flow of interpersonal relationships within daily prac-
tices and in relation to sociohistorical practices, and the research can demonstrate
how the instant stabilisation of the interactional flow produces shifts in direction
that manifest a leadership moment (Crevani et al., 2010; Raelin, 2016). However,
despite the rise of constructionist, processual and practice-based approaches to
leadership research, many of the leadership studies in management and organisation
studies, as well as the research on educational leadership, is based on realistic and
post-positivistic science philosophy and is accomplished using quantitative research
methods. According to Gumus et al. (2018), quantitative methods have recently
been favoured in the quest to measure the effectiveness and impact of education.
    Our research task is to examine how leadership is understood in the empirical
educational leadership research accomplished in Finnish educational organisations
for minors. With the systematic literature review, we approach the current study
with the following research questions: What kinds of leadership concepts are used
in the research? What is the locus of the leadership in the research? How is ‘collec-
tive’ ontologically understood in the studies? For the purpose of the present litera-
ture review, the term ‘educational leadership research’ (koulutusjohtamisen tutkimus
in Finnish) is used to refer to all the research accomplished in the field of educa-
tional sciences dealing with educational leadership, educational management and
educational administration. Furthermore, the concepts and phenomena of ‘people
leadership’ and ‘management of issues’ are not distinguished but are considered
part of the leadership phenomenon. Although bundling various concepts might
erase specifications (e.g. Oplatka, 2008; Bush, 2008), in the present research, the
phenomenon of ‘educational leadership’ is considered to consist of these various
aspects of leadership.
    Next, the systematic review process is explained, and the results are presented
based on the research questions.



Systematic Literature Review Method

Search and Selection of the Data

A systematic literature review was accomplished by the first author to focus on
selecting materials based on well-defined criteria to synthesise those materials
(Hallinger, 2014; Tranfield et al., 2003). The aim was to find out what kind of
research has been done in the field of educational sciences that deals with educa-
tional leadership, educational management and educational administration in the
context of the Finnish education system for minors, from ECEC to upper secondary
education.

6   Understanding Leadership in Educational Leadership Research in Finland         109


    The research data were collected in October 2021. The university library’s infor-
mation specialist helped with the selection of online databases and search phrases.
The following databases were selected: EBSCO (ERIC and Academic Search Elite),
ProQuest (ERIC and Education Collection), Scopus and the Finnish database Finna.
fi. Relevant publications were searched using the following search phrases: educa-
tion, leadership, management, administration, early childhood education, basic
education, upper secondary education, vocational school, principal, director and
Finland or Finnish.
    Before the literature search, it was assumed that there would be relatively few
publications altogether, so the search criteria were initially broad: (a) peer-reviewed
journal article, (b) peer-reviewed book chapter, (c) written in English or Finnish, (d)
published in 2000–2021 (before October) and (e) an empirical or a theoretical study
dealing with educational leadership. However, because the searches yielded a mod-
erate number of publications, the criteria were specified to align with the interests
of this review. The inclusion/exclusion criteria are summarised in Table 6.1 and
justified below.
    To review academic research publications that contribute to the international sci-
entific discussion on educational leadership, and thus are more widely available, it
was decided to include only peer-reviewed, English-language journal articles. Book
chapters were excluded because the peer review processes for books vary widely.
Academic dissertations, mostly written in Finnish, were excluded because of uncer-
tainty about their quality and because of being written in the Finnish language.
    The original publication period, 2000–2021, was chosen because research and
publications on educational leadership in Finland began to increase after the turn
of the millennium because of education reforms (see, e.g. Alava et al., 2012).
However, with changes in legislation, especially in the field of ECEC and VET,
taking place in the 2010s, the operating environment for pre-2010 research can be
seen as significantly different. Probably because of these changes and the growing
interest in the phenomenon of leadership, most of the journal articles were pub-
lished after 2010. Therefore, it was decided to specifically focus on studies pub-
lished in the past 10 years. In addition, previous literature reviews have already
covered the research conducted in the first decade of the twenty-first century,
though the focus and scope of these reviews do not correspond to that of this study
(see Alava et al., 2012; Eskelinen & Hujala, 2015; Risku & Kanervio, 2011;
Saarivirta & Kumpulainen, 2016).
    The systematic literature review included studies from all levels of the Finnish
education system for minors, that is, ECEC, pre-primary education, comprehensive
school and secondary education, including general upper secondary education and
VET. In these levels of the education system, the participants are minors, at least
until secondary education, and the guidance system is based on the national guid-
ance by the Finnish National Agency for Education through the national core cur-
ricula for each level – for ECEC, for pre-primary education, for basic education, for
upper secondary school and the degree criteria for VET.

110                                                                S. Korva and P.-M. Laine


    Higher education was not included because it is adult education and differs
administratively and in its leadership perspective because universities and universi-
ties of applied sciences are autonomous within the relevant legal and regulatory
framework, and their social status is different from that of compulsory education
organisations or ECEC organisations. Of course, in practice, leadership in ECEC
centres, schools, general upper secondary schools and vocational institutes also dif-
fers considerably. However, these all organise education for minors, children and
young people. Second, the main focus of the current systematic literature review
was not to address the differences regarding research on different educational-level
organisations per se but to look at how leadership as a phenomenon under study has
been approached altogether. For this purpose, the review included only empirical
studies. Theoretical studies have a lot of variations regarding the leadership as a
phenomenon and an object of study.
    The data collection and selection phases are presented in Table 6.2. The literature
search yielded approximately 400 peer-reviewed journal articles. In the initial
screening of the articles, duplicates and clearly non-relevant articles were first
removed, after which 265 publications remained (see phase 1. of screening in
Table 6.2). In the second phase of the screening, book chapters, the articles written
in Finnish or other languages, international comparative studies in which Finland
was one of the contexts and articles whose perspective was historical were excluded.
    In the third phase of screening, these 114 articles were reviewed, here in terms of
whether their abstracts and keywords matched the inclusion criteria. After the three
phases of screening, 61 articles remained. Next, the articles were coded using a
data-extraction table that included the following categories: (1) bibliographical
information (author, title, publication year, journal), (2) participants or data (e.g.
documents), (3) research methodology and (4) concept of leadership (or leadership
model). In addition to these categories, the aim of the study and research questions
were also checked in case leadership was not the object of the empirical study. In
this coding phase, 29 non-relevant articles that did not meet the criteria were found
and excluded. The articles excluded in this phase were conceptual in nature,

Table 6.2 Data collection and selection phases
                                                           Screening of the data
                                                 Search    1.      2.      3.    Final data
Database            Source                       results   Phase Phase Phase for analysis
Finna.fi            Peer-reviewed journal        96        64      114     61    32
                    article, search results for
                    ‘Text’ or ‘Other unspecified’
EBSCO; ERIC,        Peer-reviewed journal article 352      201
Academic Search
Elite
ProQuest; ERIC                                   303
and Education
Collection
Scopus                                           301
Total                                                      265    114    61     32

6   Understanding Leadership in Educational Leadership Research in Finland         111


including studies in which leadership in an educational organisation was not the
actual object of the research or studies in which data were not collected in or only
in a Finnish educational organisation. Hence, after the screening and coding phases
32 peer-reviewed articles remained for the final analysis. The list of these selected
articles is presented in Appendix.



Analysis of the Articles

To answer the main research question – How is leadership understood in the empiri-
cal educational leadership research accomplished in Finnish educational organisa-
tions for minors? – the following subquestions were posed:
1. What kinds of leadership concepts are used in the research?
2. What is the locus of leadership in the research?
3. How is ‘collective’ ontologically understood in the studies?
The analysis of the selected articles (n = 32) included the following two steps: First,
to answer the first and second subquestions, the analysis began by using a data-­
extraction table supplemented with a fifth category: (1) bibliographical information,
(2) participants or data (e.g. documents), (3) research methodology, (4) concept of
leadership (or leadership model) and (5) articulations of leadership. A summary
table and a synthesis of the concepts used in the previous research are presented in
the results section. Second, to answer the third subquestion, we used the framework
based on Ospina et al. (2020) to explore the ontology of the collective within the
studies that had different forms of collective leadership. The classification, includ-
ing examples of articles representing the different approaches to collective leader-
ship – ‘Collective leadership as type’, including the subcategories of ‘Leaders’ view
of collective’ and ‘Community’s view of collective’ and ‘Collective leadership as a
process’ – is presented in the results section. The analysis was performed in a deduc-
tive manner as previous conceptualisations of leadership research have guided it. In
the next section, the results of the analysis are presented to answer the research
question.



Findings

 eadership Concepts and Models in Finnish Educational
L
Leadership Research

Of the 32 articles analysed, 15 examined educational leadership in ECEC organisa-
tions, 13 in comprehensive school and 4 in VET. None of the articles focused on the
context of general upper secondary education/school.

112                                                                   S. Korva and P.-M. Laine


    Based on the articles included in this literature review, the most used educational
leadership concepts in the research concerning ECEC organisations and compul-
sory education organisations were distributed leadership and pedagogical leader-
ship, as well as the combinations of these concepts, such as distributed pedagogical
leadership (see Table 6.3.). In relation to distributed leadership, concepts or models
of joint leadership (Keski-Rauska et al., 2016) and moral leadership (Paulsen et al.,
2016) were used. Teacher leadership was a focus of studies specifically in ECEC,
and none of the articles examined teacher leadership in the comprehensive school
context, in contrast to an international study of teacher leadership in which the con-
cept was examined specifically in the school context (Heikka et al., 2016).
    In addition to these concepts, educational leadership was also approached from
the perspectives of culture (Lahtero & Risku, 2014; Weckström et al., 2020), diverse
worldviews in schools (Lipiäinen et al., 2021), the professional learning community
(e.g. Antinluoma et al., 2018) and a broader systemic, education theoretical per-
spective (Uljens et al., 2016). In some of the studies, the focus was specifically on
leadership in educational reforms and change (Pulkkinen et al., 2019; Pyhältö et al.,
2016; Soini et al., 2016) and models, such as knowledge management (Syysnummi
& Laihonen, 2014) and strategic leadership (Lahtero & Kuusilehto-Awale, 2013).
Few studies applied concepts such as symbolic leadership (Lahtero & Risku, 2012,
see also 2014) and relational leadership (Mäntyjärvi & Puroila, 2019), which refer
to a theoretical approach close to ‘Collective leadership as a process’ (Ospina
et al., 2020).

Table 6.3 Leadership concepts in educational leadership research in the contexts of Finnish
education organisations for minors
Distributed leadership       Halttunen (2016), Heikka et al. (2021), Heikka and Suhonen
 Joint leadership           (2019), Heikka and Hujala (2013), Kangas et al. (2016),
 Moral leadership           Keski-Rauska et al. (2016), Lahtero et al. (2019, 2017), Paulsen
                             et al. (2016), Varpanen (2021)
Pedagogical leadership       Ahtiainen et al. (2021), Fonsen and Soukainen (2020), Harju-­
 Distributed pedagogical    Luukkainen et al. (2014), Heikka et al. (2020), Jäppinen and
  leadership                 Maunonen-Eskelinen (2012), Jäppinen and Sarja (2012)
 Broad pedagogical
  leadership sustainable
  (pedagogical) leadership
Teacher leadership           Halttunen et al. (2019), Heikka et al. (2016, 2018)
Relational leadership        Mäntyjärvi and Puroila (2019)
Leadership culture           Lahtero and Risku (2014), Lahtero and Risku (2012), Weckström
 Symbolic leadership        et al. (2020)
Educational leadership       Antinluoma et al. (2018), Lipiäinen et al. (2021), Pyhältö et al.
 School leadership          (2016), Uljens et al. (2016)
 Professional learning
  community
Leadership for change        Pulkkinen et al. (2019), Soini et al. (2016)
Strategic leadership         Lahtero and Kuusilehto-Awale (2013)
Knowledge management         Syysnummi and Laihonen (2014)

6   Understanding Leadership in Educational Leadership Research in Finland          113


   A summary of the leadership concepts used in the articles is presented in
Table 6.3. It should be noted that the classification is based on the concept/model of
leadership that the study focused most on, even though the article might have
referred to the other concepts as well. In this sense, the studies could have been
positioned into several categories at the same time. In the table, the concepts have
been divided into groups according to how they are linked to each other in the arti-
cles. For example, in the same category as pedagogical leadership are the concepts
distributed pedagogical leadership and broad pedagogical leadership.
   In most of these studies, leadership was articulated as a collective phenome-
non in nature and that leadership also belongs to others than just the formal
leader. However, there were some studies in which leadership was examined
mainly from the manager’s point of view or as a manager’s task. Even if these
articles also referred to the distribution of leadership, the main focus was the
leader’s perspective and action. Overall, however, distributed leadership,
together with pedagogical leadership, was considered the most crucial concept
in examining leadership in research on Finnish education organisations for
minors. The concept was used at all levels of the education system for minors,
though it might be articulated a bit differently because of the characteristics of
the levels of education.
   In the context of ECEC, the organisation itself was often distributed (Halttunen,
2016). ECEC centre directors typically were found to have several (two to three)
units to lead, which, in turn, worked in teams pedagogically led by early childhood
education (ECE) teachers. In addition, if ECEC was provided by the municipality,
leadership was also distributed between municipal stakeholders, who, in turn, would
then be guided by state-level steering and policies (e.g. Heikka et al., 2021). In their
study, Heikka et al. (2021, p. 335) referred to the five dimensions of distributed
pedagogical leadership in the ECE organisation: ‘(1) enhancing the shared con-
sciousness of visions and strategies between the stakeholders’, (2) ‘distributing
responsibilities for pedagogical leadership’, (3) ‘distributing and clarifying power
relationships between the stakeholders’, (4) ‘distributing the enactment of peda-
gogical improvement within centres’, and (5) ‘developing a strategy for distributed
pedagogical leadership’. How distributed leadership has been determined in the
studies regarding Finnish ECEC is examined in more detail below in reviewing the
concept of teacher leadership.
   In comprehensive schools, distributed leadership was considered a way to
involve teachers in leadership processes and share and decentralise responsibilities.
The tasks of principals have increased, and the work has been complicated in many
ways, so distributed leadership has also been seen as one solution (Lahtero et al.,
2017). However, distributed leadership does not always reduce the workload of the
principal because it also requires ‘a strong core coordination’ of how tasks and
responsibilities are shared and how teachers and the other staff are involved in deci-
sion making (Paulsen et al., 2016, p. 759). In addition, because the principal is the
formal head of the school, leadership was ultimately seen as her/his responsibility
(Lahtero et al., 2019).

114                                                           S. Korva and P.-M. Laine


    In VET, distributed leadership is scrutinised in relation to pedagogical leader-
ship and called distributed pedagogical leadership (Jäppinen & Maunonen-
Eskelinen, 2012; Jäppinen & Sarja, 2012). In her article on supporting student
transitions, Jäppinen (2012, p. 24) defined distributed pedagogical leadership
(DPL) as concerning everyone in a school community and approaches leadership
as collective – the ‘innermost substance of a professional learning community’.
Theoretically, Jäppinen defined DPL through three concepts: distributed leader-
ship because of its roots in shared cognition and understanding; leaderful prac-
tices, based on Raelin’s (2003) conceptualisation of leadership practices as a
collective endeavour; and managing without leadership, based on Lakomski’s
(e.g. 2005) thinking on the distributed nature of human cognition and the context-
specific nature of organisational processes. According to Jäppinen and Sarja
(2012, p. 65), ‘In DPL, at its best, educational practices are collaboratively “led”
in jointly agreed ways and in a jointly agreed direction by each member in the
community on the basis of accumulative collective cognition and
understanding’.
    In Finnish educational leadership research, pedagogical leadership has
referred to ‘all the actions taken to enhance the implementation of the curricu-
lum’ (Harju-­Luukkainen et al., 2014, p. 338), which constructs a broader mean-
ing than what is meant by instructional leadership, which is a parallel concept
in mainstream Anglo-­    American research. Pedagogical leadership was most
often considered in the context of distributed leadership, as ‘a form of distrib-
uted leadership’ (Fonsén & Soukainen, 2020, p. 213) and also in ECEC in con-
nection with teacher leadership. In their article on the differences in leadership
between a Finnish- and Swedish-­speaking school in Finland, Harju-Luukkainen
et al. (2014) used the concept of broad pedagogical leadership and referred to
the broad pedagogical leadership theory created by Alava et al. (2012).
According to this theory, for a school to be a learning community, principals
should lead processes in which mission, vision and strategies, organisational
culture and curriculum are developed. Leadership can have direct and indirect
influencing, and from the principal’s view, it is interactive, a resource that the
principal also distributes by empowering teachers. Broad pedagogical leader-
ship is also associated with an ethical and progressive perspective, in which
education is understood as a means of strengthening equality in society (Harju-
Luukkainen et al., 2014, p. 338–340). In this case, pedagogical leadership has
been considered a dimension of principal leadership.
    According to this systematic literature review, teacher leadership has been stud-
ied mainly in the context of ECEC and does not appear to be examined at other
levels of minors’ education in Finland. Of the articles selected for review, three
focused on teacher leadership. Research conducted by the same research team
examined the enactment of teacher leadership in ECEC centres (Heikka et al.,
2016), the perceptions of ECEC professionals themselves (Heikka et al., 2018) and
the repertoires of teacher leadership in the context of team meetings (Halttunen
et al., 2019). These studies have suggested that the concept of teacher leadership is
still evolving. The concept has also been intertwined with the concepts of

6   Understanding Leadership in Educational Leadership Research in Finland        115


pedagogical leadership and distributed leadership. According to Halttunen et al.
(2019, p. 144–145), in order to understand the broader concept of pedagogical lead-
ership, the concept of teacher leadership is central. They stated that as a form of
distributed leadership, teacher leadership helps to achieve the goals set for ECE by
enhancing the development of personnel and organisation as well as curriculum
work. In the context of ECEC, teachers lead pedagogy at the team level and centre
directors at the centre level. However, if a centre director has more centres to man-
age, as is usually the case, the director is not necessarily present in the day-to-day
work, so the responsibility of the teachers grows. In Finland, the role of teachers as
leaders has been emphasised, but leadership positions are unclear, and at the national
level, no guidance on ECEC teacher leadership has been offered (Heikka et al., 2018).



 eadership Based on Its Locus and Different Ontologies
L
of Collective

Most of the 32 studies included in the present review were qualitative in nature,
while 12 (38%) were quantitative. The research related to comprehensive school
(13/32) was almost equally qualitative and quantitative, while the research related
to ECEC (15/32) was more often qualitative. In most of the studies, the research
participants included the leaders – principals or heads of ECEC centres – and the
teachers. In the context of ECEC, the teachers participated in the research almost as
often as the leaders did.
   To answer the second and third subquestions, we analysed the locus of leader-
ship – whether leadership resided in a leader, a group or a system – as well as the
ontological understanding of collective in the collective forms of leadership in the
studies. According to the analysis, 5 out of 32 (16%) studies were considered to be
representing a more traditional leader-centric research approach. These studies
focused on the management perspective or management activities and were posi-
tioned in the categories of (1) ‘Leader-centric approach’ and ‘Leadership residing in
individuals.’ In this category, the studies used both quantitative and qualitative
methods (surveys or interviews) to gather data.
   The rest of the studies – 27 out of 32 (84%) – focused on different forms of col-
lective leadership or defined leadership as such. They were positioned under the
category (2) ‘Collective leadership approach’, in which there were different catego-
ries based on whether the leadership resided in a group or system and whether the
collective was ontologically seen as (2.1) a type or (2.2) process. Furthermore, in
the category (2.1) ‘Collective as a type’, the studies were divided between two sub-
categories based on the research participants: (2.1.1) ‘Leader’s view of leadership’
and (2.1.2) ‘Community’s view of leadership’.
   The number of studies fell into the following categories:
(1) Leader-centric research approach: 5 out of 32 studies (16%)
(2) Collective leadership research: 27 out of 32 studies (84%)

116                                                             S. Korva and P.-M. Laine


      (2.1) Collective leadership as type: 20 out of 32 studies (63%)
            (2.1.1) Leaders’ views on leadership: 5 out of 32 studies (16%)
            (2.1.2) Community’s view of leadership: 15 out of 32 studies (47%)
      (2.2) Collective leadership as a process: 7 out of 32 studies (22%)
In leader-centric research, leadership was mainly defined and approached from the
perspective of the leader’s activities, responsibilities and competencies, but the col-
lective dimension of leadership was, without an exception, also referred to, at least
to some extent. The distinction between different forms of collective leadership was
made based on the different ontological understandings of the collective. Category
2.1 consisted of studies examining collective forms of leadership as an ‘entity’.
Thus, collective forms of leadership are seen as ‘types of leadership’ whose charac-
teristics and consequences are examined. In turn, Category 2.2 consists of studies
within which leadership is based on process ontology. This means that leadership is
seen as constituted within relations in a process in which meanings of leadership are
created or the researcher can stabilise certain moments in which leadership occurs,
for example, as decisions and changes in direction. Furthermore, we have divided
category 2.1 into two subcategories: (2.2.1) ‘Leaders’ view of leadership’, which
includes studies in which the research participants were the leader(s), whereas in the
second subcategory, (2.2.2) ‘Community’s view on leadership’, the respondents
were diverse and held various roles within the educational organisation. Hence,
even though leadership was seen as a collective, the articles in the first subcategory
(2.2.1) seemed to rely on the perspectives of the leaders in examining collective
leadership in the educational context.
    Below, we provide an exemplary study, if there can be said to be one, for each
category as representative of the research (see Table 6.4). We accomplished the
categorisation based on our understanding of whether the leadership was based
more on an entity-based ontology or process ontology.
1. Leader-centric approach. The studies in this category did not focus on the forms
 of collective leadership, but instead, they represented a more traditional leader-
 centred approach. The studies drew from entity-based ontological understandings
 of leadership residing in individual(s) whose characteristics and behaviours were
 studied. Five out of the 32 studies (16%) were identified as representing the leader-
 centric approach, and these studies also fell into the category of leadership resid-
 ing in the individuals. Furthermore, the studies focused on the leader(s) viewpoint
 of leadership. As an example of this category, Syysnummi and Laihonen (2014)
 focused on knowledge management in vocational education and training organisa-
 tions (VET) from the perspective of management team members (n = 8) via e-mail
 enquiry and a group interview; the aim was to discover the management challenges
 and explore the knowledge management processes that support the teachers’ work
 (Syysnummi & Laihonen, 2014, p. 54). The authors defined knowledge manage-
 ment as an ‘integral part of education management’, which is ‘seen as an essential
 task for producing high-quality education services’ (p. 63). They pointed out the
 collective dimension of knowledge management in management teams by stating

                                                                                                                                                             6

Table 6.4 Leadership based on its locus and ontology of collective in educational leadership studies in the context of Finnish education organisations for
minors (framework modified from the original four-field matrix of Ospina et al., 2020, p. 433)
Locus of             Leadership approaches based on different ontological underpinnings
leadership           (1) Leader-centric approach   (2) Collective leadership approach
                                                   (2.1) Collective leadership as type                             (2.2) Collective leadership as process
                                                   (2.1.1) Leaders’ view of (2.1.2) Community’s view of
                                                   leadership                leadership
Leadership                                         Ahtiainen et al. (2021), Weckström et al. (2020),               Halttunen et al. (2019),
residing in the                                    Pedagogical leadership Leadership culture                       Teacher leadership
group.
Leadership                                             Uljens et al. (2016),                                       Varpanen (2021)
residing in the                                        Educational leadership /                                    Distributed leadership
system.                                                Non-affirmative theory
Leadership           Syysnummi and Laihonen
residing in the      (2014),
individual(s).       Knowledge management
All studies (32)     5/32                              5/32                       15/32                          7/32
                     Harju-Luukkainen et al. (2014),   Ahtiainen et al. (2021),   Antinluoma et al. (2018),      Halttunen et al. (2019), Heikka et al.
                     Lipiäinen et al. (2021),          Heikka et al. (2020),      Fonsén & Soukainen (2020),     (2016), Kangas et al. (2016), Jäppinen
                     Pulkkinen et al. (2019); Soini    Lahtero et al. (2019),     Halttunen (2016), Heikka and   and Sarja (2012), Lahtero and Risku
                     et al. (2016); Syysnummi &        Pyhaltö et al. (2011),     Hujala (2013), Heikka and      (2012, 2014), Varpanen (2021), Uljens
                     Laihonen (2014)                   Uljens et al. (2016)       Suhonen (2019), Heikka et al.  et al. (2016)
                                                                                  (2018, 2021), Jäppinen (2012),
                                                                                  Jäppinen and Maunonen-­
                                                                                  Eskelinen (2012), Keski-Rauska
                                                                                                                                                             Understanding Leadership in Educational Leadership Research in Finland




                                                                                  et al. (2016), Lahtero and
                                                                                  Kuusilehto-Awale (2013),
                                                                                  Lahtero et al. (2017),
                                                                                  Mäntyjärvi and Puroila (2019),
                                                                                  Paulsen et al. (2016),
                                                                                  Weckström et al. (2020)
                                                                                                                                                             117

118                                                            S. Korva and P.-M. Laine


 that ‘knowledge-intensive activities rely heavily on group problem solving and
 decision making’ (p. 56); however, the study approached knowledge management
 primarily as a management task.
    The other articles that were interpreted as belonging to the category of (1)
 ‘Leader-centric approach’ studied leadership from the view of principals in the
 context of leading change (Pulkkinen et al., 2019; Soini et al., 2016) and princi-
 pals’ perceptions of Finnish and Swedish-speaking schools (Harju-Luukkainen
 et al., 2014). In addition, a study on the principals’ perceptions of diverse world-
 views in leading schools (Lipiäinen et al., 2021) was included because the study
 focused on the topic from the principals’ point of view, pointing out the principal’s
 role and competences.
2. Collective leadership approach. The studies in this category focused on forms
 of collective leadership and different approaches to it. Most of the analysed stud-
 ies – 27 out of 32 (84%) – were included in this category, drawing from either an
 entity-based or process ontological understanding of leadership as a collective:
 (2.1) ‘Collective leadership as a type’ or (2.2) ‘Collective leadership as a ‘process’
 (2.2). Next, the classification of the studies based on this division is presented.
 2.1. Collective leadership as a type. This category was divided into two subcate-
      gories – (2.1.1) ‘Leader’s view on leadership’ and (2.1.2) ‘Community’s view
      on leadership’ – based on whether the research participants were designated
      leaders or if other members of the work community, such as teachers, were
      included. Below, we present two exemplary studies from both of these two
      subcategories – a study in which the locus of leadership resided in a group
      and one in which leadership resided in a system (see Table 6.4).
      2.1.1. Leader’s view of leadership. An exemplary study representing a (2.1.1)
             ‘Leader’s view on leadership’ and ‘Leadership residing in a group’ is
             that of Ahtiainen et al. (2021), which focused on ECEC leaders’ per-
             ceptions of pedagogical leadership and an assessment of the imple-
             mentation of the National Core Curriculum for ECEC. The research
             material was collected with the help of a survey and comprised of 41
             ECEC leaders’ answers to the open-ended questions on the electronic
             questionnaire. The leaders’ described the pedagogical practices of
             their own centre in open-ended questions. The survey material was
             analysed using a content analysis, and the results were reflected regard-
             ing the theoretical framework of the study: the human capital of peda-
             gogical leadership and models of educational change. Regarding these
             lenses, the authors refer to their previous studies (e.g. Fonsén and
             Ukkonen-Mikkola, 2019) and to the theories of Fullan (2015) and
             Hargreaves and Shirley (2012), amongst others.
                In the study, the researchers articulated leadership, here considering
             the ECEC context, including changed legislation, curriculum and
             employee qualification requirements, along with the concepts of peda-
             gogical leadership and distributed leadership. Referring to Heikka
             (2014), the authors stated that leadership is ‘a distributed phenome-

6   Understanding Leadership in Educational Leadership Research in Finland          119


              non, in which leadership is a collective commitment and process for all
              participants’ (Ahtiainen et al., 2021, p. 128). In conclusion, the authors
              presented a model of leadership competence for leading pedagogy and
              curriculum implementation (see Fig. 1 in Ahtiainen et al., 2021,
              p. 136).
                   A study by Uljens et al. (2016) is our other exemplary study of the
              subcategory (2.1.1.) ‘Leader’s view on leadership’, and it represents
              the category of ‘Leadership residing in a system’. Furthermore, the
              study can also be seen as an example crossing the boundaries of the
              upper categories of (2.1) ‘Collective leadership as type’ and (2.2)
              ‘Collective leadership as process’. Uljens et al. (2016) perceived
              ­leadership as residing in a broader system than, for example, within a
               management team inside the school. The study was based on two theo-
               ries: discursive institutionalism, which was used to explore Finnish
               educational policy culture, and non-affirmative general education the-
               ory, by which institutionalised education could be perceived in a sys-
               tem-wide manner, assuming the non-hierarchical nature of the
               relationships within a system. According to non-affirmative theory,
               educational leadership and school development and teaching can be
               understood as the ‘mediating’ activities between epistemic practices,
               such as the theory of teaching and values in society. In addition, edu-
               cational leadership was understood as influencing others in a non-­
               hierarchical and ethical way. The data consisted of focus group
               interviews with professionals from the district administration of Åland,
               a Swedish-speaking region in Southwest Finland, and the schools
               there (N = 20), as well as policy documents including, amongst others,
               national and regional curricula. The materials were analysed through
               hermeneutic content analysis, which linked the analysis of the inter-
               views with the policy documents to create a temporal and multilevel
               picture of school development in the region.
                   As a result, Uljens et al. (2016, p. 103) produced three periods of ‘a
               successful ten-year multilevel and district-led school regional develop-
               mental turnaround process’. The study also demonstrated strong char-
               acteristics of leadership across the different levels, such as a shared
               commitment to evaluation and the development of teaching. Hence,
               the study provided an example of a leadership type with characteris-
               tics. Simultaneously, the study can be positioned in the second class,
               (2) ‘Collective leadership as a process’, because leadership was
               approached in terms of activities operating at all levels of the system,
               where ‘strength’ was also found in ‘leadership practices distributed
               across levels and professional groups, where different professionals
               own the initiative’ (p. 119; see also Crevani et al., 2010).
                   In addition to these two examples, the other studies in the (2.1.)
               ‘Collective leadership as type’ subcategory of (2.1.1) ‘Leader’s view
               on leadership’ focused on the content of pedagogical leadership plans

120                                                           S. Korva and P.-M. Laine


             formed by the ECEC leaders (Heikka et al., 2020) and, in the context
             of comprehensive school, principals’ training and their views on dis-
             tributed leadership (Lahtero et al., 2019) and principals’ and chief edu-
             cation officers’ views on school development (Pyhaltö et al., 2011).
      2.1.2. Community’s view of leadership. The studies that examined (2.2.)
             ‘Collective leadership as a type’ from the perspective of a larger com-
             munity (2.1.2 ‘Community’s view of leadership’) represented all the
             category of ‘Leadership residing in a group’. Weckström et al. (2020)
             provided an exemplary study that examined the creation of participa-
             tive culture in ECEC and identified leadership as part of that. A larger
             community of educational professionals participated in the study.
             More specifically, the researchers investigated participative culture
             and the critical factors in its development, from which leadership was
             one. The study was carried out as a critical participatory study in the
             context of a private ECEC unit in Finland. The data consisted of group
             conversations, one stimulated recall conversation, diary notes and the
             field notes of the leader, and it was analysed using thematic analysis.
             The analysis revealed a powerful community discourse, which the
             researchers named the ‘we-narrative’. According to the results, the we-­
             narrative was at the centre of inclusive culture development, and ‘rela-
             tional and reciprocal leadership’ was one of the three critical culture
             factors (see Fig. 3, p. 509). The study can be seen to demonstrate the
             difference between the categories of (2.1) ‘Collective leadership as
             type’ and (2.2) ‘Collective leadership as process’: if leadership would
             have been examined as constituted within the ‘we-narrative’, the
             research could have been seen based on a process ontology, but now,
             because leadership was one of the factors of a participatory culture, it
             was considered ontologically as an entity.
                 Other studies in this largest category of (2.1.2) ‘Community’s view
             on leadership’ included studies on pedagogical leadership (Fonsén &
             Soukainen, 2020), teacher leadership (Heikka et al., 2018), the joint
             leadership model (Keski-Rauska et al., 2016), distributed leadership
             (Heikka & Hujala, 2013; Lahtero et al., 2017), distributed pedagogical
             leadership (Heikka et al., 2021; Heikka & Suhonen, 2019; Halttunen,
             2016; Jäppinen, 2012; Jäppinen & Maunonen-Eskelinen, 2012), rela-
             tional leadership (Mäntyjärvi & Puroila, 2019), strategic leadership
             (Lahtero & Kuusilehto-Awale, 2013) and a study in which (distribut-
             ing) leadership was studied as a ‘one of the key factors in implement-
             ing a PLC [professional learning community]’ (Antinluoma et al.,
             2018, p. 78) and another study regarding teacher empowerment in the
             Finnish policy culture (Paulsen et al., 2016).
 2.2. Collective leadership as a process. The studies exploring (2.2.) ‘Collective
      leadership as a process’ strived to understand leadership from a completely dif-
      ferent ontological perspective than entity-based ontology, focusing on the con-
      tinuous process of relational interactions within which leadership can be seen

6   Understanding Leadership in Educational Leadership Research in Finland         121


       to emerge. Theoretically, the studies may have drawn, for example, on social
       constructionism (Berger & Luckmann, 2005) or practice theory (Raelin, 2016),
       which invites a reflection on the ontological nature of leadership and epistemo-
       logical commitments to how this phenomenon can be understood as emerging
       within a process of actions rather than focusing on how collective forms of
       leadership operate. Hence, the research drew on written and spoken language,
       various texts and discourses, interaction processes, material objects and prac-
       tices and processes (Ospina et al., 2020). According to the analysis, only 7 out
       of 32 studies (22%) could be interpreted as representing this approach. From
       this category, we can offer an example of both types of research in which lead-
       ership resided in a group and in a system.
           The exemplary study in the category ‘Leadership residing in a group’ is
       that by Halttunen et al. (2019), who explored how teacher leadership is for-
       mulated in the discussions of six ECE teams. The teams were comprised of
       one to two ECE teachers and one to two childcare nurses. The research was
       based on social constructivism, in which language was understood as a social
       practice. The study investigated teacher leadership repertoires at weekly ECE
       team meetings, utilising critical discourse analysis to elucidate the functions
       of talk and subject positions in relation to functions and repertoires. As a
       result, four repertoires of talk describing ‘how teacher leadership occurs in
       the talk’ were identified: the repertoires of collaborative teacher leadership,
       supportive teacher leadership, professional expertise and legitimation. In
       addition, several subject positions were recognised: ‘teachers as reflection
       enhancers, decision-makers, interpreters, guides and agents of compliance in
       team decision making within ECE settings’ (Halttunen et al., 2019, p. 149).
       Even though repertoires can be seen as sociohistorical system level configura-
       tions constituting leadership, we interpreted that in this study leadership
       resided in a group. The repertoires were constructed in the situational interac-
       tion between team members, and the study provided agency for the individu-
       als in constructing the repertoires as well as utilising them by stating that
       ‘informal leadership positioning constructed by discursive means can influ-
       ence how the teacher utilises daily encounters to promote pedagogy’ (p. 156).
           Another example of research in the (2.2) ‘Collective leadership as process’
       category, where ‘Leadership resided in a system’, was Varpainen’s (2021)
       qualitative study on ECE leadership in relation to Gronn’s (2000) idea about
       the polarisation of leadership theory regarding individual agency and struc-
       tural power. The aim was to investigate whether this polarisation would also
       apply to ECE leadership. The research material was collected from three
       focus group interviews of ECEC unit leaders’, which the author analysed
       using post-structural discourse analysis. The study provided an example of
       the relational dynamics of linguistic acts in and through which the meaning
       of leadership and leader could be cocreated. The author drew from practice
       theory to examine the co-constitution of structure and agency in the flow of
       ECE leaders’ talk, which reconstructed existing discourses of leadership and
       subtly transformed them. Because he demonstrated how the leaders of ECEs

122                                                            S. Korva and P.-M. Laine


      drew from frames that could be seen as moments of sociocultural discourse,
      we interpret leadership as residing in a system. This positioning was strength-
      ened when the author demonstrated the difficulty of changing existing insti-
      tutional practices, even though this empirical result would not legitimate the
      positioning of the study into this category. Still, Varpainen’s study can also
      serve as an example of leaders as study participants in a study drawing from
      process ontological understanding of the collective.
          The other studies positioned in the category of (2.2) ‘Collective leadership
      as process’ were those on distributed leadership (Kangas et al., 2016), distrib-
      uted pedagogical leadership (Jäppinen & Sarja, 2012) and teacher leadership
      in the ECEC context (Heikka et al., 2016), along with studies approaching
      leadership from the perspective of culture (Lahtero & Risku, 2014) and sym-
      bolic leadership (Lahtero & Risku, 2012). These studies relied mostly on
      qualitative methods, such as linguistic analysis and observation. When it
      came to the participants, the focus was on the entire working community,
      including leaders, management teams’ members and teachers, excluding the
      exemplary studies of Varpainen (2021) and Uljens et al. (2016).



Conclusions and Discussion

The purpose of the present study was to increase understanding about the various
approaches to leadership, especially collective leadership, in previous empirical
research that has focused on Finnish educational organisations for minors. The lit-
erature was examined through a systematic literature review that focused on the
years 2010–2020.
    The results have emphasised the extensive use of concepts such as distributed
leadership and pedagogical leadership, which have also been noted in previous
literature reviews (Eskelinen & Hujala, 2015; Risku & Pulkkinen, 2016; see also
Saarivirta & Kumpulainen, 2016). The results demonstrated the conceptual integra-
tion of distributed leadership and pedagogical leadership in distributing pedagogi-
cal leadership at different levels of education – in ECEC and pre-primary education,
in comprehensive school and at the upper secondary level in VET.
    The majority of the studies examined some forms of collective leadership, and
there were only a few studies representing a more traditional leader-centred
approach. Most of the studies on collective forms of leadership drew from an entity-­
based ontological understanding of collective leadership as a type, the characteris-
tics and consequences of which can be studied. The study participants were mainly
the leader(s) and personnel. However, there were a few studies that focused only on
the leader(s) perspective. Even though it is important to understand the viewpoints
of the leader(s), we would like to notice that this kind of a research setting might –
on its part – dilute the understanding of collective within the collective forms of
leadership.

6   Understanding Leadership in Educational Leadership Research in Finland              123


    Studies representing the category of (2.2.) ‘Collective leadership as a process’
were less common because these should be based on a fundamentally different
ontological understanding of leadership as emerging within a process of relations.
This echoes the leadership studies in the field of management and organisation stud-
ies, within which this approach has also been relatively rare (Ospina et al., 2020). In
different disciplines and fields of research, things and phenomena have been viewed
from different perspectives. When a management and organisational scholar draws
from management and organisation theory, the educational leadership researcher
focuses on educational theories and the activities with their related aspects and
dimensions. There may be inconsistencies in the interpretation and application of
the concepts in leadership research in the field of management and organisation, in
general, and in educational leadership, in particular. The ontological commitments
of the research are not always easy to interpret. Furthermore, educational leadership
scholars have been less explicit about the ontoepistemological underpinnings of
their study than leadership scholars in the field of management and organisation
studies, where discussions on the different ontoepistemological approaches are
lively within the constructionist, processual and practice-based leadership research
(e.g. Crevani et al., 2010; Ospina et al., 2020; Raelin, 2016). Along with the advo-
cates of pluralism in advancing science (e.g. Cunliffe, 2018; Reed & Burrell, 2019),
we want to emphasise that, to understand leadership as multidimensional, it is
important to understand and advance the different ontoepistemological approaches
of the research. This also enhances consistency between ontoepistemological
approaches and methods, whether qualitative or quantitative. Overall, this enables
researchers and practitioners alike to better perceive the various aspects and dimen-
sions of leadership manifestation in leadership studies, in general, and in educa-
tional leadership research, in particular.
Limitations Because there is not yet much academic research on Finnish educa-
tional leadership, national surveys and dissertations are a crucial part of construct-
ing a knowledge base for Finnish educational leadership research. Therefore, the
results of the present review would have looked a bit different if all the project
reports, academic dissertations and book chapters excluded were considered as
well. In addition, the literature search focused on databases that included publica-
tions in the field of educational sciences; therefore, for example, studies published
in the field of psychology could have been left out.



Appendix: Summary of the Reviewed Articles


1. Ahtiainen, Fonsén   2021 Finnish early childhood education and      Australasian Journal
& Kiuru                     care leaders’ perceptions of pedagogical   of Early Childhood
                            leadership and assessment of the
                            implementation of the national core
                            curriculum in times of change
                                                                                (continued)

124                                                                 S. Korva and P.-M. Laine


2. Antinluoma,        2018 Schools as professional learning            Journal of Education
Ilomäki, Lahti-­           communities                                 and Learning
Nuuttila & Toom
3. Fonsén &           2020 Sustainable pedagogical leadership in       Early Childhood
Soukainen                  Finnish early childhood education (ECE):    Education Journal
                           An evaluation by ECE professionals
4. Halttunen          2016 Distributing leadership in a day-care       Journal of Early
                           setting                                     Childhood Education
                                                                       Research
5. Halttunen,        2019 Teacher leadership repertoires in the        Journal of Early
Waniganayake &            context of early childhood education team    Childhood Education
Heikka                    meetings in Finland                          Research
6. Harju-Luukkainen, 2014 Principals’ perceptions for Finnish- and     Leadership and
Vettenranta,              Swedish-language schools in Finland: An      Policy in Schools
Kanervio &                analysis of school-level indices from
Pulkkinen                 programme for International Student
                          Assessment 2009
7. Heikka & Hujala   2013 Early childhood leadership through the       European Early
                          lens of distributed leadership               Childhood Education
                                                                       Research Journal
8. Heikka & Suhonen 2019 Distributed pedagogical leadership            Southeast Asia Early
                          functions in early childhood education       Childhood Journal
                          settings in Finland
9. Heikka, Halttunen 2016 Investigating teacher leadership in ECE     Journal of Early
& Waniganayake            centres in Finland                          Childhood Education
                                                                      Research
10. Heikka,          2018 Perceptions of early childhood education Early Child
Halttunen &               professionals on teacher leadership in      Development and
Waniganayake              Finland                                     Care
11. Heikka, Kahila & 2020 A study of pedagogical leadership plans in South African
Suhonen                   early childhood education settings in       Journal of Childhood
                          Finland                                     Education
12. Heikka,          2021 Distributed pedagogical leadership and      International Journal
Pitkäniemi,               teacher leadership in early childhood       of Leadership in
Kettukangas &             education contexts                          Education
Hyttinen
13. Jäppinen         2012 Distributed pedagogical leadership in       Improving Schools
                          support of student transitions
14. Jäppinen &       2012 Organisational transition challenges in the Educational Studies
Maunonen-Eskelinen        Finnish vocational education: perspective
                          of distributed pedagogical leadership
15. Jäppinen & Sarja 2012 Distributed pedagogical leadership and      Management in
                          generative dialogue in educational nodes    Education
16. Kangas, Venninen 2016 Distributed leadership as administrative    Educational
& Ojala                   practice in Finnish early childhood         Management,
                          education and care                          Administration &
                                                                      Leadership
17. Keski-Rauska,    2016 Research on a joint leadership model for    Journal of Early
Fonsén, Aronen &          early childhood education in Finland        Childhood Education
Riekkola                                                              Research
                                                                                 (continued)

6   Understanding Leadership in Educational Leadership Research in Finland                   125


18. Lahtero &          2013 Realisation of strategic leadership in      School Leadership &
Kuusilehto-Awale            leadership teams’ work as experienced by Management
                            the leadership team members of basic
                            education schools
19. Lahtero & Risku    2012 Symbolic leadership and leadership          School Leadership &
                            culture in one unified comprehensive        Management
                            school in Finland
20. Lahtero & Risku    2014 Symbolic leadership culture and its         International Journal
                            subcultures in one unified comprehensive of Educational
                            school in Finland                           Management
21. Lahtero,           2019 Finnish principals: Leadership training and Educational
Ahtiainen & Lång            views on distributed leadership             Research and
                                                                        Reviews
22. Lahtero, Lång &    2017 Distributed leadership in practice in       School Leadership &
Alava                       Finnish schools                             Management
23. Lipiäinen,         2021 Leading school with diverse worldviews: Journal of Beliefs &
Jantunen &                  Finnish principals’ perceptions             Values
Kallioniemi
24. Mäntyjärvi &      2019 Has something changed? Leaders’,              Contemporary Issues
Puroila                    practitioners’ and parents’ interpretations   in Early Childhood
                           after renewed early childhood education
                           and care legislation in Finnish private
                           centres
25. Paulsen, Hjerto & 2016 Exploring the moral and distributive levers   International Journal
Tihveräinen                for teacher empowerment in the Finnish        of Educational
                           policy culture                                Management
26. Pulkkinen,        2019 Principals’ views on changes in the           Journal of
Räikkönen, Pirttimaa       provision of support for learning and         Educational Change
& Janhukainen              schooling in Finland after educational
                           reform
27. Pyhältö, Soini & 2011 A systemic perspective on school reform.       Journal of
Pietarinen                 Principals’ and chief education officers’     Educational
                           perspectives on school development            Administration
28. Soini, Pietarinen 2016 Leading a school through change –             School Leadership &
& Pyhältö                  principals’ hands-on leadership strategies    Management
                           in school reform
29. Syysnummi &       2014 Top management’s perception of                International Journal
Laihonen                   knowledge management in a vocational          of Educational
                           education and training organisation in        Management
                           Finland
30. Uljens, Sundqvist 2016 Educational leadership for sustained          Nordic Studies in
& Smeds-Nylund             multi-level school development in             Education
                           Finland – A non-affirmative approach
31. Varpanen          2021 Early childhood education leadership in       Educational
                           Finland through the lens of structure and     Management,
                           agency                                        Administration &
                                                                         Leadership
32. Weckström,       2020 Creating a culture of participation: Early     Children and Society
Karlsson, Pöllänen &      childhood education and care educators in
Lastikka                  the face of change

126                                                                     S. Korva and P.-M. Laine


References

Alava, J., Halttunen, L., & Risku, M. (2012). Changing school management. Status review – May
   2012. Publications 2012:13. Finnish National Board of Education.
Alvehus, J., & Crevani, L. (2022). Micro-ethnography: Towards an approach for attending to the
   multimodality of leadership. Journal of Change Management, 22(3), 231–251.
Berger, P. L., & Luckmann, T. (2005). Todellisuuden sosiaalinen rakentuminen. Tiedonsosiologinen
   tutkielma [The social construction of reality, 1996]. Gaudeamus.
Bush, T. (2008). From management to leadership. Semantic or meaningful change? Educational
   Management, Administration & Leadership, 36(2), 271–288.
Bush, T. (2019). Models of educational leadership. In T. Bush, L. Bell, & D. Middlewood (Eds.),
   Principles of educational leadership and management (3rd ed., pp. 3–17). SAGE Publishing.
Bush, T., & Glover, D. (2014). School leadership models: What do we know? School Leadership &
   Management, 34(5), 553–571. https://doi.org/10.1080/13632434.2014.928680
Carroll, B., Levy, L., & Richmond, D. (2008). Leadership as practice: Challenging the competency
   paradigm. Leadership, 4(4), 363–379.
Crevani, L., Lindgren, M., & Packendorff, J. (2010). Leadership, not leaders: On the study of lead-
   ership as practices and interactions. Scandinavian Journal of Management, 26, 77–86.
Cunliffe, A. L. (2018). Alterity: The passion, politics, and ethics of self and scholarship.
   Management Learning, 49(1), 8–22.
Denis, J.-L., Langley, A., & Sergi, V. (2012). Leadership in the plural. The Academy of Management
   Annals, 6(1), 211–283. https://doi.org/10.1080/19416520.2012.667612
Eskelinen, M., & Hujala, E. (2015). Early childhood leadership in Finland in light of recent
   research. In M. Waniganayake, J. Rodd, & L. Gibbs (Eds.), Thinking and learning about
   leadership: Early childhood research from Australia, Finland and Norway (pp. 87–101).
   Community Child Care Cooperative NSW.
Fonsén, E., & Ukkonen-Mikkola, T. (2019). Early childhood education teachers’ professional
   development towards pedagogical leadership. Educational Research, 61(2), 181–196.
Fullan, M. (2015). The new meaning of educational change (5th ed.). Routledge.
Gronn, P. (2000). Distributed properties. A New architecture for leadership. Educational
   Management and Administration, 28(3), 317–338.
Gumus, S., Bellibas, M. S., Esen, M., & Gumus, E. (2018). A systematic review of studies on
   leadership models in educational research from 1980 to 2014. Educational Management
   Administration & Leadership, 46(1), 25–48.
Hallinger, P. (2014). Reviewing reviews of research in educational leadership: An empirical assess-
   ment. Educational Administration Quarterly, 50(4), 539–576.
Hallinger, P. (2018). Bringing context out of the shadows of leadership. Educational Management
   Administration & Leadership, 46(1), 5–24.
Hallinger, P., & Murphy, J. (1985). Assessing the instructional management behaviour of princi-
   pals. The Elementary School Journal, 86(2), 217–247.
Hargreaves, A., & Shirley, D. (2012). The global fourth way: The quest for educational excel-
   lence. Corwin.
Harris, A. (2010). Distributed leadership: Current evidence and future directions. In T. Bush,
   L. Bell, & D. Middlewood (Eds.), Principles of educational leadership and management
   (pp. 55–69). Sage.
Heck, R. H., & Hallinger, P. (2005). The study of educational leadership and management. Where
   does the field stand today? Educational Management Administration & Leadership, 33(2),
   229–244.
Heikka, J. (2014). Distributed pedagogical leadership in early childhood education. [Doctoral dis-
   sertation, Tampere University, Finland]. https://trepo.tuni.fi/handle/10024/95016
Lakomski, G. (2005). Managing without leadership. Elsevier.
Moos, L. (2013). Comparing educational leadership research. Leadership and Policy on Schools,
   12, 282–299.

6   Understanding Leadership in Educational Leadership Research in Finland                     127

Niesche, R. (2018). Critical perspectives in educational leadership: A new ‘theory turn’? Journal
   of Educational Administration and History, 50(3), 145–158. https://doi.org/10.1080/0022062
   0.2017.1395600
Oplatka, I. (2008). The field of educational administration. A historical overview of scholarly
   attempts to recognize epistemological identities, meanings and boundaries from the 1960s
   onwards. Journal of Educational Administration, 47(1), 8–35.
Ospina, S. M., Foldy, E. G., & Fairhurst, G. T. (2020). Collective dimensions of leadership:
   Connecting theory and method. Human Relations, 73(4), 441–463.
Raelin, J. (2003). Creating leaderful organizations: How to bring out leadership in everyone.
   Berret-Koehler.
Raelin, J. A. (2016). Introduction to leadership-as-practice. In J. Raelin (Ed.), Leadership-as-­
   practice. Theory and application (pp. 1–17). Routledge.
Reed, M., & Burrell, G. (2019). Theory and organization studies: The need for contestation.
   Organization Studies, 40(1), 39–54.
Risku, M., & Kanervio, P. (2011). Development plans and research—Key roles in develop-
   ing education in Finland. In O. Johansson (Ed.), Rektor – En forskningöversikt 2000–2010.
   Vetenskapsrådets raportserie 4:2011 (pp. 161–186). Vetenskapsrådet.
Risku, M., & Pulkkinen, S. (2016). Finland: Finnish principal. In H. Ärlestig, C. Day, &
   O. Johansson (Eds.), A decade of research on school principals: Cases from 24 countries.
   Studies in educational leadership 21 (pp. 61–75). Springer International Publishing.
Saarivirta, T., & Kumpulainen, K. (2016). School autonomy, leadership and student achieve-
   ment: Reflections from Finland. International Journal of Educational Management, 30(7),
   1268–1278.
Seeck, H. (2008). Johtamisopit Suomessa. Taylorismista innovaatioteorioihin. Gaudeamus.
Tian, M., Risku, M., & Collin, K. (2016). A meta-analysis of distributed leadership from
   2002 to 2013: Theory development, empirical evidence and future research focus.
   Educational Management Administration and Leadership, 44(1), 146–164. https://doi.
   org/10.1177/1741143214558576
Tranfield, D., Denyer, D., & Smart, P. (2003). Towards a methodology for developing evidence-­
   informed management knowledge by means of systematic review. British Journal of
   Management, 14, 207–222.
Uljens, M., & Nyman, C. (2013). Educational leadership in Finland or building a nation with
   Bildung. In L. Moos (Ed.), Transnational influences on values and practices in Nordic edu-
   cational leadership: Is there a Nordic model? Studies in Educational Leadership (Vol. 9,
   pp. 31–48). Springer.
Wang, Y. (2018). The panorama of the last decade’s theoretical groundings of educational lead-
   ership research: A concept co-occurrence network analysis. Educational Administration
   Quarterly, 54(3), 327–365.
York-Barr, J., & Duke, K. (2004). What do we know about teacher leadership? Findings from two
   decades of scholarship. Review of Educational Research, 74(3), 255–316.
Yukl, G. (2006). Leadership in organizations (6th ed.). Pearson-Prentice Hall.



Open Access This chapter is licensed under the terms of the Creative Commons Attribution 4.0
International License (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/), which permits use, sharing,
adaptation, distribution and reproduction in any medium or format, as long as you give appropriate
credit to the original author(s) and the source, provide a link to the Creative Commons license and
indicate if changes were made.
    The images or other third party material in this chapter are included in the chapter’s Creative
Commons license, unless indicated otherwise in a credit line to the material. If material is not
included in the chapter’s Creative Commons license and your intended use is not permitted by
statutory regulation or exceeds the permitted use, you will need to obtain permission directly from
the copyright holder.