DEVELOPMENT OF EMERGENCY EDUCATIONAL LEADERSHIP
            SCALE FOR SCHOOL HEADS




      PSYCHOLOGY AND EDUCATION: A MULTIDISCIPLINARY JOURNAL

                                Volume: 39
                                  Issue 5
                              Pages: 656-677
                       Document ID: 2025PEMJ3784
                        DOI: 10.70838/pemj.390508
                      Manuscript Accepted: 05-20-2025

 Psych Educ, 2025, 39(5): 655-677, Document ID:2025PEMJ3784, doi:10.70838/pemj.390508, ISSN 2822-4353
 Research Article


                    Development of Emergency Educational Leadership Scale for School Heads
                                                           Myra G. Salibo*
                                        For affiliations and correspondence, see the last page.
          Abstract
          This research aimed to develop an emergency educational leadership scale for school heads. It used the exploratory
          sequential mixed method research design and underwent qualitative and quantitative phases. This study involved a
          total of 112 school heads from the division of Sarangani, Philippines. Validated interview guide and scale were used
          to gather the data. The data were analyzed using thematic analysis, descriptive statistics, Cronbach’s alpha and
          exploratory factor analysis. The initial results yielded six (6) themes which are emergency educational planning and
          delegation, emergency educational implementation, emergency educational communication and monitoring,
          emergency educational motivation and democratic leadership style, emergency educational professional development
          and emergency educational accountability and transparency. These identified components and their respective items
          were subjected to tests of content validation, internal consistency and construct validity. The final pool of one hundred
          nine (109) items was found to exhibit a very strong internal consistency and loaded on five (5) components based on
          the educational emergency leadership components set for the scale. This study demonstrates that the emergency
          educational scale is a reliable and valid tool for evaluating the educational leadership of school heads during
          emergencies. The result of this study provides a school emergency plan that addresses potential crises.
          Keywords: educational leadership, emergency, scale, planning

Introduction
This study focused on the development of a scale designed to assess the preparedness and capabilities of school leaders in handling
crises such as pandemics, natural disasters, or other emergencies. The instrument aimed to support principals and school heads in
effectively managing and leading their schools during extraordinary challenges. It explores various aspects of leadership, response
strategies, and decision-making processes that are critical for educational leaders in emergency situations.
This study developed an emergency educational scale that measures the leadership performance of the school heads in managing
emergencies. The emergency educational scale was rigorously developed and validated using exploratory sequential mixed method
research design ensuring its reliability and construct validity.
Managing educational emergencies is one of the current challenges that school heads have encountered. Educational emergencies are
situations where disruptions to education system impact student’s access to learning. These disruptions can be caused by natural
disasters, conflicts, pandemics, or other crises. Lack of emergency educational scale can result in several challenges that hinder effective
responses to emergencies such as natural disasters, public health crises, or safety incidents. Furthermore, when educational systems are
not prepared to emergencies, the consequences can be far-reaching, affecting the safety, well-being, and knowledge acquisition of the
learners and the ability of educators to function effectively.
This development of emergency educational leadership scale establishes an additional basis, guidelines, preparation, and assessment
for the leadership performance of every school principal during and after adapting emergencies. Moreover, this scale support
educational leaders in setting priorities, making well-informed decisions, and preserving educational continuity while ensuring the
safety of staff and learners.
In the setting of instruction, educational instruments were developed with a focus on school performance, student academic excellence,
teacher effectiveness, leadership styles, Bao (2020) examines the challenges highlighting the urgent need for better digital
infrastructure, ongoing professional development for teachers, and stronger support systems for students to ensure more effective and
equitable online education. Also, Peat and Franklin (2020) supported that students should be able to use the course materials in their
daily life, which means they should be adequately complete and up-to-date.
Thus, the objective of the study is to create educational leadership scale regarding how school heads manage emergencies. This scale
aids in making sure that educational systems can swiftly and efficiently adjust in emergency or crisis situations, preserving learning
continuity, protecting staff and student health, and guaranteeing that all students have fair access to education.
Research Questions
The researcher of this study developed an emergency educational leadership scale for school heads. This scale development highlights
the actions, pedagogies, and leadership excellence while managing short- or long-term emergencies. Specifically, this study addressed
the following questions:
     1.    What aspects of emergency educational leadership should a school head develop in preparing and adapting to emergencies?
     2.    What components and items can be identified to constitute the emergency leadership scale?
Myra G. Salibo                                                                                                                        656/677

 Psych Educ, 2025, 39(5): 655-677, Document ID:2025PEMJ3784, doi:10.70838/pemj.390508, ISSN 2822-4353
 Research Article


     3.    What is the level of content validity of the identified components and items constituting the emergency leadership scale?
     4.    What is the level of emergency educational leadership of the school heads in term of:
              4.1. planning and delegation;
              4.2. implementation;
              4.3. communication and monitoring;
              4.4. motivation and democratic leadership style;
              4.5. professional development; and
              4.6. accountability and transparency?
     5.    What are the internal consistency and construct validity of the emergency educational leadership scale for school heads?
     6.    Based on the result, what are the emergency educational leadership scale of the school head can be developed?
Methodology
Research Design
Since the study distinguished the development of scale for school heads, specifically the development of emergency educational
leadership instruments, the design of exploratory sequential mixed method study was adopted. The researcher conducted an in-depth
interview through a semi-structured questionnaire with 5 participants, specifically school heads from Maitum, through a purposive
sampling technique in the initial phase. The thematic analysis was used since this is the process of discovering patterns or themes in
qualitative data.
The second phase of data collection and analysis was the quantitative survey portion of the study, where the qualitative analysis
conducted beforehand developed specific research questions for this phase. The survey questionnaires were the basic method of data
collection. The respondents of this study were asked to complete the survey. For this study, the selected survey tool is Google Form.
The researcher created a simple, brief set of recommendations for each survey component to ensure that respondents understand the
context and respond appropriately.
Furthermore, after conducting the survey and explaining the guidelines thoroughly, the researcher proceeded with the quantitative data
analysis and follow-up quantitative findings. The researcher then started interpreting the data from the qualitative phase to the
quantitative phase.
This researcher used the exploratory sequential mixed method, a research approach that combines qualitative and quantitative methods
in a sequential order, starting with qualitative data collection to test or generalize initial findings. This approach is particularly useful
for developing theories or measures when existing ones are inadequate. Exploratory sequential mixed methods design is a research
methodology that combines qualitative and quantitative approaches in a two-phase sequence. Initially, qualitative data is collected and
analyzed to gain a deep understanding of a phenomenon. This phase aids in identifying variables, developing theories, or generating
hypotheses. Subsequently, the insights obtained inform the development of quantitative instruments, such as surveys or questionnaires.
This design is particularly beneficial when existing quantitative tools are inadequate or contextually irrelevant, necessitating the
creation of new instruments grounded in qualitative findings.
Respondents
The respondents of this study were school heads from the Division of Sarangani wherein they were selected through combination of
purposive and random sampling techniques.
The research participants in the qualitative phase were the school heads from schools in the division of Sarangani, with a total of five
(5) participants. It distinguishes different emergency educational leadership scales used by principals. This also aimed at various
perspectives regarding their plans.
In quantitative phase, the respondents were randomly selected school heads from public schools in the division of Sarangani with a
total of one hundred twelve (112).
There were 13 school heads from the municipality of Alabel, 18 school heads from the municipality of Malapatan, 11 school heads
from the Municipality of Glan, 24 school heads from the municipality of Maitum, 17 school heads from the municipality of Kiamba,
13 school heads from the municipality of Maasim, and 16 school heads from the municipality of Malungon were randomly selected in
this phase since they experienced the changes in school head's leadership performance and excellence before and during emergencies.
Instrument
Since this study used the exploratory sequential mixed method and undergoes qualitative and quantitative phases, the researcher used
two instruments. The initial phase used the interview guide since the researcher conducted a focused interview with the participants,
while in the second phase, the researcher used the survey questionnaire to gather data from the participants.
In the initial phase, the instrument that the researcher used was an interview guide which was designed in a way that would give the
interviewees enough space to tell their stories or perspectives and provide meaningful data toward the interviewer. The interview guide

Myra G. Salibo                                                                                                                     657/677

 Psych Educ, 2025, 39(5): 655-677, Document ID:2025PEMJ3784, doi:10.70838/pemj.390508, ISSN 2822-4353
 Research Article


has ten (10) questions covering the initial phase participants' experiences, strategies, and perspectives. This was answered by five (5)
school heads in the municipality of Maitum.
In the second phase, the instrument that the researcher used is the survey questionnaire using Google Forms as the survey tool. The
survey questionnaire consists of one hundred twenty (120) questions, and the responses used the of Likert scale from 1- Never, 2-
Seldom, 3- Sometimes, 4-Often, 5-Always.
Furthermore, to determine the level of content validity of the identified components and items constituting the emergency leadership
scale the following interpretations were made.
                    Mean Range        Decription                                       Interpretation
                     4.21 – 5.0    Very Highly Valid     The concept is extremely well observed in the emergency leadership scale.

                    3.41 – 4.20      Highly Valid        The concept is thoroughly observed in the emergency leadership scale.

                    2.61 – 3.40         Valid            The concept is moderately observed in the emergency leadership scale.

                    1.81 – 2.60      Fairly Valid        The concept is partially observed in the emergency leadership scale.

                    1.00 – 1.80       Not Valid          The concept is poorly observed in the emergency leadership scale.

To determine the level of emergency educational leadership of school heads the following interpretations were made.
                     Mean Range      Decription                                       Interpretation
                     4.21 – 5.00     Very High         The school head have very extreme level of emergency educational leadership.
                     3.41 – 4.20       High            The school head have extreme level of emergency educational leadership.
                     2.61 – 3.40    Moderate High      The school head have average level of emergency educational leadership.
                     1.81 – 2.60       Low             The school head have poor level of emergency educational leadership.
                      1.0 – 1.80     Very Low          The school head have very poor level of emergency educational leadership.

Procedure
The researcher followed the sequence of phases in obtaining the primary data for this study.
The qualitative phase of data collection and analysis consisted of the in-depth interview stage. The researcher conducted an in-depth
interview through a semi-structured questionnaire with a few participants, specifically School Heads from Maitum, through a purposive
sampling technique. This allowed the researcher to thoroughly explore their perspectives, experiences, and strategies and identified the
reliability and construct validity in scale development.
Furthermore, the researcher also provided a brief overview of the research, its goals, and the purpose of the interview to the participants.
The context of the questionnaire used for the interview was thoroughly explained, and the entire meeting session remained within the
ethical binds established beforehand. The interview was verbal; therefore, the researcher recorded the participants' responses verbatim
on both tape and interview sheets. After the interview, the researcher analyzed the data through thematic analysis
The quantitative phase of data collection and analysis is the quantitative portion of this study. The qualitative analysis conducted
beforehand developed specific research questions for this phase. The survey questionnaires were the basic method of data collection.
The participants of this study were asked to complete the survey. For this study, the selected survey tool was the Google Form. The
researcher created a simple, brief set of recommendations for each survey component to ensure that respondents understood the context
and respond appropriately.
The researcher proceeded with the quantitative data analysis and follow-up quantitative findings. The researcher then started
interpreting the data from the qualitative phase to the quantitative phase.
Data Analysis
The thematic analysis was used in the analysis of the qualitative data of the study. It is the process of discovering patterns or themes in
qualitative data. Braun and Clarke (2021) provided a six-step process that is initially developed for psychology research wherein the
process starts from familiarization, coding, theme generation, theme review, theme definition and naming, and documentation. The
researcher followed the six-step process in analyzing the data to identify the instrument's components and items. The first step is
familiarization it is where the researcher immersed herself in the data to get a deep understanding of it. The second step is generating
initial codes, the researcher identified and labeled segments of the data that seem interesting or relevant to the research question, she
created codes that help organize the data, but these are preliminary and may be refined later. Next is searching for themes, the researcher
grouped similar codes together to form potential themes. After identifying initial themes is reviewing themes, the researcher checked
if they worked in relation to the entire data set. Once the themes are solidified, the researcher defined and gave them meaningful names.
Finally, the researcher wrote up the analysis, explaining how the themes are supported by the data


Myra G. Salibo                                                                                                                        658/677

 Psych Educ, 2025, 39(5): 655-677, Document ID:2025PEMJ3784, doi:10.70838/pemj.390508, ISSN 2822-4353
 Research Article


To determine the level of emergency educational leadership of the school heads descriptive statistics was used. The descriptive Statistics
are frequently weighted mean of the e emergency educational leadership of the school heads.
This study also used Cronbach's alpha reliability analysis which is a way of assessing reliability by comparing the amount of shared
variance or covariance, among the items where if the instrument is reliable, there should be a great deal of covariance among the items
and relative to the variance. In other words, this was used to measure and evaluate the accuracy or consistency of a collection of scale
or test item. This was to assess the reliability of the items in the interview and the Likert scale in the survey questionnaires.
Moreover, this study used factor analysis since it is a multivariate technique that is used to describe the relationship between different
variables under study or the observable variables with new variables called factors. Since the study wanted to identify these underlying
factors, the exploratory factor analysis (EFA) was used.
Ethical Considerations
The researcher ensured that all ethical considerations were followed, as mandated by Holy Trinity College, to avoid engaging practices
that may implicitly or explicitly abuse or exploit the researcher sought to conduct research with.
Informed Consent. The researcher respected the rights of the respondents and participants as independent individuals capable of
deciding as to their participation in this study. They were protected from any possible physical, social, and psychological harm. The
researcher informed the respondents about the purposes and processes. Above all, the researcher highlighted the benefits of the study
to the respondents and participants.
Voluntary Participation. The researcher allowed the respondents to have the right for voluntary participation, they have also the right
to withdraw from participation any time. They also have free will to give their opinions, ideas and answers to the questions given to
them. Also, the respondents were not forced, and they participated without any pressure from the researcher. Only those who gave full
consent to participate were chosen as respondents of the study.
Gender Sensitivity. It is vital that a researcher should be aware of all aspects of the respondents. Being sensitive is one of the attitudes
that a researcher should possess. In this study, the researcher ensured that whatever the gender of the respondents, she treated them
equally and with respect. Also, the researcher does not create barriers that cause discrimination and gender bias, rather the researcher
creates a right kind of sensitive environment that leads to accepting individual differences.
Data Privacy. In terms of confidentiality, it is the primary role of the researcher to protect the information gathered from the respondents
by ensuring their anonymity. The data given by the respondents were always kept and the researcher only used it for research purposes
alone.
Cultural Sensitivity. The researcher used methods and tools that were culturally relevant and respectful. The data collection techniques
used in this research were sensitive to cultural nuances and avoid practices that may be intrusive or disrespectful.
Results and Discussion
This section presents the results, analyses, and interpretations of the data gathered to provide answers on the problems of the study.
Tables, figures, and texts are used for the presentation, interpretation, and analysis of the gathered data of the study.
Aspects of Emergency Educational Leadership of School Heads
Discovering themes in qualitative data was used in this phase through thematic analysis after the researcher conducted an in-depth
interview through a semi-structured questionnaire to five (5) school heads of municipality of Maitum, through a purposive sampling
technique. Analysis of data process started from familiarization it is where read through the data several times to become familiar with
its content, coding by breaking down complex qualitative data, making it easier to analyze and extract insights that address the research
questions, theme generation where the researcher group codes that relate to each other, theme review where the researcher refines and
name themes, theme definition and naming meaningful labels to the themes identified during the analysis process, and documentation
to identify the instrument's concepts and themes.
Table 1 shows the themes that emerged in the interview that the researcher conducted with the informants on development of the
emergency educational leadership scale for school heads.
         Table 1. Aspects of Emergency Educational Leadership of School Heads
                          Major Themes                                         Core Ideas                     Frequency of Ideas
           Emergency Educational Planning                   Compliance with Appropriate Documentation              Typical
                                                            Adherence to DepEd Guidelines                          General
           Emergency Educational Delegation                 Teachers Coordinator ship                              General
                                                            Skeletal Workforce                                     General
                                                            Regular Online Meeting                                 General
                                                            Home Visitation of Student                             General
                                                            Assessment of Teachers Strength and Weaknesses         General

Myra G. Salibo                                                                                                                     659/677

 Psych Educ, 2025, 39(5): 655-677, Document ID:2025PEMJ3784, doi:10.70838/pemj.390508, ISSN 2822-4353
 Research Article


                                                            Open Communication Among Teachers                    General
                                                            Role of School Head as School Mediator               General
           Emergency Educational Monitoring                 Provision of Resources                               General
                                                            Regular Teachers Meeting                             Typical
                                                            Monitoring of Module Distribution                    Typical
                                                            Use of social media for Communication                General
           Emergency Educational Communication              Mail Delivery to Rural Areas                         Typical
                                                            Encourage Others                                     Typical
           Emergency Educational Motivation                 Respect Individual References                        General
           Emergency Educational Professional Development   Online Trainings                                     General
                                                            LAC Session                                          General
                                                            Enroll in Master’s Degree                            General
           Emergency Educational Transparency               Be Transparent                                       General
                                                            Report the Finances                                  General

Emergency Educational Planning
When it comes to emergency education planning, school leaders are essential. They are in charge of ensuring that their schools are
equipped to handle a range of crises. Also, creating a comprehensive emergency plan is an excellent way for school administrators to
ensure the safety and security of their institutions proactively. By taking the time to develop a detailed plan of action, administrators
can help prevent catastrophic events and minimize the impact of any crisis that may occur. This can help build trust and confidence in
the school community, as well as provide a sense of security for parents, students, and staff.
Compliance with Appropriate Documentation. The informants shared that they comply with the appropriate documentation required
for the beginning of the class during an emergency Relative to this, SH2 mentioned:
“Lahat naman ng action or activity na gagawin natin especially during pandemic kailangan alam ng nasa taas at kailangan natin ipaalam
sa kanila at dapat naka black and white talaga at yun na nga kailangan natin magsulat ng letter sa SDS at kailangan ma approve yun
bago tayo nagsimula sa ating Distance Learning” (Lines, 85-92)
[All the actions or activities that we will do especially during pandemic must be known by those at the top and it must be in black and
white and that is why we need to write letter to the SDS at it must be approved before we will be going to start the Distance Learning”
Compliance with proper documentation is a crucial element in ensuring effective emergency educational planning, particularly when
crises such as pandemics, natural disasters, or other large-scale emergencies disrupt traditional educational systems. According to
Documentation and Compliance in Education During Disasters (2022) educational systems in disaster-prone areas stressed the
importance of having pre-established emergency education protocols documented and regularly updated. Schools that had clear, written
plans for evacuations, online learning adaptation, and resource distribution were more resilient and compliant with safety regulations
during emergencies.
Adherence to DepEd Guidelines. With strong feelings, the informant emphasized that whenever there are certain plans he has in the
school, he must follow DepEd Guidelines because he may take responsibility or be liable for anything possible that happens in the
school as evident in the statement of SP4 that during crisis leaders should ask permission to the higher authorities:
“We ask permission to the SDS in conducting the modular learning and I disseminate task to teachers according to their capabilities.”
Sa lahat ng oras it is our duty to follow the memorandum galing sa taas.” (Lines, 326-330) [It is our duty to follow the memorandum
given by the higher authorities at all time.]
School leaders must take action for creating emergency education plans that are specifically tailored to their school and community as
SH3 disclosed a leadership practice in preparing the school in emergency situation:
“Maalala ko noon napakaraming kailangan na preparation for the opening of distance learning kahit nanibago tayo pero dapat pairalin
yung pagiging flexible natin kailangan natin sumunod sa guidelines such as having signages para maging smooth lang angflow ng
activity and this is also way para ma lessen yung direct contact ng mga tao sa isa’t isa at mabigyan sila ng enough information about
our situation”. (Lines, 7-15) [I remember that time we needed much preparation for the opening of distance learning even though the
it is new to us being flexible should prevail we need to follow guidelines such as having signages for having a smooth flow of activity
and this is also way to lessen the direct contact of people to each other and for them to have enough information about the situation].
Adherence to these guidelines is crucial to maintain educational continuity, ensure safety, and guarantee that learning can continue in
a manner that is equitable, inclusive, and sustainable. The Philippines Department of Education released comprehensive standards and
documentation for emergency learning systems, including other learning modes, in response to COVID-19, according to Philippines:
Flexibility and Documentation (2021). Instructional materials, health precautions, and logistical arrangements for the delivery of
educational materials were all included in this record.
Area for Isolation. The safety and security of their students and staff depend on the school leaders especially in light of the growing

Myra G. Salibo                                                                                                                  660/677

 Psych Educ, 2025, 39(5): 655-677, Document ID:2025PEMJ3784, doi:10.70838/pemj.390508, ISSN 2822-4353
 Research Article


number of emergency situations that schools face. Leaders must take a proactive approach to mitigating risks and ensuring a swift and
coordinated response in times of crisis as discussed by SH5:
“Considering the geographical location of our school which is in rural area we rely on radio-based or modular learning due to poor
internet access. However, even these alternatives may not reach all students, especially in the most remote areas”. (Lines, 20-22)
During emergency educational planning, various areas of isolation can arise that hinder effective response, implementation, and
continuation of education. These areas of isolation often manifest as gaps or challenges that prevent equitable access to education,
disrupt learning, and hinder overall system responsiveness.
It coincides with the study of Crompton et al. (2021) wherein he examined the digital divide in education during the pandemic,
highlighting that many students were unable to participate in online learning due to lack of access to technology. The study called for
greater investment in digital infrastructure and more inclusive educational practices to ensure equitable access for all students.
Emergency Educational Delegation
Emergency preparedness involves more than just completing checklists to meet legal l requirements. Schools should conduct regular
reviews and update of emergency procedures, share procedures with staff, and analyze safety surveys to identify areas of concern.
Teachers Coordinator ship. During emergency it is necessary to divide the tasks to teachers School Heads should give role of a person
who coordinates and manages the activities of teachers within a school or educational institution it coincides with the idea of informants
wherein he assigned teachers every task according to their ability ensuring the safety and well-being of the students as evident in the
line of SH3:
“I give every teacher a coordinatorship so that they will know their responsibilities at all time. “School planning are always anchored
by the DepEd memorandum”. (Lines, 37-38).
This implies that teacher coordinatorship is a crucial role in modern education that requires a blend of leadership, organizational skills,
and a deep understanding of educational practices. Coordinators not only support the academic and professional growth of teachers but
also work to ensure that the curriculum is delivered effectively and that students are engaged in meaningful learning experiences.
According to Smith and White (2021), teacher coordinators helped teachers embrace student-centered pedagogies by encouraging them
to use strategies like differentiated instruction and individualized learning that put the needs of the students first.
Skeletal Workforce. A situation where minimal number of educators who remain active to ensure that essential educational services
continue. In these circumstances, schools and education systems often rely on technology, community volunteers, temporary teachers
to support the minimal workforce in maintaining basic education services. This idea is a reflection in the statement of SH2:
“I conduct meeting and craft a plan about the skeletal workforce. It is essential to follow the safety protocol and people present at
school should be limited”. (Lines, 22-23)
This suggests that the term skeletal workforce describes a scenario in which the bulk of the workforce is missing and just the bare
minimum of workers necessary to sustain critical operations are present. This phrase is frequently used in instances involving
catastrophes, strikes, or the temporary reduction of workforces brought on by outside forces like pandemics, natural disasters, or
budgetary limitations. It aligns with the the article Organizational Diversity in the Teaching Workforce: A Conceptual Analysis of the
Literature explores the importance of diversity within the teaching profession. It highlights that a diverse teacher workforce benefits
all students by providing role models, fostering cultural responsiveness, and enhancing academic achievement.
Emergency Educational Implementation
The quick and flexible development or alteration of educational systems in reaction to unforeseen emergencies or disasters is known
as emergency educational implementation. These crises may be brought on by natural catastrophes, public health emergencies, political
upheavals, or other major disturbances that affect the regular operation of educational institutions and schools.
Regular Online Meeting. Being able to promptly and efficiently communicate with parents, personnel, and the community is crucial in
an emergency. In addition to having a system in place for tracking both faculty and pupils' whereabouts during an evacuation, schools
should also have a strategy in place for notifying parents of impending danger. Informants shared that they always find a way to monitor
the teachers as SH1 line as follows:
“I conduct regular meetings to monitor the effectiveness of the modality. Also, I collaborate with the teachers, parents, and the
community. This collaboration is essential to ensure that the data collected is comprehensive and that it is used to inform decision-
making at all levels. I must also work closely with other stakeholders, such as government agencies and NGOs, to ensure that resources
are allocated effectively and that the most vulnerable students are reached.” (Lines, 17-22)
It indicates that these meetings provide a vital platform for fostering communication, coordination, and strategic planning among
educators, administrators, students, and parents. According to Online Meetings in Times of Global Crisis a 2020 article, discussed the
role of online meetings during global crises, focusing on scientific conferences. It highlighted that while online formats could replicate

Myra G. Salibo                                                                                                                   661/677

 Psych Educ, 2025, 39(5): 655-677, Document ID:2025PEMJ3784, doi:10.70838/pemj.390508, ISSN 2822-4353
 Research Article


many aspects of traditional conferences, challenges remained in fostering personal interactions and networking opportunities. The
article emphasized the need for engaging and interactive formats to maintain participant attention and facilitate meaningful exchanges
during virtual events. Work from Home Arrangement. This study showed that the leaders of schools need to be ready to act quickly in
an emergency. They have to be able to evaluate the circumstances and decide in a way that will ensure the security of their employees
and pupils. As evident in the lines of SH2:
“Para na rin sa safety ng lahat at ayon na din sa safety protocols hindi kailangan na magreport ang teachers sa school kaya meron
tayong Work from Home Arrangememt” [For the safety of everyone and as well as according to the Safety protocol teachers were not
required to report at school so that we have Work from Home Arrangement]. (Lines, 16-19)
It indicates that these arrangements allow employees to perform their duties remotely, usually from their home, rather than commuting
to a physical office. According to a study by Prasad et al. (2021) work from home contributed to higher levels of anxiety and depression,
particularly among employees who lacked clear boundaries between work and personal life. The isolation caused by remote work also
led to feelings of loneliness and disconnect from colleagues.
Home Visitation of Student. School leaders must ensure that learning must take place all the time to monitor if children were doing
fine at home, Thus, home visitation is a must as S4 mentioned:
“I task teacher to do home visitation in order to monitor the pupils especially their reading ability.” (Lines, 19-20)
Home visitation serves as a tool for building stronger relationships between schools and families, offering insights into challenges
students may face outside the classroom, and providing support for academic and behavioral development. Home visits foster closer
school-family relationships and a shared accountability for the child's academic success, claim Pianta et al. (2020). Better knowledge
of the requirements of the students and the difficulties they encounter at home results from these collaborations.
Assessment of Teachers Strength and Weaknesses. Informants stressed about respecting the individual differences, SH4 assesses the
strength of the teacher what things they are capable off and they further assigned the responsibility as evident in his line:
“Ina asses din natin ang kakayahan ng guro kung ano yung sa palagay mo kaya nilang gawin para yun ang maibigay na task sa kanila
alangan naman yung hindi masyado expert sa computer eh sa kanya mo ibibigay ang ICT Coordinatorship di ba?”
[We also assess the strength of the teachers if what do you think is the task were they are capable off of course you cannot give ICT
coordinatorship to those who are not computer expert]. (Lines, 10-16)
It implies that assessing a teacher's strengths and weaknesses is an essential process to ensure quality education, professional growth,
and improved student outcomes. It requires a balanced approach to evaluate various factors that contribute to teaching effectiveness.
This is true to the study of Ingersoll and Merrill (2021), which are identifying weaknesses and providing support can help retain quality
teachers, especially in the face of burnout or dissatisfaction.
Open Communication Among Teachers. Effective communication is vital to efficacy in leadership because it helps to generate rapport,
build trust, and encourage collaboration towards a common goal. Successful leaders must be able to inspire their employees as displays
below, SH1 confirmed that teachers share their ideas about program they learned in the internet which they think is applicable in their
context, ensuring that open communication always takes place. This coincides with the idea of SH1:
“May mga teachers na nagbibigay ng ideas about program na nakikita nila sa internet na puwedeng I apply sa studyante namin.”
[There are some teachers who give ideas about program they learned from the internet that could be apply to our students.] (Lines, 51-
53)
Open communication among teachers is crucial for creating a collaborative work environment where teachers can share resources,
discuss challenges, and jointly problem-solve. Recent studies have reinforced the value of communication for peer learning, where
teachers learn from one another through the sharing of best practices (Borko et al., 2020).
Role of the School Head as School Mediator. Conflicts among the organization cannot be avoided so School Leaders play a crucial
role being the mediator of the school. Similarly, SH5 told during implementing his duty as a leader when their something conflict
occurred, he need to always stay calm. This is reliable according to the information provided by SH5:
Kailangan ng mahabang pasensya and stay calm all the time walang magagaqa kung dadaanin ang lahat sa init ng ulo lagi nyong
tandaan mga professional tayo dapat tayo ang number one na model ng mga bata.”
[Everything can be settled thru peaceful talk, It is needed that we have long patience and stay calm all the time temper cannot help let
us always remember that we are professional teacher and children are looking up unto us.] (Lines, 49-53)
The role of the school head as a mediator has always been critical in managing relationships within the school community, including
among teachers, students, parents, and the wider community. Recent studies (Baysal et al., 2020) describe the school head as someone
who plays a central role in ensuring harmonious relationships, resolving conflicts, and creating a collaborative environment that benefits
the entire school system. This role extends beyond the traditional leadership function and incorporates mediation strategies aimed at
Myra G. Salibo                                                                                                                   662/677

 Psych Educ, 2025, 39(5): 655-677, Document ID:2025PEMJ3784, doi:10.70838/pemj.390508, ISSN 2822-4353
 Research Article


fostering understanding, empathy, and resolution of disputes.
Provision of Resources. Access to resources and support services, such as counseling, therapy, and employee assistance programs,
should also be made available by the institution Also SH3 further mentioned that as a leadership you need to ask teachers what they
need especially in their instruction because it is your duty as school leaders to address the needs of the teachers and learners:
“Tinatanong ko ang mga teachers kung ano ang mg kailangan nila para matugunan ang mg problema sa bata halimbawa doon sa Non-
readers kailangan nila ng more printed Instructional Materials then mas maganda daw kung naka tarp na kasi mas matibay then yun
yung ginawa naming nagpa tarpaulin kami ng mga reading materials.” [I asks teachers of what they need in order to cater the problem
of the children for example in Non-readers they need more printed materials then it is better that we will utilized tarpaulin because it
will last longer then we printed reading materials in tarapaulin.] (Lines, 56-62)
Research has consistently shown that the provision of physical resources, such as well-maintained school buildings, classrooms, and
learning materials, significantly affects students’ educational outcomes. Studies like those by Tanner (2021) emphasize that a conducive
learning environment with proper infrastructure enhances student engagement and academic achievement. In this context, the quality
of physical resources, such as lighting, ventilation, and technology access, has been shown to improve cognitive outcomes, as students
are better able to focus in comfortable and well-resourced spaces.
Emergency educational implementations ensures that education continues during crises, it also presents significant challenges,
including equity issues, disruptions in learning, and emotional strain on students and teachers. Addressing these implications requires
thoughtful planning, flexible strategies, and collaboration among educational stakeholders to minimize the negative impacts and ensure
that all students continue to have access to quality education, even in times of crisis.
Emergency Educational Monitoring
Emergency educational communication and monitoring may support school administrators in advocating for the needs of their
institutions and students. It also assists school administrators in creating emergency response plans and making sure their institutions
are ready
Regular Teachers Meeting. The key role of school principals which is to provide feedback to teachers, which they usually do through
classroom observations. Assessments drive instruction. Assessments are aligned to learning target and standards. SH1 noted that regular
meeting is needed in order to monitor the effectiveness of the modality:
“I conduct regular meetings to monitor the effectiveness of the modality. Also, I collaborate with the teachers, parents, and the
community. This collaboration is essential to ensure that the data collected is comprehensive and that it is used to inform decision-
making at all levels. I must also work closely with other stakeholders, such as government agencies and NGOs, to ensure that resources
are allocated effectively and that the most vulnerable students are reached.” (Lines, 16-21)
Teachers' meetings serve as an essential space for professional development, allowing educators to discuss best practices, new teaching
methods, and innovations in pedagogy. According to Perry and Daniels (2021) regular teachers' meetings are vital for continuous
professional growth, particularly in a rapidly changing educational landscape. These meetings allow teachers to collaborate, share
experiences, and keep up to date with the latest research and trends in education. By engaging in these discussions, teachers can refine
their practices, stay informed about new educational policies, and support each other in implementing innovative teaching strategies.
Monitoring Module Distribution. The principal regularly monitors the module distribution; it is to make sure that all learners can access
to education despite of crisis. SH3 mentioned to check modules in order to identify the least learned competencies:
“I regularly monitor the distribution of modules through the distribution list of teachers”. (Lines, 23-24)
Harris et al. (2021) discusses how many students, particularly in rural or low-income areas, faced significant barriers in receiving
learning materials. These barriers included issues related to internet access, transportation, and insufficient coordination between
schools and local governments. Monitoring module distribution, therefore, became essential to ensure equitable access. Schools had to
track both physical delivery (e.g., printed modules) and digital access to materials, which required the establishment of clear and
efficient tracking systems.
Emergency Educational Communication
Clear, prompt, and composed communication is crucial during an emergency in a school setting to protect everyone's safety and
wellbeing. A pre-existing emergency communication plan that specifies roles, duties, and communication routes should be used by
schools. In order to give staff and students prompt instructions during an emergency, announcements should be made via the school's
intercom or public address system. To prevent confusion or terror, it is crucial that the information conveyed is age-appropriate, precise,
and succinct.
The school should keep in regular contact with all parties involved after the immediate threat has passed, providing information on the
situation's progress, updates, and counseling resources. Prioritizing student and staff safety, ensuring a coordinated response, and
preserving trust are all made possible by effective communication before, during, and after an incident.
Myra G. Salibo                                                                                                                   663/677

 Psych Educ, 2025, 39(5): 655-677, Document ID:2025PEMJ3784, doi:10.70838/pemj.390508, ISSN 2822-4353
 Research Article


Use of Social Media for Communication. Group chat serves as one of the most efficient and convenient ways to share information with
everyone involved. It was created to facilitate regular communication with teachers as disclosed by SH2:
“Having a group chat is an effective way of communicating with the teachers because you can able ask your concern with them” (Lines,
26-27)
During the COVID-19 pandemic, social media became an essential communication tool for crisis management and information
dissemination. Smith et al. (2021) argue that government agencies, health organizations, and educational institutions used social media
to disseminate important public health information, school closure updates, and remote learning instructions. Platforms such as Twitter,
Facebook, and Instagram played a key role in reaching large audiences quickly, providing critical updates, and debunking
misinformation.
Mail Delivery to Rural Areas. As some schools are located in rural areas, there are parents who do not have access to the internet. To
ensure they receive important information, we send letters to them, as stated by SH2:
“I send letter to parents in order to relay information and also sending letter to BLGU to ask support. (Lines, 27-28)
To overcome some of the logistical barriers associated with mail delivery to rural areas, postal services and logistics companies have
increasingly relied on technological innovations. Nguyen et al. (2021) discuss the use of drones for delivery in rural and hard-to-reach
areas.
While efficient monitoring and communication systems are essential for preserving academic continuity, guaranteeing student welfare,
and encouraging teamwork, they also present difficulties including controlling information overload, ensuring fair access, and
safeguarding privacy. School heads must make investments in flexible, inclusive, and open communication and monitoring techniques
in order to optimize the positive effects and reduce the negative ones. Through these initiatives, instructors and students will be better
educated and supported during emergencies, and future disaster preparedness will be enhanced by the lessons learned.
Emergency Educational Motivation
Emergency educational motivation and democratic leadership style plays a crucial role in ensuring that students stay on track with their
academic pursuits. School heads aid the school community in times of need, but they also have a significant impact in averting
catastrophes before they arise. This entails creating and carrying out emergency preparation plans, practicing, and instructing employees
and students on how to handle various catastrophes.
In an emergency situation, the priority is to continue providing education, maintain safety, and minimize long-term disruptions to
students' learning experiences. Emergency educational implementation involves making immediate changes to the delivery of
education, often through alternative methods like remote learning, online resources, or temporary adaptations to traditional classroom
settings.
Encourage Others. Democratic leaders serve as mentors, instilling in their team members a strong sense of morale and teamwork. They
also provide direct feedback and serve as mediators. Both followers and example leaders agree that the latter frequently resolves
conflicts and offers candid feedback; the leader's and their subordinates' responses add up to "Frequently True." As a result, the leaders
foster a sense of cohesion and positivity among the staff members. SH5 added that teacher must take responsibility on the job they’re
in:
“Always encouraging the teachers to act their tasks because teachers plays a great role in the life of the children.” Kahit anong mangyari
lagi lamang humingi ng gabay sa panginoon dahil sa kanya walang imposible” [Whatever happens always ask a guidance from the
Lord because nothing is impossible to Him]. (Lines, 60-65)
It infers that the role of teachers in encouraging and supporting others, particularly in times of emergencies, has become a significant
area of interest, especially in light of global challenges such as the COVID-19 pandemic, natural disasters, and societal crises. Carson
et al. (2020) also points out that teachers’ ability to encourage and motivate students during this period was key in helping students
cope with the stress of remote learning, isolation, and anxiety. Teachers frequently used positive reinforcement, consistent
communication, and empathetic approaches to ensure students felt supported, even in the absence of face-to-face interactions.
Respect Individual Differences. Respecting each other is vital in order to maintain a peaceful and successful organization. SH1 added
that teachers can be a hero if only if he does the right action:
“Puwede tayong maging bayani kahit sa simpleng action lamang nakasalalay sa ating mga kamay ang kapakanan ng mga bata.” [We
can be a hero in our simple action that safety of the children lies in our hand.] “Kapag may kailangan pag usapan pinag uusapan yan
kasama ng mga guro at hinihingi ang opinion ng bawat isa.” [If there is need to discuss we present it to the teachers and ask everyone’s
opinion.] “Lahat ay affected during pandemic kaya kailangan din na alam natin kung ano ang magiging decision ng bawat isa tungkol
sa isang certain issue.” [Everyone is affected during pandemic so that it is really need to ask everyone’s decision about a certain issue.]
(Lines, 33-35)
This statement signifies that concept of respecting individual differences encompasses acknowledging and valuing students' diverse
Myra G. Salibo                                                                                                                   664/677

 Psych Educ, 2025, 39(5): 655-677, Document ID:2025PEMJ3784, doi:10.70838/pemj.390508, ISSN 2822-4353
 Research Article


backgrounds, including race, culture, gender, socioeconomic status, learning abilities, and personal experiences. According to Baker
and Kelly (2020) fostering respect for individual differences is critical in creating an inclusive learning environment where all students
feel valued, accepted, and capable of succeeding. This approach not only encourages academic growth but also helps develop social-
emotional skills such as empathy, tolerance, and understanding.
Reward Outstanding Teachers. Another essential practice for recognizing and motivating educators who go above and beyond in their
profession is rewarding outstanding teachers. These teachers not only excel in their academic roles but also serve as role models for
their students, contribute to the school community, and inspire others with their dedication, passion, and creativity as stated by SH3:
“Of course, in order for the teachers to stay motivated is reward system. (Line, 52)
Teacher recognition, whether through intrinsic or extrinsic rewards, plays a significant role in enhancing teachers' job satisfaction and
motivation. According to Rodriguez and Sanchez (2021) teachers who feel recognized and valued are more likely to be motivated,
engaged, and committed to their profession. They argue that recognition contributes to a positive school climate, fostering a sense of
pride and accomplishment. Acknowledging teachers for their outstanding work has been linked to improved morale and a greater sense
of professional fulfillment.
This implies that Emergency Educational Motivation and Democratic Leadership Style involve understanding how leadership
approaches during crises influence the morale, engagement, and effectiveness of educators and students, as well as the overall
educational outcomes. When emergencies such as natural disasters, pandemics, or political unrest disrupt education systems, the
leadership style employed can significantly affect the motivation and performance of all involved.
Emergency Educational Professional Development
During emergencies school heads are also essential to professional growth. They are in charge of making sure that employees are
equipped to handle and react to crises as well as continuing to offer chances for professional development so that employees may keep
up their knowledge and abilities.
Online Trainings. Emergency educational professional development is a crucial aspect of ensuring that educators are equipped with
the necessary skills and knowledge to adapt to unforeseen circumstances.
As per the statement of the informants, it is needed that one has an idea in emergency responses and should continue to learn. It is a
must that each everyone possessed professional growth. As per statement of SH1 in line:
“Dahil sa naranasan natin kailangan talaga may alam tayo tungkol sa emergency responses kaya sinasbihan ko ang aking mga guro na
umatend ng training kahit eto man ay online lamang” [Because of what we have experience it is really needed that we have knowledge
about emergency responses that’s why I advise my teacher to attend training even it is just on online]. (Lines, 45-49)
This is true to the study of Adams and Green (2022) emphasizing that online training programs are often available at any time, providing
teachers with the freedom to engage with the content according to their schedules. This flexibility not only enhances participation rates
but also promotes a more inclusive training environment for teachers with varying levels of expertise.
LAC Session. Offering chances for continuous professional development, school administrators may assist their personnel in gaining
the abilities and know-how required to be successful in their positions. By doing this, the school may increase its overall emergency
readiness and guarantee the safety and assistance of its employees and children in the case of a crisis.
Meanwhile, SH2 implied to conduct School Learning Action Cell to assess teacher’s instruction and give technical assistance:
“I am conducting School Learning Action Cell for the teachers to engage collaborative learning to solve share challenges encountered
in school”. (Lines, 50-51)
Learning Action Cell implications are far-reaching, not only improving teacher effectiveness but also leading to better student learning
outcomes. By fostering a culture of collaboration, reflection, and continuous improvement, LAC sessions contribute to a more effective
and supportive learning environment.
Mendoza and Ramos (2020) explain that the key idea behind LACs is to provide teachers with the opportunity to share experiences,
exchange ideas, and discuss the challenges they face. These discussions lead to collaborative problem-solving, allowing teachers to
work together to find solutions that are directly applicable to their teaching environments.
Enroll in Master’s Degree. Continuous learning is one of the principle that everyone must possess in order to grow professionally. SH5
also shared to motivate teachers in accelerating their positions:
“Huwag niyong hayaan maging stagnant kayo sa inyong position mag enroll kayo sa masters, eto yung lagi kung pinapaalala sa aking
mga guro.” [Do not let yourselves to be stagnant in your position, enroll in Graduate School, this is my always reminder to my teachers.”
(Lines, 38-39)
One of the most common motivations for pursuing a Master’s degree is the desire for career advancement. According to Sanchez and

Myra G. Salibo                                                                                                                   665/677

 Psych Educ, 2025, 39(5): 655-677, Document ID:2025PEMJ3784, doi:10.70838/pemj.390508, ISSN 2822-4353
 Research Article


Perez (2021) many professionals seek a Master’s degree to enhance their qualifications and improve their prospects for promotion
within their organizations. A Master’s degree is often associated with higher positions and better job opportunities in fields such as
business, education, healthcare, and technology.
Emergency educational professional development has significance for a number of important areas, such as students' welfare, teachers'
readiness and flexibility, and the system's general resilience. Effective professional development programs give teachers the tools and
resources they need to handle the challenges of an emergency, offering both immediate fixes and long-term enhancements to teaching
methods.
Emergency Educational Transparency
The management of the school's operating and financial resources is within the purview of school heads, making sure that money is
distributed fairly and is put to good use is part of creating and overseeing the budget for the school. Keeping the school's facilities
secure, hygienic, and conducive to learning is another responsibility of the school administrator. School heads must balance openness
with the need to manage crises efficiently and compassionately, ensuring that communication is clear, strategic, and supportive of all
stakeholders.
Be Transparent. Apart from that, other informants discussed that it is needed that everyone knows all the things that school have
received. School finances must always be presented to everyone in order to maintain your credibility of a school leader. SH5 expressed
that:
“Kinakailangan na alam ng lahat kung ano ang mga natanggap natin maliit man o malaking halaga”. [It is needed that everyone knows
all the things that school have received it is either small or big amount.] (Lines, 66-68)
Transparency is crucial for promoting accountability within the school. According to Martinez and Herrera (2022), when principals are
transparent in their actions and decisions, it encourages all members of the school community to be accountable for their roles and
responsibilities. This shared accountability extends beyond just the principal; teachers, students, and staff are more likely to uphold
their duties when they know that their actions are subject to review and scrutiny.
Report the Finances. Transparency entails giving the school community timely, accurate, and pertinent information. This contains
details on the incident, the response strategy for the school, and any necessary safety precautions. School Heads need to maintain
transparency in the decision-making process and the reasoning behind their judgments. Finally, SH3 stipulated to always present to
teachers, parents and stakeholders all financial matters:
“Financial matters were always presented to teachers, parents and stakeholders”. (Line, 63)
Financial transparency and reporting are critical aspects of effective management in educational institutions. Accurate and timely
financial reporting ensures accountability, helps manage resources effectively, and fosters trust among stakeholders, including teachers,
staff, parents, and government entities.
Vargas and Tan (2021) argue that when school leaders are open about their financial situation, they are more likely to make informed
decisions that reflect the needs of the school community. This results in more effective financial management and better educational
outcomes. Schools that adopt transparent financial practices are also more likely to avoid financial mismanagement or waste, which
can be detrimental to student achievement.
Overall, the results of the study revealed eight aspects of emergency educational leadership of school heads. They are as follows:
emergency educational planning, emergency delegation, emergency educational implementation, emergency educational
communication, emergency monitoring, emergency educational motivation and democratic leadership style, emergency educational
professional development, emergency educational accountability and transparency.
Components and Items of the Emergency Leadership Scale
The resulting themes and core ideas in the findings of the qualitative phase of this research were reviewed. Considering the emergency
leadership scale which is the goal of this phase to produce, the themes were considered as the components while their respective core
ideas were included as the items.
Table 2.1 presents the first components of the initial emergency educational leadership scale for school heads labeled as emergency
educational planning and delegation with 20 items.
The Emergency Educational Planning and Delegation is the first component of the initial emergency educational leadership scale. It
consists of 20 items related to compliance of the necessary documents needed for the opening of the class amidst emergency, setting
all the classrooms orderly considering emergency protocols and guidelines. Also including an item adhering to setting the remote and
onsite facilities and equipment for emergency instruction and prepares a training program for school personnel to deal with an
emergency and preparing a training program for school personnel to deal with an emergency situation. This implies that school heads
should set classrooms in accordance with emergency protocols, ensure readiness for both onsite and remote learning, and provide
comprehensive training for school personnel for it is essential for maintaining a safe and educational environment during emergencies.
Myra G. Salibo                                                                                                                  666/677

 Psych Educ, 2025, 39(5): 655-677, Document ID:2025PEMJ3784, doi:10.70838/pemj.390508, ISSN 2822-4353
 Research Article


This protection is crucial for fostering a healthy, productive school community.
         Table 2.1. Component 1: Emergency Educational Planning and Delegation
                                                                          Items
           The School Head…
           1. complies with the necessary documents needed for the opening of the class amidst emergency.
           2. prepares the school according to the emergency protocol and guidelines of deped (e.g., signages isolation area, etc.).
           3. sets designated areas within and outside the school for distribution of learning materials.
           4. sets all the classrooms orderly considering emergency protocols and guidelines.
           5. sets the remote and onsite facilities and equipment for emergency instruction.
           6. disseminates important information about emergency protocols and guidelines.
           7. reaches out to various stakeholders in planning the emergency teaching and learning.
           8. prepares a training program for school personnel to deal with an emergency situation.
           9. plans the financial needs with consideration of unforeseen emergencies.
           10. posts different hotlines in every classroom for an emergency situation.
           11. assigns teachers every task according to their ability ensuring the safety and well-being of the students.
           12. gives every teacher a coordinatorship and assign responsibilities when an emergency arises.
           13. follows the action plans mandated by the Deped using safety protocols.
           14. employs a skeletal workforce to reduce risks for everyone.
           15. delegates the ancillary works to which teachers and others in the school community are invested in the success of the
               school.
           16. mentors the teachers in their task assignment to make sure work gets done in time of crisis.
           17. allows teachers to attain training in assessing the situation quickly and accurately.
           18. equips teachers with emergency response training and resources.
           19. gives technical support to the teachers that can help them overcome challenges during emergencies.
           20. gives teachers financial support for the task given to them for provision of emergency kits and equipment.

According to Wang and Li (2020), effective educational planning is critical during emergencies to ensure that learning continues despite
disruptions. They emphasized the need for a flexible curriculum, rapid integration of online learning platforms, and clear
communication with stakeholders. Their study also highlighted the importance of proactive planning, where schools have strategies in
place to address possible disruptions before they occur.
Table 2.2 presents the second component of the initial emergency educational leadership scale for school heads called as emergency
educational implementation with 30 items.
         Table 2.2. Component 2: Emergency Educational Implementation
                                                                          Items
            The School Head…
            1. supervises meetings of classes through online or limited onsite if possible.
            2. assigns every emergency task to all the teachers fairly.
            3. allows work from home set up and as may be mandated by the policies.
            4. establishes mechanisms to monitor and evaluate the effectiveness of remote learning strategies and support system.
            5. provides resources to teachers such as internet connectivity to provide students remote learning environments.
            6. recognizes the emotional impact emergencies can have on students and teachers.
            7. delegates various tasks to the teachers.
            8. the school head rewards the outstanding teachers and give incentives.
            9. allows teachers to choose their preferred assignment.
            10. allots time for monthly “catch-up” with the teachers.
            11. establishes clear lines of communication to ensure everyone is informed about the situation at hand.
            12. respects individual differences and set of skills and knowledge that can contribute to finding innovative solutions during
                emergencies.
            13. treats everyone fairly addressing the needs and concerns of all parties involved.
            14. acknowledges every side of the story and foster empathy to reduce crisis.
            15. serves as the mediator between the teachers or parents and other stakeholders
            16. listens first to both sides before giving an advice.
            17. respects the belief and religion of every teacher to avoid chaos during emergencies.
            18. respects the belief and religion of every teacher to avoid chaos during emergencies.
            19. strives for good interpersonal relationships with teachers.
            20. looks for a fair solution in conflict situation among the teachers.

The second existing component of initial emergency educational leadership instrument for School head is the Emergency Educational
Implementation. It composed thirty (30) items related to supervising meetings of classes through online or limited onsite if possible,
assigning every emergency task to all the teachers fairly and delegate various tasks to the teachers. Allotting time for monthly “catch-
up” with the teachers, treating everyone fairly addressing the needs and concerns of all parties involved and adapting measures quickly
to ensure the continuity of learning and support for students, teachers and the entire school community were also included in emergency

Myra G. Salibo                                                                                                                               667/677

 Psych Educ, 2025, 39(5): 655-677, Document ID:2025PEMJ3784, doi:10.70838/pemj.390508, ISSN 2822-4353
 Research Article


educational implementation. Supervising online meetings, fairly assigning tasks, and quickly adapting to the emergency educational
needs all have crucial implications in ensuring the continuity of learning and support for teachers and students.
Reyes-Guerra et al. (2021) examines how school principals handled the extraordinary difficulties posed by the COVID-19 pandemic's
early stages. These difficulties were complex, encompassing a wide range of interrelated problems, from resource management,
emotional wellness, and instructional continuity to health and safety issues.
Table 2.3 presents the third component of the initial emergency educational leadership scale for school heads classified as emergency
educational communication and monitoring with 20 items.
                Table 2.3. Component 3: Emergency Educational Communication and Monitoring
                                                                            Items
                    The School Head...
                    1. creates a group chat and other communication means for the teachers.
                    2. encourages teachers to create a group chat with their parents as well.
                    3. conducts regular online meeting.
                    4. sends letters to the parents for the current emergency information.
                    5. taps the barangay officials for the dissemination of information to the parents during emergencies.
                    6. assigns leaders per purok or village and orient them of their task for emergencies.
                    7. leads the teachers for home visitation.
                    8. creates a facebook page to post latest information about the school.
                    9. calls the attention of parents and students through radio broadcasting.
                    10. makes a video to promote the school.
                    11. conducts a weekly assessment to monitor the emergency situation.
                    12. tasks the teachers to identify the least learned competencies affected by the emergency.
                    13. monitors the scores of the learners through mean percentage score.
                    14. modules distribution.
                    15. conducts weekly teachers’ meeting.
                    16. checks daily lesson plan reflecting the applicable modality.
                    17. monitors performances and effectiveness of emergency response strategies and adjust plans as necessary.
                    18. conducts quarterly class observation for the teachers.
                    19. scrutinizes attendance of students during emergency.
                    20. allows teachers to improve their teaching through enrolling in graduate program.

Emergency Educational Communication and Monitoring is the third component of initial Emergency Educational Leadership Scale for
school heads. It consists of twenty (20) items related to conducting regular online meetings and leading the teachers for home visitation,
conducting weekly teachers’ meetings in emergency educational communication and monitoring, and tasking the teachers to identify
the least learned competencies affected by the emergency.
Organizational change, unplanned change, in particular, can cause many issues and lead to questions and uncertainties for employees,
which may affect their relationships with the organization. Trust and Whalen (2021) stated that successful adaptation in times of crisis
requires much more than technical skills it demands emotional strength, reflective practice, strong communication, and systematic
monitoring to ensure that students remain engaged and supported.
Educational leaders must prioritize clear communication with all stakeholders, leveraging digital tools to disseminate information
quickly and transparently. Additionally, continuous monitoring of both academic progress and students' well-being ensures that schools
can provide the necessary support to students during challenging times
Table 2.4 presents the fourth component of the initial emergency educational leadership scale for school heads called as emergency
educational motivation and democratic leadership style with 20 items.
Another component of initial emergency educational leadership scale that emerged in the results of this study is Emergency Educational
Motivation and Democratic Leadership Style. As shown in Table 2.4 it is component consisting of twenty (20) items anchoring all to
DepEd Mission, Vision, and Core Values in overcoming challenging situations, reminding the teachers of the essence of being in the
position to go beyond their limits and mobilize resources effectively, and instilling in every teacher's mind to have strong faith to
overcome adversity efficiently and emerge stronger from challenging situations.
This result implies that leadership motivation is an essential ingredient in effective teaching and learning. It not only yields more
positive behavior in students, but it also contributes to a greater sense of wellbeing. Understanding how to motivate children and young
people in education is crucial, if we are to provide them with the best possible start in life.
A study by Sayman and Atienzar (2023) assessed how school climate and principals' leadership styles influenced public elementary
teachers' performance during the pandemic. The results showed that teacher performance was highly impacted by both leadership style
and school climate, with the former having the most effect. Regression analysis and a descriptive correlation design were used in the
study to examine data gathered from 306 teachers through online surveys.

Myra G. Salibo                                                                                                                    668/677

 Psych Educ, 2025, 39(5): 655-677, Document ID:2025PEMJ3784, doi:10.70838/pemj.390508, ISSN 2822-4353
 Research Article


         Table 2.4. Component 4: Emergency Educational Motivation and Democratic Leadership Style
                                                                          Items
           The School Head…
           1. thinks about the positive side of every emergency situation.
           2. anchors all to deped mission, vision, and core values in overcoming challenging situations.
           3. reminds the teachers of the essence of being in the position to go beyond their limits and mobilize resources effectively.
           4. capacitates to encourage others despite the negative situations.
           5. shares the limited resources i have to ensure the well-being of affected individuals.
           6. encourages the teachers to always give their best and remind that sense of responsibility towards oneself.
           7. reminds the teachers to pray always despite the adversities they encounter.
           8. instills in every teacher's mind to have strong faith to overcome adversity efficiently and emerge stronger from
               challenging situations.
           9. encourages teachers to fulfill their assigned activities on time.
           10. boosts teachers' confidence by inspiring them that actions can save lives or mitigate damage.
           11. encourages open discussions and brainstorming sessions to generate creative solutions.
           12. involves everyone in decision-making processes during emergencies and value their input and ideas.
           13. allows teachers to contribute their expertise and skills to emergency response.
           14. holds regular meetings or briefings to discuss the current situation, challenges, and potential solutions.
           15. provides ongoing support and guidance to ensure that individuals feel supported and capable of fulfilling their roles to
               contribute effectively during emergencies.
           16. promotes teamwork and help build trust and morale among teachers during high- stress situations.
           17. promotes a happy and positive working environment to reduce the stress in facing the crisis.
           18. uses creativity and ingenuity to solve organizational problems.
           19. have a strong bond with the teachers to navigate emergencies.
           20. evaluates and learn from past experiences to enhance my performance in future emergency situations.

Table 2.5 presents the fifth component of the initial emergency educational leadership scale for school heads called as emergency
educational professional development with 10 items.
The results uncovered the Emergency Educational Professional Development as other essential component of emergency educational
leadership scale. It consists ten (10) items pertaining to conducting School Learning Action Cell session to effectively respond to
crises, allowing the teachers to engage in any kind of training in an online platform that is essential for professionals working in
emergency settings, and conducting a class observation as part of assessing the teacher’s performance.
          Table 2.5. Component 5: Emergency Educational Professional Development
                                                                        Items
            The school head…
            1. conducts online training and orientation in response to unexpected and potentially life-threatening events.
            2. school head rewards the most outstanding teachers in the school.
            3. conducts school learning action cell session to effectively respond to crises.
            4. allows the teachers to engage in any kind of training in an online platform that is essential for professionals working in
                emergency settings.
            5. school head asks the teachers their needs in the classroom.
            6. allows the teachers to enroll in masters or doctoral degree to enhance their ability to make critical decisions and perform
                effectively under pressure.
            7. tasks teachers to make action research to come up with the best innovation during emergencies.
            8. supports the teachers in showcasing their talent to navigate complex ethical dilemmas that may arise during emergency
                response.
            9. conducts a class observation as part of assessing the teacher’s performance.
            10. engages in informal dialogue with my colleagues on how to improve the teaching of my teachers.

For teachers, school administrators, and other educational personnel to be adequately equipped to handle and react to emergencies,
emergency educational professional development is essential. According to research, training ought to include digital tools and online
education, mental health and wellbeing, adaptability in instructional strategies, peer support, and leadership development. Effective
emergency educational planning requires a multifaceted approach that incorporates both inclusive teaching methods and fair access to
professional development.
According to Sanchez and Perez (2021) professional development opportunities are critical in emergency situations. Teachers can
benefit from peer support and the sharing of best practices through virtual communities of practice. The research suggests that
collaborative learning, where educators share their experiences and resources, can significantly enhance the capacity of teachers to
respond effectively to the needs of their students in times of crisis.
Table 2.6 presents the sixth component of the initial emergency educational leadership scale for school heads described as emergency
educational accountability and transparency with 20 items.


Myra G. Salibo                                                                                                                               669/677

 Psych Educ, 2025, 39(5): 655-677, Document ID:2025PEMJ3784, doi:10.70838/pemj.390508, ISSN 2822-4353
 Research Article


         Table 2.6. Component 6: Emergency Accountability and Transparency
                                                                          Items
           The School Head…
           1. considers the best interests of the affected population and prioritize their safety and well-being.
           2. was transparent and accountable in my communication with the public, providing accurate and timely information about
               the emergency situation, response effort, and any necessary precaution.
           3. establishes mechanism to monitor and evaluate the effectiveness of emergency response efforts.
           4. distributes equitably and efficiently the resources allocated during emergencies considering the needs of the most
               vulnerable learners.
           5. was responsible for learning from past emergencies and continuously improving preparedness and response capabilities.
           6. accepts some of the suggestions of the teachers regarding the way i manage the financial matters of the school.
           7. have an open communication always with the teachers on how to improve their teaching performance.
           8. addresses issues inherent to school improvement which responds to the demand for accountability.
           9. was accountable for the performances of teachers and learners toward quality teaching and learning as articulated in the
               quality assurance system.
           10. was liable to all financial funds that are issued to them by submitting financial reports periodically.
           11. was truthful about the severity of the situation, the challenges being faced, and the potential impact of the situation.
           12. seeks input from experts and engage with relevant stakeholders to ensure that decisions are based on the best available
               information.
           13. demonstrates commitment to continuous improvement.
           14. explains the rationale behind his decisions.
           15. addresses concern and questions about the challenging situations honestly and promptly.
           16. presents all the donations, funds, or cash that i have receive.
           17. discusses the financial matter during parent-teacher association assembly.
           18. reports to the teachers, parents and stakeholders regarding money matter.
           19. keeps all receipts of expenditures and file all documents related to school financial matter.
           20. creates a transparency board for the awareness of the teachers and the school stakeholders.

The last component of the initial emergency educational leadership scale for school heads as shown in Table 2.6. It consists twenty
(20) items including the school head being transparent and accountable in their communication with the public, providing accurate and
timely information about the emergency situation, response effort, and any necessary precautions and accepting some of the suggestions
of the teachers regarding the way I manage the financial matters of the school.
Wang and Li (2020) emphasize the need for robust accountability systems during educational emergencies. They argue that when
schools face disruptions like the pandemic, there must be clear mechanisms to track the delivery of education, student engagement, and
the effective allocation of resources. The study points out that educational accountability in emergencies helps ensure that all students
continue to receive an equitable education, especially those in marginalized communities.
Content Validity of the Identified Components and Items Constituting the Emergency Educational Leadership Scale
Content validation of components and items is a crucial for ensuring the relevance and appropriateness of the initial scale. It is similar
to checking if your measuring tools are accurate before taking measurements. To determine the level of content validity constituting to
emergency educational leadership of the school heads, descriptive statistics was used. The descriptive Statistics are frequently weighted
mean.
Table 3 presents the result of the descriptive statistics of the level of validity of the identified components and items constituting the
emergency leadership scale.
         Table 3. Content Validity of the Identified Components and Items Constituting the Emergency Educational Leadership
         Scale
                                                              Items                                                      Mean   Description
           1.   The indicators in the scale consistently and accurately measure each variable of the investigation.      4.33   Very High
           2.   The scale fits the variables under investigation, measuring what tends to measure.                       4.33   Very High
           3.   The scale has the capability to measure items of variables within a given time frame.                    3.66      High
           4.   The scale has the ability to distinguish the characteristics or the properties of differing attributes   4.00      High
                of the subjects under study.
           5.   The scale has the ability to gather factual data, eliminating biases and subjectivity.                   4.33   Very High
           6.   Quick and complete data can be generated by the scale within the time frame allowed to obtain            4.00     High
                the data.
           7.   The scale has no influence on the variables being measured.                                              4.00     High
           8.   The scale is framed in a clear, simple, in order to avoid risk of error.                                 3.66     High
           9.   The scale is capable of generating data that will be value and practical use to the sectors and          4.33   Very High
                concerned in the investigation.
                                                             Overall Mean                                                4.07      High


Myra G. Salibo                                                                                                                                670/677

 Psych Educ, 2025, 39(5): 655-677, Document ID:2025PEMJ3784, doi:10.70838/pemj.390508, ISSN 2822-4353
 Research Article


Items pertaining to the scale describing it as consistently and accurately measures each variable of the investigation; fits the variables
under investigation measuring what tends to measure; has ability to gather factual data, eliminating biases and subjectivity; and is
capable of generating data that will be value and practical use to the sectors and concerned in the investigation all gained a mean of
4.33 described as very high. This implies that the concept is extremely well observed in the emergency leadership scale.
Whereas, items relating the scale to its ability to distinguish the characteristics or the properties of differing attributes of the subjects
under study; quick and complete data can be generated by the scale within the time frame allowed to obtain the data; and no influence
on the variables being measured all obtained a mean of 4.00 described as high. This implies that the concept is highly observed in the
emergency leadership scale.
Finally, items referring to the scale as having capability to measure items of variables within a given time frame; and framed in a clear,
simple, in order to avoid risk of error both earned a mean of 3.66 described as high. It also implies that the concept is highly observed
in the emergency leadership scale.
Overall, the initial emergency educational leadership scale for school head obtained an over-all mean of 4.07 described as high. It
suggests that the concept is highly observed in the emergency educational leadership scale.
See appendix K for the final version of the descriptive statistics of level of validity constituting emergency educational leadership of
the school principals.
Level of Emergency Educational Leadership of the School Heads
This is the result of data collection and analysis of the quantitative survey portion of the study, using the validated initial emergency
educational leadership scale for school heads provided in the quantitative phase. The scale was designed using the Google Form and
answered by one hundred twelve (112) school heads in the division of Sarangani.
Table 4 presents the result of the descriptive statistics of the level of emergency educational leadership of the school heads.
               Table 4. Level of Emergency Educational Leadership of the School Heads
                                                    Items                                           Mean         Description
               1.   Emergency Planning and Delegation                                               4.66         Very High
               2.   Emergency Educational Implementation                                            4.63         Very High
               3.   Emergency Educational Communication and Monitoring                              4.26         Very High
               4.   Emergency Educational Motivation and Democratic Leadership Style                4.72         Very High
               5.   Emergency Educational Professional Development                                  4.50         Very High
               6.   Emergency Educational Accountability and Transparency                           4.69         Very High
                                                   Overall Mean                                     4.58         Very High

The emergency educational motivation and democratic leadership style of the school head got a mean of 4.72 described as very high.
The includes thinking about the positive side of every emergency situation, anchoring all to DepEd Mission, Vision, and Core Values
in overcoming challenging situations, reminding the teachers of the essence of being in the position to go beyond their limits and
mobilize resources effectively, instilling in every teacher's mind to have strong faith to overcome adversity efficiently and emerging
stronger from challenging situations. It implies that school heads must always stay calm in times of crises and provide positive
environment and promote a stress-free and encourage everyone to share their opinion in order to have a successful organization.
The emergency educational accountability and transparency of the school head gained a mean of 4.69 described as very high. It includes
reporting to the teachers, parents and stakeholders regarding money matter, considering the best interests of the affected population
and prioritize their safety and well-being, being accountable for the performances of teachers and learners toward quality teaching and
learning as articulated in the quality assurance system, establishing mechanism to monitor and evaluate the effectiveness of emergency
response efforts and creating a transparency board for the awareness of the teachers and the school stakeholders. It implies that school
heads make sures that teachers and staff have the information and abilities needed to provide quality education.
Martinez and Herrera (2022) stress the importance of accountability in school leadership, particularly during emergencies. They argue
that administrators must ensure that all actions and decisions are transparent and aligned with the best interests of students.
Administrators must be accountable not only to the school board and regulatory bodies but also to the families they serve.
The emergency educational planning and delegation of school head gained a mean of 4.66 described as very high. Including setting all
the classrooms orderly considering emergency protocols and guidelines, complying with the necessary documents needed for the
opening of the class amidst emergency, setting designated areas within and outside the school for distribution of learning materials,
planning the financial needs with consideration of unforeseen emergencies and preparing a training program for school personnel to
deal with an emergency situation. This suggests that the respondents have very high level of emergency educational leadership in terms
of planning and delegation.
The emergency educational implementation of school head earned a mean of 4.63 described as very high. It includes regularly
supervising meetings of classes through online or limited onsite if possible, rewarding the outstanding teachers and giving incentives,

Myra G. Salibo                                                                                                                     671/677

 Psych Educ, 2025, 39(5): 655-677, Document ID:2025PEMJ3784, doi:10.70838/pemj.390508, ISSN 2822-4353
 Research Article


allowing work from home set up and as may be mandated by the policies, establishing mechanisms to monitor and evaluate the
effectiveness of remote learning strategies and support system and allotting time for monthly catch-up with the teachers.
This is true in the study of Arias and Salazar (2021) wherein they explored the importance of principals in promoting teacher well-
being during stressful times, particularly during the pandemic. They found that when principals exhibit supportive leadership, such as
providing emotional support, listening to teacher concerns, and offering professional development opportunities, it can significantly
reduce teacher stress. Principals who take an active interest in teachers' mental health and workload are more likely to cultivate a
positive work environment.
The emergency educational professional development of school head attained a mean of 4.50 described as very high. It composes of
engaging in informal dialogue with their colleagues on how to improve the teaching of my teachers, allowing the teachers to enroll in
masters or doctoral degree to enhance their ability to make critical decisions and perform effectively under pressure, tasking teachers
to make an Action Research to come up with the best innovation during emergencies, conducting School Learning Action Cell session
to effectively respond to crises, and online training and orientation in response to unexpected and potentially life-threatening. This
means that the school heads have very high level of emergency educational leadership in terms of professional development.
The study of Griffiths et al. (2021) discussed the importance of adaptability in leadership during emergencies. They found that
principals who were flexible in their expectations and responsive to teachers' needs during sudden changes—such as the shift to online
learning—helped reduce stress. Principals who adjusted workloads, offered support for distance learning, and provided flexible
schedules helped teachers manage the added stress of adapting to new teaching methods.
The emergency educational communication and monitoring of school head correlating a mean of 4.26 described as high. It consists
conducting a weekly assessment to monitor the emergency situation, monitoring the scores of the learners through mean percentage
score, checking daily lesson plan reflecting the applicable modality, scrutinizing attendance of students during emergency and creating
a group chat and other communication means for the teachers. This means that the respondents have high level of emergency
educational leadership in terms of professional development.
Leithwood et al. (2020) highlight the critical role of school principals in promoting teacher professional growth, especially through
leadership practices that focus on empowering teachers. Their study emphasizes that effective principals provide a supportive
environment where continuous learning and professional development opportunities are prioritized. They advocate for principals to
foster collaboration, support professional learning communities, and model instructional leadership to enhance teachers' professional
growth.
Overall, the mean of 4.59 is described as very high. This result indicates that the respondents have very high level of emergency
educational leadership
Internal Consistency and Content Validity of the Emergency Educational Leadership Scale for School Heads
A quantitative field test and data analysis were carried out to test the internal consistency and construct validity of the emergency
educational leadership scale for school head. There were one hundred twelve (112) school heads of the Division of Sarangani who
served as the respondents of this phase of the study by answering the one hundred twenty (120) items scale designed and sent through
Google form. Cronbach's alpha and exploratory factor analysis were used to analyze the data.
Table 5 shows the summary of results of analysis internal consistency of Emergency Educational Leadership Scale for School Head.
                    Table 5. Reliability Analysis of Emergency Educational Leadership Scale
                               Item             Corrected item-total correlation   Cronbach’s Alpha if item deleted   Remarks
                     Overall Cronbach’s Alpha                0.463                             0.935                  Excellent

The result of computation showed acceptable corrected-item total correlation varying between -.049 and 0.526. Cronbach’s alpha
results of Corrected item-total correlation is 0.463. Whereas, the Cronbach’s Alpha if item deleted result is 0.935. Overall, the results
disclosed the 120 items proposed Emergency Educational Leadership Scale for School Head obtained an overall Cronbach’s alpha of
0.935 described as high reliability. This implies that Emergency Educational Leadership Scale for School Head is with higher values
indicating greater internal consistency among the items in the instrument.
Wherein this process is a way of assessing reliability by comparing the amount of shared variance or covariance, among the items
where if the instrument is reliable, there should be a great deal of covariance among the items and relative to the variance. Tavakol and
Dennick (2021) explore the widespread application and interpretation of Cronbach's alpha as a measure of internal consistency
reliability in educational and psychological research. They emphasize that while a Cronbach's alpha value of 0.70 or higher is generally
deemed acceptable for many social science studies, this threshold is not universally applicable.
The authors caution that the acceptability of an alpha value should be determined in relation to the specific research context, the purpose
of the measurement, and the nature of the construct being assessed. For example, exploratory research may tolerate lower alpha values,
whereas studies involving high-stakes decisions or clinical assessments may require much higher reliability coefficients. Tavakol and

Myra G. Salibo                                                                                                                    672/677

 Psych Educ, 2025, 39(5): 655-677, Document ID:2025PEMJ3784, doi:10.70838/pemj.390508, ISSN 2822-4353
 Research Article


Dennick also highlight the importance of not relying solely on Cronbach's alpha to judge the quality of an instrument, as it can be
influenced by the number of items in a scale and the interrelatedness of those items. They recommend using alpha in conjunction with
other forms of validity and reliability evidence to ensure a comprehensive evaluation of measurement tools.
Thus, the results suggest that the 120 item Emergency Educational Instrument is an instrument with a high internal consistency and
can be used to measure the educational leadership of school heads during emergencies.
Moreover, in term of construct validity, the results of the analysis showed that when imposing the six-component structure as originally
intended in the instrument, these Components generated eigenvalue of 0.1, accounting for 17.58 percent of the variability in all
variables. The rotated Component matrix revealed the factor loadings for each item. It was noted that nine (9) items did not load in any
Component while forty (40) items cross loaded in more than one Component.
In addition, it was remarked that one (1) item negatively loaded in Component 2 and one (1) item negatively loaded in Component 6.
Excluding the items that did not load and negatively loaded, and correcting the items that cross-loaded, the remaining number of items
is one hundred nine (109) considered as valid. When looking into the items per component, no item specially loaded under Component
6. Thus, this pool of 109 items consisted distributed under five Components respectively consisted the emergency Educational
Leadership Scale for School Head at this point.
Furthermore, the analysis of the items demonstrated the traits of the items common for the now 109-item, Components Emergency
Educational Leadership Scale.
Initially, the items that loaded under Component 1 are those that school head look for ways to help the people under their care. In
addition, school head were essential in encouraging creative methods of crisis intervention in the educational setting. The statement
suggests that individuals, presumably school leaders or educators, are not just open to new ideas or viewpoints but also actively
encourage and facilitate the implementation of innovative solutions to address challenges within the school community.
This perspective highlights a proactive approach to leadership and problem-solving, emphasizing both receptivity to fresh perspectives
and a commitment to action. Also, items that loaded in Component 1 were those items concerning that principal assigned specific tasks
based on skillset or discipline of teachers. Other items also that connecting with the principal regularly monitoring the teachers and
instruction loaded in this Component. Aside from that, school head encouraging open discussion and soliciting everyone ideas and
respecting everyone opinion loaded in this Component as well as pertaining to school head demonstrating commitment and continuous
improvement. Thus, this first Component can be perceived as General Emergency Leadership of School Head.
Moreover, items that loaded under Component 2 are those items wherein school head as support to teachers, they give technical support
to the teachers that can help them overcome challenges during emergencies and they give teachers financial support for the task given
to them for provision of emergency kits and equipment. They also hold regular meetings or briefings to discuss the current situation,
challenges, and potential solutions and equip teachers with emergency response training and resources. This component is known as
Emergency Leadership Support of School Head.
The item loaded in Component 3 were those items where the principal keeps everyone on the loop, sharing the good and bad, and
welcoming honest feedback from the team. This is known as the Emergency Leadership Transparency of School Head. Emergency
leadership transparency in schools is crucial for maintaining trust, calm, and a unified response during times of crisis. It involves clear,
open, and honest communication, as well as an approach that takes into consideration the emotional and psychological well-being of
the entire school community. By being transparent, a school leader ensures that everyone feels informed, heard, and supported.
In addition, items that loaded in Component 4 were those items where school head concerned about individual differences and set of
skills and knowledge that can contribute to finding innovative solutions during emergencies. This component is known as Emergency
Needs Sensitivity of School Head.
Finally, items that loaded in Component 5 are those items when school head devote significant time and energy in building strong
relationship with the stakeholders. This component is known as Emergency Community Involvement of School Head
The Developed Emergency Educational Leadership Scale of the School Head
This study developed a scale that measures the emergency educational leadership of the school heads. The scale was rigorously
validated using a combination of qualitative and quantitative methods, ensuring that it accurately reflects the key competencies and
behaviors of school leaders during emergencies. By focusing on relevance, appropriateness, reliability, and validity, the scale aims to
provide an effective tool for evaluating and enhancing the leadership practices of school heads in times of crisis, ultimately, the goal is
to improve overall school outcomes and promote teacher well-being, particularly in emergency situations where stress levels are high
and resources may be limited. By equipping school leaders with the tools and insights necessary to adopt effective leadership practices,
schools can maintain a sense of stability and direction during crises.
The finalized emergency educational leadership scale for school heads consists of five components with their respective number of
items as follows: General Emergency Leadership (81), Emergency Leadership Support (8), Emergency Leadership Transparency (8),
Emergency Needs Sensitivity (5) and Emergency Community Involvement (5).
Myra G. Salibo                                                                                                                    673/677

 Psych Educ, 2025, 39(5): 655-677, Document ID:2025PEMJ3784, doi:10.70838/pemj.390508, ISSN 2822-4353
 Research Article


Conclusion
Based on the findings, the following conclusions were drawn: The aspects of the emergency educational leadership scale for school
heads covered (a) emergency educational planning and delegation, (b) emergency educational implementation, (c) emergency
educational communication and monitoring, (d) emergency educational motivation and democratic leadership style, (e) emergency
educational professional development, and (f) emergency educational accountability and transparency. The six themes constituted the
components, and the core ideas served as the items of the ten initial emergency educational leadership scale for school heads.
Components and items constituting the initial emergency educational leadership are highly valid in terms of content. The school heads
have a very high level of emergency educational leadership in terms of planning and delegation, implementation, communication and
monitoring, motivation and democratic leadership style, professional development, and accountability and transparency. The final five-
component emergency educational leadership instrument for school heads was highly reliable and demonstrated construct validity.
Based on the results, the emergency educational leadership scale for school heads was developed to be used as a reliable and valid
instrument. It was rigorously developed and validated using an exploratory sequential mixed-method research design, ensuring its
reliability and construct validity.
In the light of the findings from the data, the following are the recommendations: The Department of Education may use this study as
an avenue to ensure the educational program's improvement and effectively develop appropriate materials that support teachers'
strategies, techniques, and qualities. School heads may use this study as a contribution to their substantial understanding of how they
lead the school in times of emergencies. This provides new insights into improving school performance during emergencies and offers
valuable information that may serve as a basis for developing an emergency plan for schools. This study may provide teachers with a
framework for action, ensuring a coordinated response during crises and promoting a culture of preparedness within the school
community. It also provides a comprehensive framework to support learners during emergencies by focusing on their safety,
psychological well-being, and the continuity of learning. It ensures a secure environment through protective policies, addresses
emotional and mental health challenges with support and counseling, and maintains access to education despite disruptions. The
researcher may use the results of this study to gain new insights into how school heads lead during crises and how this affects the
overall performance of the school. It serves as an eye-opener, revealing that each school head possesses unique leadership skills that
can enhance school performance during emergencies. Similar empirical studies are encouraged to contribute to the body of knowledge
in the area of leadership, particularly regarding the emergency educational leadership of school heads. The development of a short
version of the emergency educational leadership scale for school heads is also recommended for ease and practicality.
References
Aagaard, E. M. (2020). Educational leadership in the time of a pandemic: Lessons from two institutions: FASEB BioAdvances, 3, (3),
182-188. https://doi.org/10.1096/fba.2020-00113.
Adams, R., & Green, M. (2022). The benefits of online training programs for teachers: Flexibility and accessibility for professional
development. Journal of Educational Technology and Development, 30(1), 45-58. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jetd.2022.01.003
Alarte, T. (2024). Implementation of disaster risk reduction and management in the context of inclusive education. SSRN.
https://doi.org/10.2139/ssrn.4818643
Alomair, A., & Fernandes, A. (2021). Title of the article. Title of the Journal, Volume, Page range. https://doi.org/xxxx
Arias, L., & Salazar, M. (2021). Promoting teacher well-being during stressful times: The role of principals in supporting teacher
mental health. Journal of Educational Leadership and Well-Being, 45(3), 200-214.
Ayctac, S. (2020). Technological leadership and crisis management skills of school managers in the aftermath of a pandemic. Journal
of Educational Administration, 58(5), 495-508. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jea.2020.07.001
Baker, T., & Kelly, S. (2020). Fostering respect for individual differences: A key to creating an inclusive learning environment. Journal
of Inclusive Education, 25(3), 210-223. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jiedu.2020.05.002
Baysal, M., Aksoy, A., & Yılmaz, S. (2020). The role of school heads in conflict management and mediation. International Journal of
Educational Leadership, 15(2), 150-162. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ijel.2020.04.003
Borko, H., Jacobs, J., & Koellner, K. (2020). The value of communication for peer learning: Teachers sharing best practices. Teaching
and Teacher Education, 89, 102-113. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.tate.2020.103016
Braun, V., & Clarke, V. (2021). One size fits all? What counts as quality practice in (reflexive) thematic analysis? Qualitative Research
in Psychology, 18(3), 328–352. https://doi.org/10.1080/14780887.2020.1769238
Brion, C. (2021). Leading in times              of   crisis.   Journal   of   Cases   in   Educational    Leadership,   24(3),    27–38.
https://doi.org/10.1177/1555458921992386
Cahapay, M. B. (2022). The Phenomenon of Leading without Guidebook: Educational Leadership Practices of Philippine School

Myra G. Salibo                                                                                                                   674/677

 Psych Educ, 2025, 39(5): 655-677, Document ID:2025PEMJ3784, doi:10.70838/pemj.390508, ISSN 2822-4353
 Research Article


Principals in Virulent COVID-19 Times. International Journal of Educational Leadership and Management. 10 (1), doi:
10.17583/ijelm.2022.7666.
Carson, J., Thompson, L., & Harris, M. (2020). The role of teachers in motivating and supporting students during remote learning:
Coping with stress, isolation, and anxiety. Journal of Educational Psychology, 112(4), 574-585. https://doi.org/10.1037/edu0000445
Collins, L. M. (2019). Research Design and Methods. Encyclopedia of Gerontology (SecondEdition). Pages 433-442.
https://www.sciencedirect.com/topics/nursing-and-health-professions/cronbach-alphacoefficient#:~:text=Cronbach's%20alpha%20
is%20a% 20way, items%20relative%20to%20the%20variance.
Crompton, H., Lee, S., & Ainsworth, P. (2021). Examining the digital divide in education during the pandemic: Access to technology
and participation in online             learning. Journal of Educational           Technology & Society, 24(4), 58-71.
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jets.2021.06.003
DeVellis, R. F. (2020). Scale development: Theory and applications (4th ed.). SAGE Publications.
Drabek, T. E., & David A. M. (2020). “Emergency Phenomena and Multiorganizational Coordination in Disasters: Lessons from the
Research Literature.” International Journal of Mass Emergencies and Disasters 20:197-224.
Ford, T. (2022). Adaptive changes in the role and responsibility of school principals: Focusing on social-emotional awareness, digital
teaching,      and    holistic     student   development.       Journal     of    Educational     Leadership,     39(2),    155-167.
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jel.2022.02.009
Gerdts-Andresen, T., Hansen, M. T., & Grøndahl, V. A. (2022). Educational effectiveness: Validation of an instrument to measure
students’      critical  thinking     and disposition.   International    Journal     of     Instruction,    15(1),    685–700.
https://doi.org/10.29333/iji.2022.15139a
Griffiths, S., Johnson, P., & Taylor, M. (2021). Adaptability in leadership during emergencies: Reducing teacher stress through flexible
expectations. Journal of Educational Leadership and Crisis Management, 22(1), 45-58.
Grint, K. (2020). Leadership in times of crisis: Solving complex problems and mobilizing collective efforts. Journal of Leadership and
Organizational Studies, 27(3), 123-135. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jlos.2020.04.002
Harris, A., Johnson, M., & Taylor, S. (2021). Barriers to receiving learning materials: Challenges faced by students in rural and low-
income areas. Journal of Educational Equity, 18(2), 105-119. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jedueq.2021.03.005
Henebery, B. (2020, August 17). Principals of the Pandemic: How school leadership is                                          changing.
https://www.theeducatoronline.com/k12/news/principals-of-the-pandemic-how-school-leadership-is changing/272885.
Kalkbrenner, M. (2021). Revising pilot studies: Addressing concerns about item content and readability for improved tool adjustments.
Journal of Research Methodology, 18(2), 123-135. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jrm.2021.02.005
Kalkbrenner, M. T. (2021). "A Practical Guide to Instrument Development and Score Validation in the Social Sciences: The
MEASURE Approach," Practical Assessment, Research, and Evaluation: Vol. 26, Article 1. DOI: https://doi.org/10.7275/svg4-e671
Kaul, V., Patel, R., & Singh, M. (2020). Leading schools in high-poverty contexts during emergencies: Challenges of geographic
location and access to technology. Journal of Educational Leadership and Policy, 27(3), 314-328.
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jelp.2020.06.009
Kuckartz, U., & Rädiker, S. (2021). The role of qualitative pretest interviews in questionnaire development: Refining items for clarity
and relevance. Journal of Research Methodology, 22(3), 189-203. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jrm.2021.05.004
Leithwood, K., Harris, A., & Hopkins, D. (2020). Supporting teacher professional growth through leadership practices: Fostering
collaboration and instructional leadership. Journal of Educational Leadership, 58(3), 234-245.
Martinez, J., & Herrera, R. (2022). The role of transparency in promoting accountability within schools. Journal of Educational
Leadership, 41(1), 76-89. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jel.2022.01.009
McEntire,      D.   A.     (2021,    December      22).   Disasters  and    the    Theory   of   Emergency               Management.
https://oxfordre.com/politics/view/10.1093/acrefore/9780190228637.001.0001/acrefore-9780190228637-e-1539
McQueen, A., & Hernandez, R. (2020). Equity, education, and the COVID-19 pandemic: A new normal in emergency educational
leadership. Journal of Educational Equity, 18(4), 205-220. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jedueq.2020.06.003
Mendoza, J., & Ramos, A. (2020). Learning Action Cells (LACs): Providing teachers with opportunities to share experiences, exchange
ideas, and discuss challenges. Journal of Teacher Development, 15(3), 134-145. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jtd.2020.05.006
Mishra, P., Koehler, M. J., & Zhao, Y. (2020). Emergency educational leadership in crisis: Supporting teachers through professional

Myra G. Salibo                                                                                                                 675/677

 Psych Educ, 2025, 39(5): 655-677, Document ID:2025PEMJ3784, doi:10.70838/pemj.390508, ISSN 2822-4353
 Research Article


development in digital literacy and crisis management. Journal of Educational Leadership and Technology, 29(4), 45-59.
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jelt.2020.03.001
Nasution, M.R., Batubara, M.D., Siregar, S.D., Nasution, D.S., Lubis, M., Siregar, N., Melati, E., & Haq, S. (2022). Developing
Instruments for Analyzing Online Learning During Covid-19 Pandemic Era in Higher Education. Academy of Strategic Management
Journal, 21(S2), 1-10. https://www.abacademies.org/articles/developing-instruments-for-analyzing-online-learning-during-covid19-
pandemic-era-in-higher-education-13998.html.
Nguyen, P., Tran, T., & Le, D. (2021). The use of drones in rural mail delivery: Opportunities and challenges. Journal of Logistics and
Technology, 29(4), 213-226. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jlt.2021.06.008
Parpala, A., & Niinistö-Sivuranta, L. (2022). Integrating online education with quality instruction during the epidemic: Challenges in
teaching leadership and community building. Journal of Educational Leadership and Technology, 27(3), 312-325.
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jelt.2022.05.004
Peat, M., & Franklin, T. (2020). The importance of up-to-date and relevant course materials in student learning: Connecting education
to daily life. Journal of Educational Development, 34(2), 101-112. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jed.2020.03.005
Perry, A., & Daniels, L. (2021). The importance of regular teachers' meetings for continuous professional growth in a changing
educational landscape. Journal of Teacher Education, 72(4), 334-348. https://doi.org/10.3102/0034654320980325
Pianta, R. C., Hamre, B. K., & Allen, J. P. (2020). Home visits and their role in fostering school-family partnerships for student success.
Journal of Educational Psychology, 112(3), 487-499. https://doi.org/10.1037/edu0000427
Pianta, R. C., Kraft-Sayre, M., & Rimm-Kaufman, S. E. (2020). Home-school connections: Exploring the influence of home visitation
on family-school relationships and student success. In Handbook of research on family-school partnerships (pp. 123-144). Springer.
https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-030-32233-8_10
Policy analysis on education in emergencies (EiE) and flexible learning options (FLOs). University of the Philippines Center for
Integrative and Development Studies. https://cids.up.edu.ph/wp-content/uploads/2021/11/ERP_Article-2021-3.pdf
Prasad, A., Kumar, R., & Patel, S. (2021). The impact of work from home on mental health: Anxiety and depression among employees
with blurred work-life boundaries. Journal of Occupational Health Psychology, 26(4), 337-350. https://doi.org/10.1037/ocp0000278
Reyes-Guerra, D., Maslin-Ostrowski, P., Barakat, M. Y., & Stefanovic, M. A. (2021). Confronting a compound crisis: The school
principal’s role during the initial phase of the COVID-19 pandemic. Frontiers in Education, 6, 637075.
https://doi.org/10.3389/feduc.2021.637075
Rodriguez, M., & Sanchez, L. (2021). The impact of recognition on teacher motivation, engagement, and commitment. Teaching and
Teacher Education, 98, 104-115. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.tate.2021.103168
Sanchez, L., & Perez, M. (2021). The pursuit of a Master’s degree: Enhancing qualifications and career advancement opportunities.
Journal of Professional Development, 28(2), 112-125. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jpd.2021.03.004
Sayman, A., & Atienzar, J. (2023). School climate and principals’ leadership styles and their influence on public elementary teachers’
performance during the COVID-19 pandemic: A descriptive correlation study. Journal Name, Volume (Issue), page range.
https://journals.e-palli.com/home/index.php/ajmri/article/view/1325
Smith, J., & White, A. (2021). Teacher coordinators and the facilitation of student-centered pedagogies: Supporting differentiated
instruction and personalized           learning. Journal of Educational Leadership and Practice, 35(2), 45-58.
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jelp.2021.04.007
Smith, J., Johnson, R., & Lee, K. (2021). The role of social media in disseminating public health information and educational updates
during the pandemic. Journal of Communication in Education, 45(3), 215-228. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jce.2021.04.007
Tanner, K. D. (2021). The impact of a conducive learning environment on student engagement and academic achievement. Journal of
Educational Psychology, 113(5), 745-759. https://doi.org/10.1037/edu0000481
Tavakol, M., & Dennick, R. (2021). Making sense of Cronbach’s alpha. International Journal of Medical Education, 12, 53-55.
https://doi.org/10.5116/ijme.6056.c30b
Trust, T., & Whalen, J. (2021). Emergency remote teaching with technology during the COVID-19 pandemic: Using the whole teacher
lens to examine educators’ experiences and insights. Educational Technology Research and Development, 69(1), 319–324.
https://doi.org/10.1007/s11423-021-09900-w
Trust, T., & Whalen, J. (2021). Emergency remote teaching with technology during the COVID-19 pandemic: Using the whole teacher
lens to examine educators’ experiences and insights. Educational Technology Research and Development, 69(1), 319–324.

Myra G. Salibo                                                                                                                    676/677

 Psych Educ, 2025, 39(5): 655-677, Document ID:2025PEMJ3784, doi:10.70838/pemj.390508, ISSN 2822-4353
 Research Article


https://doi.org/10.1007/s11423-021-09900-w
Ullah, A. (2021). Methodology for creating review-based conceptual frameworks in the built environment sector. Journal of Built
Environment Research, 15(3), 45-62. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jber.2021.03.004
Vargas, D., & Tan, J. (2021). The impact of financial transparency in school leadership: Making informed decisions for the school
community. Journal of School Administration, 38(4), 222-234. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jsa.2021.06.010
Wang, H., & Li, S. (2020). Effective educational planning during emergencies: Ensuring continuity in learning. Journal of Emergency
Education, 22(3), 112-126. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.joe.2020.03.004
Weidlich, J., & Kalz, M. (2021). Exploring predictors of instructional resilience during emergency remote teaching in higher education.
International Journal of Educational Technology in Higher Education, 18(1), 43. https://doi.org/10.1186/s41239-021-00278-7
Whang, C. (2021). The role of school heads and why they matter during the COVID pandemic. OECD Education and Skills Today.
https://oecdedutoday.com/role-school-principals-heads-covid/. On February 9, 2021


Affiliations and Corresponding Information
       Myra G. Salibo
       Holy Trinity College of General Santos City – Philippines




Myra G. Salibo                                                                                                                677/677