Educational Leadership and ICT Implementation in Israeli
      Arab Sector – towards a Model of Hybrid Leadership
                                                              Suleiman HABIBALLAH 1
                                                                         Nicolae BIBU 2
                                                                    Doina DANAIATA 3

              Abstract
              The present article discusses the concept of hybrid leadership in the context of
     the educational leadership in ICT implementation in Israeli Arab sector. In the Arab
     sector in Israel, where the school system has always been patriarchal, authoritarian,
     and strictly hierarchical, developing a hybrid school leadership represents a
     particularly interesting, important and beneficial challenge. The discussion evolves
     from analyzing the qualitative findings obtained from interviews conducted with 12
     stakeholders: principals, teachers, ICT coordinators and external coordinators. The
     analysis and interpretation of the findings brought to introducing of the “hybrid model”
     of educational leadership that includes four components: (1) hybridity as open-minded
     thinking; (2) hybridity as proficiency at managing e-spaces and blended environments;
     (3) hybridity as openness to multiple databases of knowledge and multidisciplinary
     thinking; (4) hybridity as communal responsibility.

       Keywords: hybrid leadership, educational digital leadership, ICT reform
implementation, principal-as-ICT-leader.

          JEL classification: I00, I29, P46
          DOI: 10.24818/RMCI.2021.1.74

          1. Introduction

         In the context of the 21st century, featured by swift dynamics of change and
shifting concepts and paradigms, the concept of leadership also undergoes constant
changes and adaptation to new demands and inquiries. The dramatic shift that
occurred in school leadership worldwide in the context of the ICT reform and
implementation brought about a need for an eclectic form of leadership, which can
combine and wisely use various forms of leadership, with consideration for cultural
varieties and variances, as well as for continuously changing demands. The
principal-as-ICT-leader works in multiple administrative, managerial,
organizational, and learning environments, which cross the boundaries of time,
space, and disciplinary frameworks; all that poses new challenges, as well as a

1
  Habiballah Suleiman, West University of Timisoara, Romania, E-mail: swakhaled@
  gmail.com, Telephone: +972552272488, Fax: +97246468233
2
  Bibu Nicolae, West University of Timisoara, Romania, E-mail: nicolae.bibu@e-
  uvt.ro.com
3
  Danaiata Doina, West University of Timisoara, Romania, E-mail: doina.danaiata@e-
  uvt.ro

74    Review of International Comparative Management          Volume 22, Issue 1, March 2021

need for developing new competencies of leadership in the context of blended
teaching, learning, and managing.
        The principal’s educational leadership was defined as the key factor for the
existence of an optimal educational climate which provides opportunity for
teachers to operate effective teaching processes leading to meaningful learning as
much as possible (e.g. Elmore, 2008). The survey administered to 30 principals in
Tehran, Iran found "a strong positive correlation between educational leadership
and computer use" (Afshari et al., 2009). The educational leadership behavior,
along with reward behavior and intellectual stimulation significantly affected the
teachers’ level of satisfaction from communication.
        The educational leadership style of principals, along with cultural
perception were found of significant contribution to the extent of computer use by
principals themselves (Arokiasamy, Abdullah & Ismail, 2014). Educational
leadership practices positively affected teachers’ perceptions on integrating ICT in
teaching (Ng, 2008). Eight dimensions of educational leadership style were
included in Ng’s survey: "developing shared vision, building consensus,
individualized support, intellectual stimulation, modeling behavior, high
performance expectation, strengthening school culture and building collaborative
structure" (Ng, 2008).
        Among the questions that emerge before the research and practice of
educational leadership: how does a 21st century principal-as-ICT-leader transmit
her/his enthusiasm and inspiration through the virtual space and enables her/his
followers’ intellectual and professional development? What are the characteristics
of e-interaction in blended managerial and teaching/learning environments that
make a successful principal-as-ICT-leader? What is the new definition of school
vision in the blended spaces and how is it conveyed to and implemented by the
working staff?
        We consider that in today’s schools, educational leaders underwent a
digital metamorphosis and became what we address as “hybrid leaders”. An
extensive body of research has consistently shown that enhancing communication
and collaboration in ICT school leadership requires hybrid modes of content –
based and personalized professional development, learning resources, peers’
support, and digital evaluation. Thus, the first section of the article describes the
notion of hybrid leadership in the educational digital context, including its
characteristics and main components.
        The second section of the article is subdivided into two parts: the first
subsection addresses the vicissitudes of the Arab educational leadership in Israel
while the second subsection describes the qualitative findings of our recent study
on the subject, whose interpretation foregrounds the model of hybrid educational
leadership presented in the first section.

        2. Hybrid leadership

        The notion of hybridity was first mentioned by Gronn (2010a; 2010b,
2011) in his research on leadership: he described hybridity as a complementarity of
various approaches and forms, as opposed to binary approach. The concept of


Review of International Comparative Management     Volume 22, Issue 1, March 2021   75

hybrid leadership was introduced to undertake a revision of the notion of
distributed leadership. It refers to the perspective on leadership from a variety of
diverse viewpoints, which, as we argue, describes more accurately the complexity
of educational technological leadership.
         The hybrid leadership is generated and informed by various leadership
styles. Those styles are both embedded in and borrowed from both global and
individual cultural contexts. The hybridity signifies reworking the relationship
between two existing, usually opposed, categories, combining and re-connecting
their attributes, coming up with a hybrid form.
         Hybridization performs blending between hierarchical and heterarchical
modes of responsibilities and relations. The hybridity subverts the “black & white”
conceptualization and by introducing diversity and gradation. It involves the ability
to hold a number of complementary qualities that either are opposed to each other,
or belong to different cultural and social frameworks; to combine two systems of
beliefs that are not always consistent, and also to act accordingly, with a necessary
degree of responsiveness and responsibility.
         We address the hybridity of school leadership in ICT implementation
according to the following criteria: (1) hybridity as open-minded thinking; (2)
hybridity as proficiency at managing e-spaces and blended environments; (3)
hybridity as openness to multiple databases of knowledge and multidisciplinary
thinking; (4) hybridity as communal responsibility.

         a. Hybridity as open-minded thinking
         The principal as hybrid leader should be able to combine and maneuver
between various modes of thinking and cultural paradigms: she/he should be able
to integrate between patriarchic and hierarchic modes of thinking, instructional
way of managing, and encouraging initiatives from middle-to-low range workers,
being sensitive and available to her/his workers and their needs. The hybrid
educational leader is especially responsive to cultural and social contexts; her/his
mind is open to both multi-cultural perspectives of the 21st century learning and
unique national local interests and characteristics. The hybrid leader thinks and acts
in the framework that is beyond narrow political perspectives, but still reveals
sensitivity and faithfulness to the local cultures. Principals who are responsible and
effective have the capability to create a professionally and personally warm and
nurturing environment for teachers, learners, and community with parents to enable
collaboration for common improvement. The hybrid leadership, defined as
“technology leadership” by Saudi scholars, should be in harmony with collective
culture and the vision of quality education.
         The effective principal with hybrid characteristics is multi-tasking: she/he
simultaneously performs two managerial/administrative functions and builds
cultural ties, establishing behavioral norms, rituals, and symbols, as a part of school
culture and vision. She/he navigates among different clusters of structures, tools,
and routines of school culture, teachers; involvement, and leadership behaviors,
considering how knowledge and understanding are constructed, how innovations


76    Review of International Comparative Management      Volume 22, Issue 1, March 2021

penetrate and diffuse, and how to build adequate structures, tools, and routines to
attain the desirable outcomes.

         b. Hybridity as managing e-space and blended environments: ICT
             proficiency
         The principal as hybrid leader should be highly proficient in everything
related to digital literacy and competence, defined as those skills, knowledge, and
attitudes that make learners use digital media for participation, work and problem
solving, either independently or in collaboration with others, and do so in a critical,
responsible, and creative manner.
         The hybrid leader is able to orientate and interact successfully and
efficiently with her/his staff through the ICT means of communication (via
emailing, WhatsApp messages, blogs etc): the ability to communicate effectively
using technology has been defined as one of the vital skills for the 21st century
principal. Other vital skills are: familiarity with and expertise in software and
hardware, using information and data retrieval, planning and managing – the pre-
requisites for effective 21st century leaders.
         She/he also should be capable of managing assignments and updating in
the e-space via learning digital platforms such as MOODLE, schoolie, i-contact, to
name but a few. The familiarity with such notions as compatibility or replacement
for software and hardware, to keep up with the constant changes in innovations; if
unfamiliar with those notions, the principal may purchase obsolete and outdated
technologies thereby using the funds ineffectively.
         In other words, she/he should be able to “flow” within e-environments as
skillfully as in non-virtual ones, that is, in the classroom; she/he should
demonstrate full proficiency in managing digital communication at all levels.
Indeed, the efficient and proficient e-communication was named among the most
influential factors in promoting ICT assimilation in school culture.

         c. Hybridity as openness to multiple databases of knowledge
         The principal as hybrid leader should be well-versed in and open to various
fields of knowledge, especially to distinct and often opposed versions, narratives,
and points of view on controversial subjects. She/he should be proficient in
multiple subjects and fields of study and have a multidisciplinary orientation. In the
era of accountability, she/he is proficient in gathering and analyzing data,
collecting and interpreting results and communicating findings in order to enhance
instructional practices and increase productivity, using data in making leadership
decisions.
         The hybrid principal-as-ICT-leader is comprehensive, place-conscious,
knowledgeable about policies and planning, but at the same time open to the
individual needs, perceptions, and culture of stakeholders in the community.
She/he is equally competent in funding sources and applying those funds for the
technology programs, as well as in identifying which technologies are most
effective on the school campus.


Review of International Comparative Management      Volume 22, Issue 1, March 2021   77

         d. Hybridity as communal responsibility
         The hybridity is characterized by responsible leadership that consists in
listening to the ideas and working together, applying the ideas such as small
learning communities and collaborating with teachers to come up with new
solutions to improve the student achievement. The hybridity in leadership is
characterized by commitment to accountability, as well as by high level of social
and communal involvement, as the principal-as-ICT-leader should assume both
instructional and ethical responsibilities for managing the complexity of ties and
relationships between school organization, communities, and stakeholders.
         Often times the principal faces various dilemmas concerning the
appropriateness of the digital communication in schools, taking into consideration
not only positive but also potentially negative outcomes of students using cell
phones, instant messaging or blogs, as well as the ways of mitigating those
negative outcomes. It is up to the hybrid leader’s discretion to assess and determine
the educational values while deciding on instructional methods.
         The principal as an ICT leader faces the complex mission of making ICT a
part of school culture and a school a part of online community. Thus, as a main
leader of change, s/he is required to make a double change, or, rather a double
transformation: she/he has both to undergo a transformation him/herself in the
online reality and to become able to inspire a further transformation in others.
         The matrix in Figure 1 illustrates the components of the Hybrid
Leadership: (1) hybridity as open-minded thinking; (2) hybridity as proficiency at
managing e-spaces and blended environments; (3) hybridity as openness to
multiple databases of knowledge and multidisciplinary thinking; (4) hybridity as
communal responsibility.


     • Multiple databases                                        • E-spaces & Blended
        of knowledge &                                                Enviroments
       multidisciplinarty
            thinking
                               Openness        Proficiency at
                                                 managing




                              Responsibility      open-
                                                mindedness


     • Community                                                • Human Knowledge

                     Figure 1. The components of Hybrid leadership
                               (adapted from Gronn, 2011)




78     Review of International Comparative Management              Volume 22, Issue 1, March 2021

        3. Hybrid educational leadership in Israeli Arab Sector

         a. Educational ICT leadership in Arab sector – backgrounds
         In the context of ICT reform, which demands openness to changes,
flexibility, and distributing the authority among multiple leaders operating outside
and inside the digital networks, there is an ongoing tension between perceiving ICT
as a symbol of change and the traditional character of Arab education system.
These two conflictive forces – seeking for innovation versus preserving traditional
structures and methods - generate complex and dynamic tensions within the
schools (Forkosh-Baruch, Mioduser, & Nachmias, 2012).
         The principal in the Arab sector is on the junction of contrasting but co-
existing circumstances, such as social and economic disparities between two
sectors, along with special efforts by the Ministry of Education to improve the
conditions of Arabic-speaking schools in Israel, as far as ICT reform is concerned.
There are multiple tensions amidst other changes: cultural, social, economic, and
political between the forces of resistance to change and the irreversible social
processes of transformation occurring the Israeli Arab society: defending
traditional values and methods versus the processes of modernization and
innovation.
         In addition to the internal tensions of the Arab society, the new principal-
as-ICT-leader faces the challenges of Israel’s multicultural diversity and political
tensions. The principal-as-ICT-leader in the Arab sector of Israel education system
needs to reveal high adaptive skills and flexibility, while at the same time
maintaining the balance and possible harmony between diverse cultural and social
contexts. This further highlights the need to adopt an eclectic model of educational
leadership with hybrid qualities.
         Throughout the years, Arab leadership in Israel has undergone dramatic
changes: a new generation of leaders emerged as a consequence of sociological and
political changes, featured by transformational style, more self-conscious, and
much more competent and capable, as compared to the “old” leadership in the first
decades of the State of Israel. This new generation is more representative of the
socioeconomic and sociopolitical composition of Arab society and reﬂects the
community’s growing national consciousness. As a result, it is viewed as the
community’s legitimate representative, especially with regard to matters of
collective identity.
         The communal responsibility is of especial significance for the principal-
as-ICT-leader in the Arab sector, cementing the basics for successful collaboration
through communal and parental engagement in the learning process. Despite the
inequities in various areas of educational systems, the principals from the Arabic-
speaking schools demonstrated highly positive attitude and pro-active position
toward ICT, seeing it as high priority issue for their schools to reach their
educational objectives and become change agents of the Arab society as a whole
(Forkosh et al., 2012).



Review of International Comparative Management     Volume 22, Issue 1, March 2021   79

        Therefore, the findings of this research are of contribution and interest for
the principal in the Arab sector schools. She/he has an opportunity to benefit from
extensive research on successful ICT leadership conducted by scholars across the
globe, including Western, Eastern, and Arab countries, developed and developing
alike. Learning from the extant findings on the preferable styles of leadership in
advancing ICT reform from the experiences of different countries enables the
principal to develop a multi-faceted perspective on leadership and carry out the
mission of integrating ICT into school organizational culture and pedagogical
practices.

         b. The Research on the ICT school leadership – qualitative results
         The recent study we conducted in 20 elementary schools in Israeli Arab
sector aimed at examining the process of implementing the ICT reform as a
function of educational leadership. The study included 345 participants, principals,
ICT coordinators and teachers, who filled in structured questionnaires on their
attitudes towards the ICT reform and its integration into teaching and learning. The
findings obtained suggest the principal who promotes ICT by decentralizing
authority and increasing the level of teachers’ accountability and autonomy leads to
the most outstanding success in ICT implementation in the school; the finding
further corroborates the extensive research on positive effects of distributed
leadership on school effectiveness and improvement (e.g. Leithwood & Jantzi,
2006).
         However, as the comparative results of the Meitzav State Examination
throughout the years demonstrated4, only five schools showed remarkable increase
in grades. Even though the effect of the national ICT program was very strong in
the first year of its operation, there was no overall significant improvement in the
achievements of students in schools in the Arab sector. The t-test revealed that, in
all five schools, the principals were particularly supportive and knowledgeable in
ICT, while the teachers displayed high scores on attitudes, competence, and
perceptions of the ICT contribution to learning.
         Therefore, the impact of national ICT program on learning outcomes
needed further examination and it was clear that the effectiveness of the ICT
program does not operate in a vacuum but should rather be examined in
conjunction with a wide range of factors and variables that may influence students'
achievements. Thus, to reach a deeper understanding of the quantitative findings,
we performed a triangulation with qualitative paradigm, by conducting 12 semi-
structured interviews with principals, teachers, ICT-coordinators, and ICT
instructors.
         Four prominent themes emerged throughout the qualitative analysis of
categories and subcategories in the interviews. (1) the importance of clear vision in
ICT implementation process; (2) the importance of sustainable infrastructure and
accessibility of external resources, along with proper technical support, (3), and (4)
the importance of hybrid leadership



80    Review of International Comparative Management     Volume 22, Issue 1, March 2021

        The interviewees added a valuable insight into the reality of ICT
implementation and assimilation processes in schools, presenting a realistic picture
of the situation in Arab schools in Israel. They also brought to light important
aspects pertaining to the characteristics of principals’ leadership style, most
successful for ICT implementation: those aspects are: the outmost significance of
clear vision that contains reference to clear outcomes and the means of achieving
them; the outmost significance of principals’ supportive attitudes towards teachers’
professional development and training.

         i. The Importance of Vision
         Two ICT coordinators interviewed from schools with improvement in
learning outcomes explicitly addressed the subject of a clearly expressed vision in
the principals’ agenda and viewed themselves as both an integral part and
architects of that vision; the school ICT policies were described as well focused
and clearly defined. The principals from the same schools, too, emphasized and
detailed their particular focus on learning outcomes in their ICT implementation
agenda. It is important to note that those principals were not particularly
“transformational” in their general attitude and stressed the hierarchical framework
of their leadership activities; it seemed that the clearly stated goals, along with the
well-defined means for their achievement, which included improving learning
outcomes, constituted the main contribution to the schools’ success.
         The findings are corroborated with the results obtained by several recent
studies showing that principal were the least prepared for the Visionary Leadership
(e.g. Gencer & Samur, 2016; Hamzah et al., 2017). Furthermore, the findings are in
accord with the extant research that demands a strategic ICT plan that sets clear
goals and defines clear means to achieve them; the research also mentions the
importance o a guiding policy providing teachers with a direction for ICT use, in
order to achieve high learning outcomes (Vanderlinde et al., 2008; Vermeulen et
al., 2015). Moreover, the findings reinforce the need for integrating various
leadership elements to achieve optimal results (Day et al., 2016).

        ii. The Importance of Sustainable Infrastructure and Technical
            Support

        In accord with the previous studies, the availability of suitable resources,
hardware and software, technical support were among the variables of immense
contribution to the success of ICT implementation. Participants found the technical
problems “frustrating” and “discouraging”: the data confirm that both equipment
and technical support are necessary conditions for the successful implementation of
ICT in teaching practices (Venezky & Davis, 2002). The scarcity of Internet
resources and adequate infrastructure is particularly prominent in Israel’s Arab
Sector schools, constituting another reason for failure and source of frustration.




Review of International Comparative Management      Volume 22, Issue 1, March 2021   81

          iii. The importance of continuous professional development and
               training
         The teachers interviewed expressed frustration about time-consuming
activities relating to building materials, complained about lacking teaching units
with clear instructions. The external instructors and principals, in their turn, noted
that poor preparation and competence of teachers negatively affect the ICT
assimilation and use. All the participants knew about ICT benefits and were
positive about their use in teaching; however, there was a clear gap between the
need and taking an action.
         Though the teachers were generally motivated and positive about the ICT
reform, some of them confessed to lacking proper competences and professional
training to be more confident in implementing it in their teaching practice
(Albugami & Ahmed, 2015). Teachers’ frustration due to time-consuming
activities related to building teaching materials could be easily dispelled by
providing necessary materials, such as teaching units, and adequate professional
training.
         The adequate training, coaching, and professional development of teachers
for adopting and assimilating the ICT in teaching practices require an exposure to
diverse models of online teaching, together with the acquisition of skills, essential
for intelligent use of ICT (Goldstein et al., 2010). This exposure is a basic pre-
requisite for making teachers more enthusiastic about ICT and its potential benefits
in teaching.
         The interviewees’ opinions correlated with the quantitative results showing
that pedagogical knowledge and the level of ICT proficiency affect teachers’
readiness to introduce technological changes in their work and subsequently
their use of ICT in teaching strategies; the results are consistent with the
previous studies (Shamir-Inbal & Kali, 2011; Nachmias, Myodosar, & Forkosh-
Baruch, 2009).
         In accord with various studies, our findings confirm that prioritizing
teachers’ training and constant professional development is one of the major
necessities and most essential foundation for improving the quality of teaching in
general and for optimal assimilation of ICT in classrooms in particular (Avidav-
Unger & Friedman, 2011; Olofsson, Lindberg, Fransson, & Hauge, 2011). The
teacher’s digital competence and proficiency have come to be considered as
national projects of competing on the global stage: several countries worldwide
tighten the connections between schools and training institutions by re-designing
the diverse teaching programs (Goldstein et al., 2010).
         The rationale underlying the need for training teachers in ICT stems from
the fact that ICT technology, when applied through a combination of socio-
constructivist pedagogic rationale, enables the teacher to design activities that
support independent learning, and also enables the student to experiment with
building rich products and acquiring high-order thinking skills. To benefit from
ICT integration in their teaching, teachers must integrate the technology into the



82    Review of International Comparative Management     Volume 22, Issue 1, March 2021

classroom and school agenda, in the context of the curriculum and in accordance
with school policy.

        iv. The importance of Hybrid Leadership: Principals-as-ICT-leaders
        It has been stated that the first responsibility in implementing ICT tools in
classrooms belongs to the teacher (e.g. Albugami & Ahmed, 2015). Our findings
also indicate the essential role of teachers in successful assimilating of ICT
programs in school (Halverson & Smith, 2008; Melamed & Salant, 2010; Kozma,
2010). However, the school’s principal is the key individual that enables teachers
to generate such activities by encouraging them and giving support to instill change
motivation in teachers. Overall, as we assumed in the initial stage of the research,
the findings indeed indicate the crucial importance and efficiency of principals’
transformational leadership in assimilating ICT in school culture and in teaching: A
principal with characteristics of a transformational leader is ICT competent and
aware of the ICT benefits for education and school as organization. Having these
two characteristics a principal in able, in turn, to inspire, motivate and affect his/her
followers’ attitudes and perception regarding ICT implementation.
        Beyond testifying to advantages of transformational leadership style in
leading ICT implementation in the school’s teaching activities, our findings
reinforce the need for further developing and adopting an eclectic approach to
leadership style, by blending various patterns of leadership in the process of ICT
implementation in school organizational culture and teaching (Blau & Shamir-
Inbal, 2017). In essence, the whole notion of leadership should be re-
conceptualized, viewing the 21st century school leadership as “e-leadership”, a
new concept that is still “under construction” (Jameson, 2013). In a global world,
leadership behaviors, which are best for ICT assimilation, may differ from country
to country, according to the cultural and social context, as well as individual
teaching practices of each country (House et al., 2004).

        4. Conclusions

        In a society that is being fundamentally transformed by digital
technologies, both principals and teachers face the huge and unprecedented task
consisting of reinventing schools; and many of them feel overwhelmed by the
mandate of integrating ICT in teaching. Schools are required to undergo a
substantial change from institutions that are transferring knowledge into learning
organizations. As a result, school administrators are increasingly assuming
leadership responsibilities with little or even no previous training in unfamiliar
areas.
        The recent decade has witnessed considerable developments in Israel’s
educational policies, in the context of ICT reform. Because of the decentralization
processes occurring in the public school system, teachers become much more
involved in the educational policymaking, as compared to the past; with the
increase in the number of Arab school graduates completing their higher education,


Review of International Comparative Management       Volume 22, Issue 1, March 2021   83

the situation has changed significantly in the Arab sector, too. Several studies
conducted among Arab pre-service teachers in Israel, reflected the change: the
findings demonstrated the desire for intellectual growth, for developing creativity
of thinking, increased moral satisfaction from working with children, and viewing
teachers as inspirational leaders for their community, were among the major factors
that affected motivations for choosing a teaching career.
         As the qualitative findings of our study show, there is still much room for
improvement; it is up to policy and decision-makers to invest into the development
of educational leadership capital of the Arab sector. As the field picture lamentably
reveals, learning in many elementary schools in the Arab sector still occurs by
traditional methods used in the seventies of the last century. Most of those methods
became outdated and obsolete longtime ago. The situation is unconceivable, given
the positive attitude towards ICT reform in the Arab education system; the mastery
of technological competencies and computer skills ought to become an integral part
of teacher’s qualifications.
         In addition, more resources are urgently needed to establish both hardware
and software school infrastructure and provide regular technical support to
maintain and update it. The lack of sustainable infrastructure and proper support
leads to increased Arab teachers’ frustration and infrequent use of ICT in teaching
practices. Teachers and ICT coordinators should receive incentives for productive
outcomes of ICT use in order to increase their level of job satisfaction.
Furthermore, the principal should allow them a larger sphere of action, with more
autonomy and responsibility, as well as encourage them to develop, both
professionally and personally.
         It is precisely because of the patriarchal and authoritative nature of the
Arab society, characterized by strict hierarchy and inflexible rules, that the Arab
school principal-as-ICT-leader should adopt the perspective of hybridity in leading
technological change. While preserving the social and cultural status quo, the
principal-as-ICT-leader promotes the reform, encourages collaboration between
school organization and community, acts as a personal example in ICT
implementation and conveys a compelling vision to school staff and community.

        References

1.   Afshari, M., Bakar K. A., Luan W. S., Samah B. A., & Fooi, F. S. (2009) Technology
     and school leadership, Technology. Pedagogy and Education, 18(2), 235-248.
2.   Albugami, S., & Ahmed, V. (2015). Success factors for ICT implementation in Saudi
     secondary schools: From the perspective of ICT directors, head teachers, teachers and
     students. International Journal of Education and Development using Information and
     Communication Technology (IJEDICT), 11(1), 36-54.
3.   Arokiasamy, A., Abdullah, A., & Ismail, A.B. (2014). Correlation between cultural
     perceptions, leadership style and ICT usage by school principals in Malaysia. The
     Turkish Online Journal of Educational Technology, 13(3), 27-40.
4.   Avidav-Unger, A. Friedman, Y. (2011). Empowering Teachers, Essence and
     Examples. Jerusalem: Henrietta Szold Institute.



84    Review of International Comparative Management       Volume 22, Issue 1, March 2021

5.    Blau, I., & Shamir-Inbal, T. (2017). Digital competences and long-term ICT
      integration in school culture: The perspective of elementary school leaders. Education
      and Information Technologies, 22(3), 769-787.
6.    Day, C., Gu, Q., & Sammons, P. (2016). The impact of leadership on student
      outcomes: How successful school leaders use transformational and instructional
      strategies to make a difference. Educational Administration Quarterly, 52(2),
      221-258.
7.    Elmore, R. (2008). Leadership as the practice of improvement. Improving school
      leadership (Vol. 2) - Case studies on system leadership. Paris: OECD publication
8.    Forkosh-Baruch, A. F., Nachmias, R., & Mioduser, D. (2012). ICT in Hebrew
      Speaking and Arabic Speaking Schools in Israel: Findings from SITES2006. 4th IEA
      International Research Conference (IRC-2010), 15, 1-16.
9.    Gencer, M. S., & Samur, Y. (2016). Leadership styles and technology: Leadership
      competency level of educational leaders. Procedia-Social and Behavioral Sciences,
      229, 226-233.
10.   Goldstein, A., Hayllwool, A., aldmann, N., Zidane, W., Zelkowitz, T., Tessler, B. et
      al. (2010). The current situation of student teachers training in ICT at four teacher
      training colleges. In: Y. Eshet-Alkalay, A. Caspi, S. Eden, N. Gary, & Y. Yair (Eds.),
      The Human Learner in Technological Age (pp. 47-56). Raanana, IL: Open
      University.
11.   Gronn, P. (2010a). Leadership: its genealogy, configuration and trajectory. Journal of
      Educational Administration and History, 42(4), 405-435.
12.   Gronn, P. (2010b). Where to Next for Educational Leadership? In T. Bush, L. Bell &
      D. Middleton (Eds.), The Principles of Educational Leadership and Management.
      London: Sage.
13.   Gronn, P. (2011). Hybrid configurations of leadership. The SAGE handbook of
      leadership, 2011, 437-454.
14.   Hamzah, N., Ariffin, A., & Hamid, H. (2017, August). Web-Based Learning
      Environment Based on Students’ Needs. In IOP Conference Series: Materials
      Science and Engineering (Vol. 226, No. 1, p. 012196). IOP Publishing.
15.   House, R. J., Hanges, P. J., Javidan, M., Dorfman, P. W., & Gupta, V. (Eds.). (2004).
      Culture, leadership, and organizations: The GLOBE study of 62 societies. NY: Sage
      publications.
16.   Jameson, J. (2013). E-leadership in higher education: The fifth “age” of educational
      technology research. British Journal of Educational Technology, 44(6), 889-915.
17.   Kozma, R. B. (2010). ICT policies and educational transformation. Retrieved August
      10, 2015 from http://www.unesco.org/new/fileadmin/MULTIMEDIA/HQ/ED/ICT
      /pdf/ICTpoliedtran.pdf.
18.   Leithwood, K., & Jantzi, D. (2006). Transformational school leadership for large-
      scale reform: Effects on students, teachers and their classroom practices. School
      effectiveness and school improvement, 17(2), 201-227.
19.   Melamed, U., & Salant, A. (2010). 21st Century Skills-Global Review. Tel Aviv: The
      MOFET Institute.
20.   Nachmias, R., Mioduser, D., & Forkosh-Baruch, A. (2009). Integration of ICT in
      Teaching Math and Science in Israel. Tel Aviv: Tel Aviv University, Ramot.
21.   Ng, W. L. (2008). Transformational leadership and the integration of information and
      communications technology into teaching. The Asia-Pacific Education Researcher,
      17(1), 1-14



Review of International Comparative Management         Volume 22, Issue 1, March 2021    85

22.   Olofsson, A. D., Lindberg, J. O., Fransson, G., & Hauge, T. E. (2011). Uptake and
      use of digital technologies in primary and secondary schools–a thematic review of
      research. Nordic Journal of Digital Literacy, 6(04), 207-225.
23.   Shamir-Inbal, T., & Kali, Y. (2011). A systems model for the implementation of
      technology in the school culture. In: D. Chen & G. Kurtz (Eds.), Technology,
      learning and instruction (pp. 371-400). Or-Yehuda: Publication of the Center for
      Academic Studies. (Hebrew)
24.   Vanderlinde, R., van Braak, J., De Windt, V., Tondeur, J., Hermans, R., & Sinnaeve,
      I. (2008). Technology curriculum and planning for technology in schools: the Flemish
      case. TechTrends, 52 ,23-26.
25.   Venezky, R., & Davis, C. (2001). Quo Vademus? The Transformation of Schooling in
      a Networked World. Draft Executive Summary of the OECD project, "ICT and the
      Quality of Learning". Paris: OECD.
26.   Venezky, R.L., & Davis, C. (2002). Que Vademus? The Transformation of Schooling
      in a Networked World. Research report. OECD/CERI, Version 8c, March, 2002.
27.   Vermeulen, M., Van Acker, F., Kreijns, K., & Van Buuren, H. (2015). Does
      transformational leadership encourage teachers’ use of digital learning materials?
      Educational Management Administration & Leadership, 43(6), 1006-1025.




86     Review of International Comparative Management       Volume 22, Issue 1, March 2021