Id: 1015871
                             Participatory Educational Research (PER)
                             Vol.9(3), pp. 132-147, May 2022
                             Available online at http://www.perjournal.com
                             ISSN: 2148-6123
                             http://dx.doi.org/10.17275/per.22.58.9.3



     School Principals' Opinions on Data-based School Management: A Case
                                     Study

                                                       Ömer ÖZ*
                      Educational Administration, Hacettepe University, Ankara, Turkey
                                     ORCID: 0000-0002-9371-8470

                                             Gökhan ARASTAMAN
                      Educational Administration, Hacettepe University, Ankara, Turkey
                                     ORCID: 0000-0002-4713-8643
    Article history                  Data usage-related reforms lead schools to different practices in terms of
    Received:                        management. The conceptualization of data usage and data-based
    28.09.2021
                                     management will ensure that robust steps are taken for the future in terms
    Received in revised form:        of reforms made or to be made in the name of education. In this direction,
    21.11.2021                       this study is developed as a qualitative case study to determine the
                                     opinions of school administrators for data-based management on a
    Accepted:                        school basis. The working group consists of 12 administrators, seven of
    05.12.2021
                                     whom are women and five of whom are men, who work in private and
    Key words:                       public schools. Purposive sampling method was used to determine the
    Data-based management;           participants. Data from the working group were collected through the
    Data analysis;                   semi-structured interview form and themes were created by analyzing in
    Decision-making;                 NVino 11. In line with the established themes, the opinions of the
    School administrators
                                     administrators were also evaluated. According to the research findings,
                                     administrators mostly use data on “e-Okul” and “MEBBIS” modules.
                                     Administrators use the said data in decision-making processes, to meet
                                     the demands of senior management units, to work with stakeholders, to
                                     increase student success. While the administrators stated that there is not
                                     enough support or software products to use the data more effectively in
                                     the management process, they stated that there is a need for a series of
                                     trainings and that these trainings should be in the form of hands-on
                                     workshops. They also stated that there should be auxiliary personnel and
                                     support services for data analysis. Administrators who reported their
                                     problems with time management in accessing data stated that they were
                                     not proficient in data analysis and had problems with the motivation,
                                     quality, and workload of the personnel.


Introduction
       Technology-related developments bring with it digitalization. According to Gobble
(2018), digitalization is a simple process of converting analogue information to digital.


*
    Correspondency: omeroz84@gmail.com

                                           Participatory Educational Research (PER), 9 (3);132-147, 1 May 2022



Digitalization refers to the use of digital technology to create value in new ways. It can be said
that digitalization in education has started with the use of information and communication
technologies in educational environments. Personal information of students and employees in
Bir educational institution, videos, audio recordings, text files, e-mails used in the learning
environment, social media shares, etc. are stored electronically (Özen, Kartal and Emre, 2017,
p.106; Ayyıldız, 2020). Schools have a wide range of educational data, both from internal
sources and from external sources. From this data, the data held on student grades, absence
information, student portfolios, achievement assessments, course attendance status, loans,
learning management systems are increasing day by day (Rasheed, 2018). Therefore,
determining what kind of data should be used to determine variables such as student's behavior,
exam results and the development of each student, educational needs and administrative data
becomes an important issue for the school administration. Since information is one of the most
important tools of management, it can be said that managers who hold information, benefit
from data in the decision-making process, and do not act only with estimations and intuitions
will be more effective in management.

Although students' learning results come to mind when it comes to data in schools, information
such as demographic information, observations, surveys, school programs, family information,
absenteeism are also included in the data (Turan, 2019; Matters, 2006). The decision-making
process using this data requires educators to knowhow to analyze, interpret and use data so that
they can make informed decisions in all areas of education, from professional development to
student learning. Different studies on data-based school management have also been conducted
in the international arena, which strengthens these inferences for school administrators (Reeves
and Burt, 2006; Levin and Datnow, 2012; Bowers, Shoho and Barnett, 2014). When the studies
are examined, it can be said that an administrator sets out a regular prescription for how a school
should shape its focus (Marzano, Waters, & McNulty, 2005). Studies conducted in this direction
indicate that school administrators should shape the information shared in the learning and
teaching processes in the behavior of collecting and interpreting data (Picciano, 2006). If we
read between the lines, the importance of systematically collecting, analyzing and interpreting
and presenting data sources has become clearer. Administrators in the information age need to
be knowledge-driven, committed to shared leadership, and relentless in continuous
improvement (Reeves and Burt, 2006). It can be said that this study will contribute to the
international field in terms of common denominators in terms of explaining which data and
how school administrators use, the support they receive and the factors affecting data use.

Data usage and data-based decision-making are of great importance in management in
educational organizations. In fact, the figures, visuals, plans, books, etc. that administrators and
teachers have long determined in both management processes and learning processes are data-
based decisions (Yenel, 2013). The task of decision-making in education is also very important
due to the need to improve the quality of interaction between teaching and learning resources
(Ayeni, 2018). Administrators have always had some kind of "data" when making decisions.
Having the right data can directly or indirectly affect both management and learning and
teaching processes. According to Simon (1997), in addition to some mid-level management
decision areas where linear programming (operations research) and expert systems (from
artificial intelligence) are widely used as an important form of decision-making, computers
have modestly changed executive decision-making processes and the structures of
organizations. Technological equipment, algorithms and software stabilize their presence in
the structures of organizations to help administrators with their work in the decision-making
process (Durnalı, 2020, p.42). In line with the "School-Based Data-based Management" action
plan specified in the 2023 Education Vision (MoNE, 2019) of Ministry of National Education

                                                        Participatory Educational Research (PER)

                                                -133-

School Principals' Opinions on Data-based School Management: A Case Study   Ö.Öz, G.Arastaman



(MoNE). It is a great importance to determine what data administrators use, how they use,
receive and access data in school administration. In this context, the fact that the studies carried
out in literature are mostly theoretical and the studies carried out with the administrators
through the data increase the importance of this study.

Data-based Management

Data-based management is about creating a culture based on tools, skills, and most importantly,
data. According to Yenel (2019), the test results of the students and the indicators related to
the performance of the teachers for those subjects appear as a type of data. The use of this data
in management requires the creation of a kind of culture. According to Doyle (2003), teachers
and administrators will welcome this when data becomes useful and mundane in the classroom,
and data quality will also improve. In this context, it can be said that the main purpose of data-
based management is to use the school's data to improve the decision-making processes in the
school.

The 2023 Education Vision Document indicates that the ministry attaches importance to data
by stating that it will move to data-based management on a school basis. Accordingly, one of
the applications planned to be realized in the 2023 Education vision for data-based management
is an online platform where school development plans can be monitored. In addition, it is among
the actions determined that a geographical information system will be established to determine
the capacities of schools in the planning of educational resources. At the point of cooperation
with parents, which is one of the most important stakeholders of education, MEB plans to
establish a new platform on the Parent Information System and to ensure interaction between
teachers, parents, and schools on this platform. It was stated that the students who need support
will be determined by data analysis and the necessary actions will be included in the
development plans on a school basis. In this context, it can be said that MEB’s data-based
management plan is based on school development, improving student success, and increasing
interaction with parents.

The purpose of analyzing data is important in data-based management. The main purpose of
analyzing data for a teacher is to improve the learning of one or more students. The headmaster
analyzes the data to manage the school for its purposes. These objectives differ further in senior
management; For a policymaker, the goal is to know the impact of some policies (Allen, 2005).
In addition to the purpose of analyzing the data, the ability to analyze the data is of great
importance. McNamara and Thompson (1996) proposed an alternative strategy to improve data
analysis skills in school administrators, highlighting data analysis as a discovery process. This
model focuses on how to teach data analysis skills in teacher training programs, while the
following guidelines include:

    •    Emphasizing data analysis
    •    Using real-world data
    •    Focus on descriptive statistics
    •    Using accurate descriptions
    •    Learning exploratory data
    •    Using graphic displays
    •    Reporting outliers

According to Earl and Katz (2006), in a data-rich world, school administrators should develop
a mental interrogation habit, be data literate, and create a culture of inquiry. Therefore, these

            Participatory Educational Research (PER)

                                                       -134-

                                          Participatory Educational Research (PER), 9 (3);132-147, 1 May 2022



investments in data creation will allow for increased use of evidence by decision makers to
allocate resources, plan programs and evaluate results.

Data-based Decision Making
       Lai and Schildkamp (2013, p.10) refer to the definition of data in the context of
education as "information systematically collected and edited to represent certain aspects of
schools". This data covers many quantitative and qualitative data that teachers and school
administrators need to make decisions (Lai and Schildkamp, 2013; Wayman, Jimerson and Cho,
2012). If this data is used by school staff to guide decisions such as school development or
teaching purposes, it is called data-based decision-making or, in short, data usage.

Data-based decision-making refers to the process of deciding on a data-based action plan. It is
an integral part of complex management processes such as decision making, academic planning
and policy making in a school organization. Lunenburg and Ornstein (2013) stated that
decision-making is involved in all processes and that the decisions taken will affect all
processes and therefore the management of the organization. The basis of the definition of data-
based decision-making is the assumption of a rational process based on data. The meaning of
this process depends on the active use of information and communication technologies in
education and the fact that organizational culture is based on data (Leary, 2015).

It is important for the school to use information about the student's learning, development, and
progress to improve school and classroom practices. More than 10 studies have shown that
effective data use improves student achievement (Campbell & Levin, 2009; Carlson, Borman,
and Robinson, 2011; Van Geel, Keuning, Visscher and Fox, 2016). At this point, data can be
used for feedback in decision-making by providing information about the gap between students'
learning outcomes and the teacher’s goals.

Purpose of Research
       The aim of this study is to determine the opinions of school administrators for data-
based management on a school-by-school basis. In this context, the following questions
regarding data-based management were sought in the research:

   (1) What kind of data do participant administrators use in school administration?
   (2) How do administrators use this data?
   (3) What kind of support is there/should there/ be to help with the use of data in school?
   (4) What are the factors affecting data usage in the decision-making process?

The opinions given to these questions were discussed in detail in the context of the opinions of
school administrators for data-based management on that basis.

Method
        This study is a case study that is a qualitative research method for determining the
opinions of school administrators for data-based management on a school-by-school basis. The
case study is a qualitative approach in which the researcher collects detailed and in-depth
information through real life, a limited current situation, or multiple sources of information over
a given time and presents a situation description or situation themes (Creswell, 2018, p. 97).
Case study is a comprehensive description and analysis of a limited system (Merriam and
Tisdell, 2016, p. 37). In this context, the opinions of school administrators regarding data-based
management have been tried to be determined.
                                                       Participatory Educational Research (PER)

                                               -135-

School Principals' Opinions on Data-based School Management: A Case Study   Ö.Öz, G.Arastaman



Participants
        The working group of the study consists of 12 school administrators who work in the
private sector and the public sector. Purposive sampling method was used to determine the
participants. Purposeful sampling assumes that the researcher chooses the best example he can
learn to gain insight, understand, and explore insight (Meriam and Tisdell, 2016, p. 96).
According to Patton (2015), the purposeful sample lies in the selection of information-rich
situations for in-depth study. Information-rich situations are subjects where important
information can be obtained for the purpose of the research. In this context, the participants of
the study were selected from among school administrators who are experienced in management.
Information about the gender, average age, seniority, seniority in management, level of
education, Institution of employment, type of institution and their role in the school are shown
in Table 1.

Table 1. Demographics of School Administrators
 Demographics of School Administrators                                                      f
 Gender                                             Female                                  7
                                                    Male                                    5
 Average age                                                                                37,54


 Seniority                                          1-6 Years
                                                    7-10 Years                              1
                                                    11-20 Years                             10
                                                    21 Years and Above                      1


 Seniority in Management                            1-6 Years                               6
                                                    7-10 Years                              5
                                                    11-20 Years                             1
                                                    21 Years and Above


 Educational Background                             License                                 6
                                                    Master                                  5
                                                    Doctorate                               1


 Institution of employment                          Public                                  10
                                                    Private                                 2


 Type of institution                                Kindergarten                            1
                                                    Primary school                          7
                                                    Secondary school                        1
                                                    High school                             2


 Role at School                                     Vice-Principal                          5
                                                    Principal                               7

As shown in Table 1, the participants consisted of 7 females and 5 males. The average age of
the participants was 3.54. The seniority of the school administrators is in the majority between
11-20 years (10 people) and there are 1 school administrators between 7-10 years and 1 school

             Participatory Educational Research (PER)

                                                        -136-

                                          Participatory Educational Research (PER), 9 (3);132-147, 1 May 2022



administrator for 21 years or more. There are 6 school administrators between 1-6 years, 5
between 7-10 years and 1 school administrator between 11-20 years. The level of education of
school administrators is mostly at undergraduate level, there are 5 people in master's degree and
1 person at doctoral level. Some of the administrators working in the public sector (10) and
others (2) working at private sector. There are 7 people who work in kindergarten, 7 in
elementary school, 1 in middle school and 2 in high school. 7 of the participated in the study
are principals and 5 are vice-principals.

Data Collection Tools
        Observation, interviews, and analyses are important activities of qualitative research
(Meriam and Tisdell, 2016, p. 2). In this study, research data were collected with semi-
structured interview technique. In the process of determining the interview questions, literature
was first reviewed, and then expert opinion was applied. In accordance with the feedback
received after the expert opinion, the final version of the four-question semi-structured
interview form has been finalized.

Analysis of Data
        School administrators are coded as A1, A2, A3, A4, etc. in the order of the interview.
Interview forms were given to volunteer school administrators who wanted to participate in the
study and their answers were recorded one by one. The evaluating of the received records by
analyzing and grouping is the work. In accordance with the permissions of the interviews with
the school administrators, the audio recordings were recorded, and the audio recordings
transferred to the computer environment and transcribed. Analysis for the case study depends
on making a detailed description of the situation and environment (Creswell, 2018). In this
context, after the s es registration data was written, the data was analyzed through the NVivo
11. NVivo is a software with features such as character-based encoding, rich text features and
multimedia functions that are very important for qualitative data management (Zamawe, 2015).
Accordingly, the researcher transferred the written audio recordings to the NVivo, the data was
encoded, and themes were created in accordance with the interview questions. According to
Patton (2015), the researcher who analyzed the content in the qualitative research should decide
how something is formed to shape a topic, what constitutes a theme, what to name and how to
express the result to be extracted from the case studies. The answers given by the school
administrators to each question were interpreted in the context of the themes in terms of their
similarities, and some answers to the questions were given exactly. Expert opinions have been
consulted on the creation of themes and the suitability of the coded content to the themes.

Reliability of Research
        In qualitative research, triangulation is used to increase validity and reliability.
Triangulation is the diversification of data sources, data collection method and researcher to
verify the findings (Meriam and Tisdell, 2016, p. 259). In order to confirm the findings reached
in this study, researcher diversification from the diversification method specified by Patton
(2015) was used. In the study, apart from the researchers, another educational science expert
participated in the analysis, so that the researcher was diversified. The volunteering of the
participants to participate in the study is an important condition for the validity and reliability
of the research (Yıldırım and Şimşek, 2011). In order to increase the validity of the study, the
selection of the experts was based on voluntariness, and it was stated that their names would be
kept confidential and would not be disclosed in any way so that they could answer the questions
sincerely. In addition, data were collected through face-to-face interviews with experts. The

                                                       Participatory Educational Research (PER)

                                               -137-

School Principals' Opinions on Data-based School Management: A Case Study   Ö.Öz, G.Arastaman



opinions of three experts were used for the interview form in which the data were collected.
The opinions of the participants were conveyed as in the findings section.

Results

School Administrators’ Views on What Kind of Data Administrators Use in School
Administration
        The themes determined in line with the opinions of those administrators regarding what
kind of data they use in school administration are shown in Figure 1.

                                                        Data Types


                                                                Senior
  Student        Teacher     Auxiliary Staff   School                       Software      Parents   Meeting
                                                              Management



   Figure 1. School administrators' views on what kind of data administrators use in school
                                        management

When the opinions of the school administrators are evaluated in general, the above-mentioned
themes are created. Accordingly, some school administrators have made the following
assessments:

A1: “Within our Ministry, applications such as MEBBIS, e-Okul, eba, dys, e-rehberlik, e-
yaygın, e-kurs, tefbis, e-library, transport student module, kbs, ekap, open education secondary
school – high school are among the most used data sources by school administrators. However,
it can be stated that the most used of these is the e-Okul with the data of the students and the
MEBBIS system, where the data of teachers and administrators is located, and the business
procedures are carried out.”

A4: “Systemic data E-Okul, Meis, MEBBIS, Tefbis and so on. Data obtained by in-school
meetings, interviews, etc. IKS teacher student parent surveys applied at the end of the 2nd
semester; surveys applied when strategic planning is carried out. Central examinations, course
grades, documents received, social influences module, books read, development report,
absence status, data obtained from the graphs and reports prepared on the socio-cultural and
economic situation. Informal data, data transmitted verbally or based on observation. Data
obtained through social media tools and school websites.”

A7: “Generally e-Okul and MEBBIS data, parent and student feedback, teachers' board,
meetings information.”

A8: “We use data linked to the survey, statistical data, data from the ministry and provincial
national education."

In line with the opinions of the school administrators and the established themes, the opinions
about what kind of data the administrators use in the school administration are combined with
the data of the students. School administrators stated that they collected data such as attendance,
grades, passing class, class repetition, documents received, health, student population
information, behavior, social activity, report, number of books read, success status, special
education requirement for students. School administrators stated that they collected data for

            Participatory Educational Research (PER)

                                                          -138-

                                           Participatory Educational Research (PER), 9 (3);132-147, 1 May 2022



teachers regarding employment, learning status, seniority, attendance and absence, courses
taken, and reported that they also used data obtained through observation, interview, and verbal
means in meetings. School administrators who reported that the data about the auxiliary staff
were also used as data in the school stated that they benefited from e-Okul (School Management
Information System), MEBBIS (Ministry of National Education Information Systems), DYS
(File Management System), KBS (Public Expenditure and Accounting Information System),
social media accounts, EBA (Education information Network), e-rehberlik (E-guidance and
counselling decision support system), e-yaygın (Non-formal Education Information System),
e-kurs (Supporting and Training Courses), tefbis (Education Financing and Education
Expenditures Information Management System in Turkey), e-kütüphane (e-Library), transport
student module, EKAP (Electronic Public Procurement Platform), open education operations
software offered by the ministry in collecting this data. In addition, the ministry stated that they
collected data about the school from the senior management such as provincial/district national
education. School administrators stated that they used the records and documents kept in the
school as data.

School Administrators' Views on How Administrators Use Data
       The themes determined in line with the views of those administrators regarding how
administrators use the data are shown in Figure 2.
                                             Data Usage



                                Senior      Measurement
   Student       Teacher                                            School         Curriculum           Guidance
                              Management    and Evaluation


             Figure 2: School administrators' views on how administrators use data

When the opinions of the school administrators are evaluated in general, the above-mentioned
themes are created. Accordingly, some school administrators have made the following
assessments:

A11: "This data is used to create classrooms, to identify teachers in classrooms, to assign
teachers or students for schoolwork, to keep the school's memory when information is requested
from the higher authorities."

A12: “Measurement of student levels, observance of school population, distribution of boys
and girls, absence-absence status, GPAs.”

A4: “The effectiveness of the data is looked at when creating action that can be applied for the
benefit of the institution. Qualified data is used, and if the data is considered unqualified or
biased, it can be ignored. Numerical data showing success, attendance status, social studies,
etc. are used to create new targets in strategic planning. Administrators use positive data to
create positive perceptions of the environment and stakeholders, that is, the organization is
advertised. Existing data can be shared with all stakeholders through meetings and used
solution oriented. Data is also used to improve the structure of the institution by comparing it
with previous data.”

A6: “The progress of the students continues to be monitored in the guidance documents.
Official minutes and meeting documents ensure that the current information for that year,
which continues within the school, is stored and sheds light on the following years."

                                                             Participatory Educational Research (PER)

                                                -139-

School Principals' Opinions on Data-based School Management: A Case Study   Ö.Öz, G.Arastaman



A8: “We often use it for measurement evaluation."

It can be said that the opinions of school administrators and themes are combined on measuring
and evaluating the views of administrators on how they use the data. Accordingly, school
administrators use data in activities such as determining the factors affecting grade point
averages and measuring the student level. In addition, school administrators who report that
they use the data for the purpose of tracking attendance and increasing the reading rate for
students also state that teachers use the data for salary, additional course, and success certificate
situations. School administrators also use data to track student development in line with
guidance activities. School administrators, who also use data for the development of
curriculums, use data for strengthening the structure of the school, making solution-oriented
studies, strategic planning, creating classrooms, shedding light on the following years,
strengthening school memory, organizing class entrance and exit times, planning parent
meetings and parent guidance. "Administrators use positive data to create positive perceptions
on the environment and stakeholders, that is, the organization is advertised.” A4 stated that
positive data is used as an advertising tool without attracting the attention of stakeholders. In
addition, school administrators stated that they use the data to meet the requests from the
ministry, provincial and district national education directorates, and that they collect and use
the data to ensure regularity of the work and operation in the institution.

School Administrators' Views on What Kind of Support / Should Be Available to Help
with Data Usage in School
       The themes set out in line with the opinions of those administrators regarding what kind
of support/should be provided to help administrators use data in school are shown in Figure 3.
                                                       Support

                                                                Auxiliary      Support
                        Training          Software
                                                                Services       Services

  Figure 3. School administrators' views on what kind of support should be available to help
                                  with data usage in school

When the opinions of the school administrators are evaluated in general, the above-mentioned
themes are created. Accordingly, some school administrators have made the following
assessments:

A5: “Easy-to-interface and practical applications are important. We use K12. I'd say it's our
data store. Initially, the interface was difficult and incomplete, but it is now better and an up-
to-date software that is developing itself according to recommendations. We also use Google
Drive to create and store corporate memory."

A11: “Absolutely like the information registration system for every school, a software that is
more detailed than the current system is needed. Because when administrative staff changes,
this data can be difficult to access. All personnel can be trained regarding the data to be used
and stored in schools. Thanks to the trainings, the quality is improved by making the data,
eclipse patterns and other aspects equal/the same by providing standardization.”

A9: “There is no support in kindergarten management to help with the use of data in the school.

            Participatory Educational Research (PER)

                                                        -140-

                                           Participatory Educational Research (PER), 9 (3);132-147, 1 May 2022



The data sources we use are automatically updated by ministry officials. In the problems
encountered, a superior supervisor is informed and expected. This leads to a waste of time.
Instead, trainings can be organized, and computer teachers can be assigned to assist school
administrators in provincial or district administrations."

A4: “The data warehouse application mentioned in the vision document should be implemented
and digital mechanisms should be used to reach comprehensive data as quickly as possible. In
this way, repeated correspondence containing the same data between schools and parent
institutions and waste of time can be prevented.”

In line with the opinions and themes of school administrators, the opinions of administrators on
what kind of support/should be available to help with the use of data in school are combined in
the software theme. Accordingly, they stated that school administrators use Excel specifically
from Office applications in data collection and data analysis. In addition, school administrators
who reported that they benefited from e-Okul and MEBBIS in collecting data stated that there
should be more useful software as an interface. School administrators who stated that they used
the Google Drive application to create school memory, use it as a repository of information and
transfer data to later years also stated that the information registration system should be the data
warehouse application specified in the MoNE 2023 Education Vision. School administrators
stated that there should be hands-on training and workshops in data analysis, while there should
also be staff or support services that can help them.

School Administrators' Views on Factors Affecting Data Usage in Administrators'
Decision-Making Process
        The themes determined in line with the opinions of those administrators regarding the
factors affecting the use of data in the decision-making process are shown in Figure 4.

                                             Support



        Data           Administrator       Technology             School Staff              Parent


  Figure 4. School administrators' opinions on factors affecting data usage in the decision-
                                      making process

When the opinions of the school administrators are evaluated in general, the above-mentioned
themes are created. Accordingly, some school administrators have made the following
assessments:

A1: “It is essential that the data is reliable and valid in the decision-making process. In other
words, the correct and up-to-date data to be used will have a direct effect on the decisions to
be taken in the analysis and interpretations to be made. Another of the elements required for
the success of the data-based decision-making process is the diversity of the data collected. The
same information obtained from different data sources will make the decision healthier. Again,
the quality of the trainings given on how to use the data in the data-based decision-making
process will have a positive contribution to data literacy. The decisions taken will be healthier.”

A2: “The data sets to which we will collect the data are missing. The inability to know what to

                                                        Participatory Educational Research (PER)

                                                -141-

School Principals' Opinions on Data-based School Management: A Case Study   Ö.Öz, G.Arastaman



do in data processing is one of the important factors affecting the data usage of some school
principals' tendencies to distort the data.”

A6: “Time is one of the factors affecting data usage. Time management is very, very important
in management. Considering the historical information data, you are faced with a lot of time
when you need to make quick decisions. However, to be up-to-date and accessible, digital
platforms should be aware of digital platforms in every environment and work with applications
accordingly.”

A7: “Insufficient data, reluctance to access data, time shortage, lack of personnel to provide
data, inadequate staff, reliability of the data source"

In line with the opinions of school administrators and themes, the opinions of administrators on
the factors affecting data usage in the decision-making process are combined in the theme of
data reliability and time management. School administrators have stated that data usage is
mostly influenced by time management in decision-making and that they do not spend enough
time. In addition, administrators emphasized that they do not know enough about data
processing, that there is little understanding of decision-making management, and that
continuous change of administrators is effective. They have reported that the reliability,
diversity, access to data, quality and inadequate data are the most important factors influencing
data usage in the decision-making process. Technology literacy in data analysis, data collection
tool, interface design of software and lack of quality of reports from applications were also
considered as factors affecting data usage in the decision-making process. In addition, school
administrators stated that the quality, motivation, and workload of school staff is important,
while parents' level of education is inadequate in collecting data.

Conclusion and Discussion
        In this study, what kind of data school administrators use in school administration, how
they use this data, what kind of services are or should be available in the school to help use this
data, and what factors affect data usage in the decision-making process are evaluated in line
with the opinions of school administrators.

It is one of the results that school administrators mostly use data about students in
administration. Examples include classroom repetition, special educational needs, enrollment
deferral, success status, passing class, student grades, awards, documents, student population
information, health status, behavioral evaluation, social activity, guidance studies, graphs,
reports, absence status, number of books read. Yibrie Ahmed (2019) states that some data such
as students' learning difficulties and socio-economic status are found in high-performing
schools. According to According to Matters (2006), the main subject of data collection is the
student and student learning. School administrators also use data on teachers and auxiliary staff.
Examples of this data include the way the staff is employed, their education status, seniority,
and the training they receive. The job with parents is mostly because they use data for parent
information.

The data of the school administrators is one of the results obtained that they use for the purposes
of the school. In this context, school administrators use the data to organize parent meetings,
parent guidance, course entry and exit, shed light on the following years, create classrooms and
branches, make the school strategic plan, solution-oriented management, advertising, and
institutional structure. At the school level, data indicators support the quality and allocation of
resources and supports available to students (Wohlstette, Datnow and Park, 2008). This data

            Participatory Educational Research (PER)

                                                       -142-

                                           Participatory Educational Research (PER), 9 (3);132-147, 1 May 2022



can help school administrators track progress over time and look for changes between classes
or grades to determine how resources and supports are allocated. Examples of school-level data
include student data by class levels, measures to be taken, subgroup data, knowledge about
special programs and professional development opportunities (Hough, Byun and Mulfinger,
2018). In addition, administrators use data to track students' attendance and attendance, to
determine and increase the reading rate. School administrators, who also use data in the field
of guidance on the development of students, are among the results reached that they support the
development of the curriculum by using data on issues such as determining the factors affecting
their GPA and measuring the student level. According to McGill, Kennedy and Busse (2016),
apart from official data, there is a variety of data that can be used to evaluate guidance and
counseling      outcomes in school settings. For example, data on school attendance, job
completion, behavioral advice, and test or homework scores are official data, while guidance
services' analysis of school attendance and success can be an example of using alternative data.
In addition, better, timely data on student performance can help administrators make better
decisions about the cost-effectiveness of certain programs and materials (New, 2016). Stating
that they use the data for teacher salary and additional course procedures and reward, the school
administrators stated that they analyzed the data to meet the requests from the ministry,
provincial and district national education directorates. Competencies such as collecting, storing,
analyzing, and presenting these data to users are among the competencies expected from digital
school leaders together with digitalization (Öz, 2020).

It is one of the results reached that school administrators use office applications, e-Okul and
MEBBIS as helpful support in data usage and analysis. In this context, school administrators
who state that there should be software such as information recording system in the process of
collecting and analyzing data are among the results reached that they use google drive
application for information recording. They are the statements stated by school administrators
that there should be necessary and adequate training in data analysis, especially hands-on
training, and workshops. It has also been learned that school administrators want to get support
from computer teachers on data analysis, and that there should be auxiliary staff at the school.
The need for data usage and appropriate technical support for data teams was clearly stated in
the study of Huffman and Kalnin (2003). Auxiliary staff to assist school administrators can
take part in the execution of analysis plans, as they must first collect data and then create
analysis and presentation methods in office applications such as Excel. Appropriate training
should be given for the creation of these teams and appropriate technologies should be used
(Wayman, Midgley and Stringfield, 2006).

Time management is one of the factors affecting the use of data in the decision-making process
of school administrators. Other factors affecting data usage in the decision-making process for
administrators are ignorance in data analysis, decision-participating management, and the
constant change of administrators. The results obtained in terms of data are the reliability,
diversity, access to data, quality of data and insufficient data. The quality of the data should be
improved by reviewing the methods used for data collection, processing, and indicator
calculation. Using new technologies can help reduce the cost of collection and analysis and
reduce the error rate. Since bad data contributes to the design of bad policies, all stakeholders
should target the highest quality data possible (UNESCO, 2017). The lack of technological
tools to be used in data collection and analysis in schools, the lack of interface design in existing
ones and the nature of reporting are among the factors affecting the use of data in the decision-
making process of school administrators. In this context, the data analysis competencies of the
administrators come to the forefront that there should be appropriate and adequate technological
facilities in schools. The motivation, workload and nature of the school staff are the factors that

                                                        Participatory Educational Research (PER)

                                                -143-

School Principals' Opinions on Data-based School Management: A Case Study   Ö.Öz, G.Arastaman



affect data usage. According to Marsh et al. (2006), our students need access to professional
development to support their readiness and skills, technical and interrogation skills, and support
from talented individuals to make the data more interpretable. In addition, according to
Schildkamp, Poortman, Luyten, and Ebbeler (2016), data use is also affected by school
organizational features, collaboration, and user characteristics. Another factor affecting data
usage is the level of education of parents.

Within the scope of developing and changing technology and the opportunities it offers, it is
expected that schools will use data in the international arena on subjects such as monitoring
their performance, observing development, and increasing quality (Shildkamp, 2019). The
results show that managers have a key role in using data in the literature (Skalski and Romero,
2011). It can be said that the results of the study support the international literature on data-
based decision making, since school administrators have similar duties in the international arena
and have common goals.

Suggestions
        For administrators, when school, county, and county administrators are informed about
data usage, they can more effectively review their existing capacities, identify weaknesses, and
create better chart plans for improvement (Earl and Katz, 2006). In addition, solutions must be
produced by taking opinions from relevant stakeholders in order to ensure data security (Balyer
and Öz, 2018). It is stated that the examination of the test results for teachers will enable the
development of teaching practices for the individual needs of the students (Mandinach and
Honey, 2008). Accordingly, the following recommendations can be made. The
recommendations determined in line with the results of the study are presented below.

    •    School administrators should be informed about data science and ensured that they
         receive the necessary training. These trainings should be given by experts in the form
         of workshops in practice.
    •    Support units should be established to assist the school administration in the collection,
         analysis, and interpretation of data, or assisted staff support should be provided to school
         administrators.
    •    The workload of administrators and teachers should be considered in schools, and data-
         oriented studies should not create too much workload.
    •    A common vision for data usage should be established in the decision-making process,
         and school administrators should lead the creation of data culture within the school.
    •    Parents need to be educated in terms of data usage. Parent education is of great
         importance for students and schools in terms of data quality, access to data and the
         nature of the data.
    •    In terms of data processing process, schools need to have appropriate software.
    •    In order to create school memory, it is necessary to create a common pool where
         administrators can record information about the school.
    •    In management, teachers should be cooperated on participation in the decision.

Since this study is a case study, purposive sampling method was used, and a limited number of
participants could be reached. For this reason, the findings obtained from the study do not aim
to generalize. Future studies can reach more generalizable results by increasing the sample size.
More in-depth studies can be done by examining each of the research questions separately.



            Participatory Educational Research (PER)

                                                       -144-

                                        Participatory Educational Research (PER), 9 (3);132-147, 1 May 2022



Resources
Ahmed, Y., A. (2019). Data-based decision making in primary schools in Ethiopia, Journal of
        Professional Capital, and Community, 4(3), 232-259. https://doi.org/10.1108/JPCC-11-
        2018-0031
Allen, R. (2005). Using the evidence of student achievement for improvements at individual,
        class and school level, Using Data to Support Learning, Conference Proceedings 7–9
        August 2005 Grand Hyatt Hotel, Melbourne, Victoria.
Ayeni, A., J. (2018). Principals’ Decision-Making Strategies and Teachers’ Productivity in
        Secondary Schools in Ondo Central Senatorial District of Ondo State, Nigeria, Global
        Journal of Management and Business Research: An Administration and Management,
        18(10), 18-30.
Ayyıldız, P. (2020). Technology in clasroom management. In M. Durnalı (Ed.), Utilizing
        technology, knowledge, and smart systems in educational administration and leadership
        (pp. 42-58). Hershey, PA: IGI Global.
Balyer, A., & Öz, Ö. (2018). Academicians’ views on digital transformation in education.
        International Online Journal of Education and Teaching (IOJET), 5(4), 809-830.
Bowers, A.J., Shoho, A.R., Barnett, B.G (2014). Considering Use of Data by School Leders for
        Decision Making – An Introduction. In A.J. Bowers, A.R. Shoho, B. G. Barnett (Eds.)
        Using Data in Schools to Inform Leadership and Decision Making (p.1-16). Charlotte,
        NC: Information Age Publishing Inc.
Campbell, C., & Levin, B. (2009). Using data to support educational improvement. Educational
        Assessment, Evaluation and Accountability, 21(1), 47–65.
Carlson, D., Borman, G. D., & Robinson, M. (2011). A multistate district-level cluster
        randomized trial of the impact of data-based reform on reading and mathematics
        achievement. Educational Evaluation and Policy Analysis, 33(3), 378–398.
Creswell, J., W. (2018). Nitel Araştırma Yöntemleri [Qualitative Research Methods], Ankara:
        Siyasal Bookstore
Doyle, D. P. (2003). Data-based decision-making. T. H.E. Journal, 30(10), 19-21.
Durnalı, M. (2020). Yönetsel İşlevler, Yönetme Sanatı, Lider Yöneticinin El Kitabı
        [Administrative Functions, Art of Management] (Ed. M. Özdemir), Ankara: Anı
        Publishing
Earl, L., & Katz, S. (2006). Leading schools in a data rich world. Thousand Oaks, CA: Corwin
        Press.
Gobble, M., M. (2018). Digitalization, Digitization, and Innovation, Research-Technology
        Management, 61(4), 56-59, DOI: 10.1080/08956308.2018.1471280
Hough, H., Byun, E. & Mulfinger, L. (2018). Using Data for Improvement: Learning from the
        CORE Data Collaborative, Technical Report, Stanford University.
Huffman, D. & Kalnin, J. (2003). Collaborative inquiry to make data-based decisions in
        schools. Teaching and Teacher Education, 19, 569-580.
Lai, M. K., & Schildkamp, K. (2013). Data-based decision making: An overview. In K.
        Schildkamp, M. K. Lai, & L. Earl (Eds.), Data-based decision making in education:
        challenges and opportunities (pp. 9–21). Dordrecht: Springer.
Leary, L., M. (2015). Assessing Organizational Data Culture to Create an Ideal Data
        Ecosystem,          Capstone         Collection,     2799.       Retrieved       from
        https://digitalcollections.sit.edu/capstones/2799
Levin, J. A., & Datnow, A. (2012). The principal role in data-driven decision-making using
        case-study data to develop multi-mediator models of educational reform, School
        Effectiveness         and        School       Improvement,      23(2),       179–201,
        doi:10.1080/09243453.2011.599394

                                                     Participatory Educational Research (PER)

                                             -145-

School Principals' Opinions on Data-based School Management: A Case Study   Ö.Öz, G.Arastaman



Lunenburg, F., C. & Ornstein, A., C. (2013). Educational Administration: Concepts and
        practices (G. Arastaman, Trans.). Ankara: Nobel Publishing.
Mandinach, E. B., & Honey, M. (Eds.) (2008). Data driven school improvement: Linking data
        and learning. New York: Teachers College Press.
Marsh, J., A., Pane, J., F & Hamilton, L., S. (2006). Making Sense of Data-based Decision
        Making in Education, Evidence from Recent RAND Research. Retrieved from
        https://www.rand.org/content/dam/rand/pubs/occasional_papers/2006/RAND_OP170.
        pdf
Marzano, R. J., T. Waters, & McNulty, B. A. (2005). School Leadership That Works: From
        Research to Results. Alexandria, VA: Association for Supervision and Curriculum
        Development.
Matters, G. (2006). Using Data to Support Learning in Schools Students, teachers, systems,
        Victoria: Acer Press.
McGill, R.J., Kennedy, K.S., & Busse, R.T. (2016). Data-based decision making in school
        counseling: Utilizing multiple single-case indicators to evaluate interventions. The
        Practitioner Scholar: Journal of Counseling and Professional Psychology 5(1), 104-
        121.
McNamara, J. F., & Thompson, D. P. (1996). Teaching statistics in principal preparation: Part
        one. International Journal of Educational Reform, 5(3), 381-389.
Meriam, S., B. & Tisdell, E., J. (2016). Qualitative Research, A Guide to Design and
        Implementation, San Francisco: Jossey-Bass.
MoNE (2019). 2023 Eğitim Vizyonu [2023 Education Vision]. Retrieved from
        http://2023vizyonu.meb.gov.tr/doc/2023_EGITIM_VIZYONU.pdf
New, J. (2016). Building a Data-Driven Education System in the United States. Retrieved from
        https://www2.datainnovation.org/2016-data-driven-education.pdf
Öz, Ö. (2020). Dijital Liderlik: Dijital Dünyada Okul Lideri Olmak [Digital Leadership: Being
        a School Leader in the Digital World], International Journal of Leadership Studies:
        Theory and Practice, 3(1), 45-57.
Özen, Z., Kartal, E., & Emre, İ., E. (2017). Eğitimde Büyük Veri, Eğitim Teknolojileri
        Okumaları [Big Data in Education, Educational Technology Readings] (Eds. H. Ferhan
        Odabaşı, B. Akkoyunlu ve A. İşman), Ankara: TOJET
Patton, M., Q., (2015). Qualitative Research & Evoluton Methods, (4th Edition), California:
        Sage Publications.
Picciano, A., G. (2006). Data-driven Decision-making for Effective School Leadership, Upper
        Saddle River, N.J.: Pearson-Merrill Prentice Hall.
Rasheed, Z. (2018). Solving Educational Pitfalls with Big Data, Dell EMC Proven Professional
        Knowledge Sharing. Retrieved from https://education.dellemc.com/content/dam/dell-
        emc/documents/en-us/2018KS_Rasheed-
        Solving_Educational_Pitfalls_with_Big_Data.pdf
Reeves, P., I. & Burt, W., I. (2006). Data-based Decision-making, Challenges in Data-based
        Decision-making:           Voices       from     Principals,      Retrieved      from:
        https://files.eric.ed.gov/fulltext/EJ750644.pdf
Schildkamp, K. (2019). Data-based decision-making for school improvement: Research
        insights      and     gaps,     Educational   Research,    61(3),    257-273,    DOI:
        10.1080/00131881.2019.1625716
Schildkamp, K., Poortman, C., Luyten, H. & Ebbeler, J. (2016). Factors promoting and
        hindering data-based decision making in schools, An International Journal of Research,
        Policy and Practice, 28(2), 242-258.
Simon, H., A. (1997). Administrative Behaviour, A Study of Decision-Making Processes in
        Administrative Organizations, New York: The Free Press.

            Participatory Educational Research (PER)

                                                       -146-

                                         Participatory Educational Research (PER), 9 (3);132-147, 1 May 2022



Skalski, A., K. & Romero, M. (2011). Data-based Decision Making, Retrieved from:
       https://www.nasponline.org/Documents/Resources%20and%20Publications/Handouts
       /Families%20and%20Educators/Data_Use_Jan11_NASSP.PDF
Turan, H. (2019). Veriye dayalı karar verme, Veriye Dayalı Yönetim [Data-Based Decision
       Making, Data-Based Management] (Ed. N. Cemaloğlu) Ankara: Pegem Academy.
UNESCO, (2017). The Data Revolution in Education, Information Paper No. 39. Retrieved
       from          http://uis.unesco.org/sites/default/files/documents/the-data-revolution-in-
       education-2017-en.pdf
Van Geel, M., Keuning, T., Visscher, A. J., & Fox, J. P. (2016). Assessing the effects of a
       school-wide databased decision-making intervention on student achievement growth in
       primary schools. American Educational Research Journal, 53(2), 360–394.
Wayman, J. C., Jimerson, J. B., & Cho, V. (2012). Organizational considerations in establishing
       the Data-Informed District. School Effectiveness and School Improvement, 23, 159–
       178.
Wayman, J., C. Midgle, S. & Stringfield, S. (2006). Leadership for Data-Based Decision-
       Making: Collaborative Educator Teams, Paper presented at the annual meeting of the
       American Educational Research Association, San Francisco, CA.
Wohlstetter, P., Datnow, A., & Park, V. (2008). Creating a system for data-based decision
       making: Applying the principal–agent framework. School Effectiveness and School
       Improvement, 19(3), 239–259. http://doi:10.1080/09243450802246376
Yenel, K. (2019). Veri Kültürü Oluşturma, Veriye Dayalı Yönetim [Creating Data Culture,
       Data-Based Management] (Ed. N. CEMALOĞLU) (p.123-138), Ankara: Pegem
       Academy.
Yıldırım, A. & Şimşek, H. (2011). Sosyal bilimlerde nitel araştırma yöntemleri, 8. baskı.
       [Qualitative research methods in the social sciences, 8th Ed]. Ankara: Seçkin Publ.




                                                      Participatory Educational Research (PER)

                                              -147-