Online School Management Model for Supported Fullday
                           School Management in Industrial Revolution 4.0
                                         Alex Marjuki1, Trisno Martono2, C. Dyah S. Indrawati3
                                                     123
                                                         Universitas Sebelas Maret
                                                         marjukia05@gmail.com

                                                               ABSTRACT

                             The existence of internet in modern era makes society easy to do their activities.
                             All aspect of human life is based on online or connected to internet. The
                             development of e-administration in school administration is one of them. This
                             study was descriptive qualitative which aims to describe and to explain school
                             administration concept based online to ease school management in digital era.
                             Source of data divided into two, including document and informants referring to
                             education expert, education implementer unit and society as education user.
                             Technique of collecting the data were content analysis and in-depth interview.
                             Triangulation of source of data technique were used to validate the data. The result
                             shows that there are some school administration system based online to ease
                             school administration process. They are school registration based online (e-
                             registration), school payment based online integrated with certain bank account
                             (e-school payment), teaching journal based online (e-journal), and student
                             achievement report based online (e-raport). Besides, school is also facilitated by
                             school administrator which can be contacted via whatsapp and telegram
                             applications to ease education user on asking for information about school and
                             education.

                             Keywords: School Administration, Online System, School Management, School
                             Based Online System, Technology Development

                     1.   INTRODUCTION

                         In globalization era, human life in which all aspects become modern cannot be separated
                     from the easiness of information and communication access phenomenon. The development of
                     technology recently facilitates some tools for information delivery medium. Tools or application
                     can easily show information based on the proceed data. If the data needed have been saved in
                     database, like student data and their academic achievement integrated in database, the database
                     can cope with the problem of difficulties in accessing and integrating data [1]. With technology
                     development, it directly and indirectly will affect human life style into digitalized life style. It
                     indicates that human life style is the effect and reason of technology utilization itself [2].
                        The easiness of information and communication access cannot be separated from internet
                     which can reach wide range area in the world. In education area, the influence of technology
                     development can be utilized to facilitate academic activities in school. Modernization in
                     education make everything smoother and easier, like internet, Wi-Fi facility and computer can
                     be used as supporting progression in education [3]. Education institutions are demanded to
                     always follow science and technology development which increase gradually, because




CONVASH 2019, November 02, Surakarta, Indonesia
Copyright © 2020 EAI
DOI 10.4108/eai.2-11-2019.2294946

education based curriculum instructional will only lead imbalance of unavoidable technology
development.
    Internet is utilized to ease school management process. All this time, school management
process still uses conventional system operated manually. Conventional system has been
operated during some periods in some schools. However, it still shows weaknesses like too
difficult procedure, spending much time, requiring many personnel, restricted time, and
ineffective, so error system sometimes still occur [4]. Consequently, the more effective, efficient
and practical school management system is needed. School management system based online
or mobile is one of them.
    Mobile development gradually increases by the sophistication and completeness of features
which is updated continually and makes consumers easy to access information anytime and
anywhere. Mobile utilization in daily life used by society, industry and education ease them to
deliver and access information related to academic through mobile phone or mobile network
[5]. Mobile system can be used in terms of registration, school payment management, journal
management, school administration, and student achievement report systems.
    Smartphone technology and mobile application began developed by using android platform
based Linux, which also more excellent than Symbian platform generally used. The benefit of
using android platform are complete (complete platform), open (open source platform) and free
(free platform). Mobile operation system based android is rapidly developed than Symbian
platform of JME technology [6]. Hence, there is an opportunity for android user to make
application which can access freely and widely. Moreover, android user can make a new system
for organization or institution need to increase work effectiveness. Besides, android application
can cope with some operational problems related to website and short message service (SMS)
media usage, by creating certain application based mobile, simpler, fast and effective
bandwidth, more informative and operated anywhere and anytime [7].
    Discussing about smartphone technology system and mobile application which gradually
get increased, those can also be used to facilitate and to ease school management process.
Technology development make many education organizations and institutions utilize
technology based website to spread information because of its effectiveness and efficiency [8].
Therefore, this study will describe mobile system utilization deeply to ease school management
system including registration management, payment, administration system and raport or
student achievement report based online systems.


2.   METHOD

    This study was descriptive qualitative. It was a case study to describe in detail and depth
about condition of what truly happen. Descriptive qualitative research mostly focus on
naturalistic principle [9]. The aim of this study is to describe and to explain school
administration concept based online to ease school management in digital era. Source of data
divided into two, including document and informants referring to education expert, education
implementer unit, society as education user. Technique of collecting the data were content
analysis and in-depth interview. The data were reduced and then analyzed by using flow model
of analysis and interactive analysis model. Data analysis included data reduction, data display
and conclusion in which all of them are simultaneously connected and continuously conducted

in data collection process of flow model of analysis [10]. Triangulation technique of source of
data were used to validate the data.


3.     RESULT AND DISCUSSION

   This part will discuss about some mobile features systems utilized to ease school
management system, including registration system based online (E-Registration), payment
based online system (E-School Payment), administration based online system (E-School
Administration) and student achievement report based online system (E-Raport)
     3.1. Registration Based Online System (E-Registration)

    School registration system is known as New Student Enrollment (PPDB). All this time,
PPDB mechanism still used conventional system. This system requires new student candidates
directly to come to school destination for proceeding registration. This system certainly has
many weaknesses such as lack of control and conditioning the candidates. This results from
manual registration which needs many personnel to accommodate candidates in school. This
system is also not effective in terms of cost and time. However, system must be able to be
accessed anytime and anywhere and to produce information automatically without manual
count which sensitively get error and wrong information [11].
    In digital era, school registration based online system has been developed. It has been
applied in some schools. The process of online PPDB has been done to ease society as education
user on proceeding online registration [12]. The process of online PPDB known as E-
Registration collaborating with department of education and culture in district (Dinas
Pendidikan dan Kebudayaan Daerah) and province (Dinas Pendidikan dan Kebudayaan
Provinsi) levels are connected to e-registration page. The benefits are cost, time and personnel
effectiveness because all system and registration documents has been based online.

     3.2. School Payment based Mobile System (E-School Payment)

    School payment is one of administration requirement to fill by student candidates. School
cost payment is utilized for school operational cost including electric bill, office stationery
purchase budget, internet bill, transportation, references purchase budget and other services. In
digital era, payment system can be done through online. Online payment system is directly
connected to collaborated bank [13]. Collaborated bank get school cost payment from
candidates and re-registered student for next semester.
    Payment based online is more effective and practical in term of funding management,
because payment is directly saved in school saving account. It also can minimize corruption
practice in school funding management. If payment system is still manual, the probability of
corruption practice and human error must be great rather than payment based online system
which directly connected to bank and school saving account [14]. Besides, payment based
online system give a positive effect to school finance count and management because payment
is based online or e-school payment directly counted by bank system which has a great accuracy.

     3.3. School Administration based Mobile Application System (E-Mobile Administration)

    Education cannot be separated from administration system because it is one of academic
documents supporting education process in school. Administration can be considered as a
process or as task (duty) which must be fulfilled [15]. Administration as task (duty) which must
be fulfilled in education activities as proposed by Usman [16] includes student; educator, staff
and organization structure; finance; tools and infrastructure; school and society relationship;
special service (counseling guidance, student health unit, school cooperation unit, and
extracurricular activities) administrations.
    School administration must be well-ordered and well-regulated to increase education
management ability. To make activities more effective and efficient needs sufficient
information. Information system in education relates to important things including recording
and reporting system [17]. Consequently, there is a need of administration based mobile system
to ease school administration management system. Regarding to this condition, there has been
application and features developed in smartphone and gadget to ease administration process.
They are SIMAKAD (School Academic Information System) to manage academic data,
Finance Module to facilitate school finance; Teacher based Online Module as a means of
information and communication between teacher and student in school; Employee Affair
Module is an information system of employee data management; Inventory Module to record
goods as school inventory; and Report Module to ease headmaster on monitoring finance
development, student achievement, teacher attendance and other functions.


     3.4. Student Achievement based Online System (E-Raport System)

    The internet can also be used to facilitate school in developing information based web
(online) system in terms of student achievement and data managements. Consequently, parents
can always monitor student learning development by accessing website or school information
system anywhere like office, warung internet (internet service shop) or house as long as internet
access is available [8]. Raport (student achievement report) based online usage or e-raport
originally results from impracticality of raport distribution in class, so school needs to build
academic information system to ease student and parents on accessing information [18].
    With E-raport application, the process of study assessment become easy. This system has
been designed by formula suited with student achievement management system [19]. It can ease
teacher in managing student grade, which previously must be done manually in which the
formula is complex enough. Now, with e-raport system teacher only needs to submit student
grade in provided columns. E-raport application can also facilitate teacher to print raport directly
or to save it in PDF file. Besides, the benefit of using e-raport is student achievement report can
be accessed through website anywhere by available internet access. Therefore, parents can
easily access student achievement file through website [20].


4.     CONCLUSION

    The development of technology increased extremely, results in easier and more practical
human life. The easiness of communication access cannot be separated from internet function
as a medium in communication access. As a consequence, almost all aspects of human life now
use system based online which is connected to internet. In education, internet can be used to

ease school management system. Some features of utilizing internet on school administration
process include school payment based mobile system (E-School Payment), administration based
mobile system (E-Administration) and student achievement report based website system (E-
Raport). These features has positive functions in school management process which makes
activities management process easy, effective, cost effective, not spend much time and many
personnel, decrease human error, more accurate and practical, and information dissemination
fast, especially student achievement report which can be accessed by parents.

Reference
[1] F. Nuraeni & I. Risdiani. “Design of Information Media Android based for Student
      Academic (Case Study: SMPN 1 Sukahening Kabupaten Tasikmalaya)” on JURNAL VOI
      STMIK Tasikmalaya, Vol. 5, No. 1, 2016.
[2] S. Tatminingsih. “The Impact of ICT Use on Early-Age Children Behavior: A Case Study
      of 4-7 Years Old” on Jurnal Pendidikan, Vol. 18, No. 1, Maret 2017.
[3] P. Kim; F.H. Kim; & A. Karimi. “Public Online Charter School Students: Choices,
      Perceptions, and Traits” on American Educational Research Journal, Vol. 49, No. 3, June
      2012.
[4] M.H. Ginn & A. Hammond. “Online Education in Public Affairs: Current State and
      Emerging Issues” on Journal of Public Affairs Education, Vol. 18, No. 2, SPRING 2012.
[5] T.P. Liang & C.P. Wei. “Introduction to the Special Issue: Mobile Commerce Applications”
      on International Journal of Electronic Commerce, Vol. 8, No. 3, Spring 2004.
[6] M. Lahiri & J.M. Moseley. “Is Mobile Learning the Future of 21st Century Education?
      Educational Considerations from Various Perspectives” on Educational Technology Vol.
      52, No. 4, 2012.
[7] K.D. Ariza. “Pembuatan Aplikasi Informasi Tagihan Listrik Berbasis Android” Skripsi, Fak.
      Ilmu Komputer. 2014.
[8] Y. Kurniawan; Mustain; & M. Wahyudi. “Perancangan Sistem Informasi Pengolahan Nilai
      Raport Berbasis Web (Studi Kasus Mts Negeri 1 Lamongan)” on J-TIIES, Vol. 1, No. 1,
      2017.
[9] Sutopo. Metode Penelitian Kualitatif. Surakarta: UNS Press. 2002.
[10] L.J. Moleong. Metodologi Penelitian Kualitatif (Edisi Revisi). Bandung: PT Remaja
      Rosdakarya. 2014.
[11] H. Fatta & R. Marco. “Analisis Pengembangan dan Perancangan Sistem Informasi
      Akademik Smart Berbasis Cloud Computing pada Sekolah Menengah Umum Negeri
      (SMUN) di Daerah Istimewa Yogyakarta” on JURNAL TELEMATIKA, Vol. 8, No. 2,
      2015.
[12] M.H. Cho. “Online Student Orientation in Higher Education: A Developmental Study” on
      Educational Technology Research and Development, Vol. 60, No. 6, December 2012.
[13] H. Castell. “DIGITAL PAYMENTS: Broadening the appeal of mobile money” on Spore
      Journal, No. 185, June-August 2017.
[14] N. Mallat & V.K. Tuunainen. “Exploring Merchant Adoption of Mobile Payment Systems:
      An Empirical Study” on e-Service Journal, Vol. 6, No. 2 Winter 2008.
[15] M. Arifin & A. Nahar. “Pengembangan Sistem Administrasi Sekolah berbasis Teknologi
      Informasi di Mts. Darul Ulum dan Mts. Miftahul Huda di Kabupaten Jepara” on Journal
      of Dedicators Community, Vol. 1, No. 1, 2017.
[16] H. Usman. Administrasi dan Supervisi Pendidikan. Bandung: Remaja Rosdakarya. 2006.

[17] L. Naylor; L. Gentry; & B. Wooldridge. “Rethinking Connection: Master of Public
      Administration Student Perceptions of Transactional Presence” on Journal of Public
      Affairs Education, Vol. 22, No. 1 WINTER 2016.
[18] D. Nurani et. al. “Aplikasi E–Rapot berbasis Web pada SMP N 1 Tempuran” on JURNAL
      AMIKOM, Vol. 3, No. 1, 2015.
[19] J. Brau, et. al. “Can I Boost My GPA by Taking Online Classes? An Analysis of Online
      versus Traditional Class Outcomes for Five Finance Courses” on Journal of Financial
      Education, Vol. 43, No. 1 Spring 2017.
[20] K. Saddhono, E. Satria, A. Erwinsyah, & D. Abdullah. Designing SwiSH Max Learning
      Software Based of Multimedia. In Journal of Physics: Conference Series. vol. 1364, no.
      1, pp. 012032. IOP Publishing, 2019.