International Journal of Evaluation and Research in Education (IJERE)
Vol. 10, No. 1, March 2021, pp. 161~173
ISSN: 2252-8822, DOI: 10.11591/ijere.v10i1.20953                                                                161

    The improving of effectiveness school-based enterprise: A
 structural equation modeling in vocational school management

Arie Wibowo Khurniawan1, Illah Sailah2, Pudji Muljono3, Bambang Indriyanto4, M. Syamsul Maarif5
                         1Postgraduate Program, Bogor Agricultural University, Indonesia
                                  2,3,4,5Bogor Agricultural University, Indonesia




Article Info                          ABSTRACT
Article history:                      The study aimed to investigate the influence of total quality management and
                                      school governance on school management effectiveness, whether school
Received Aug 22, 2020                 governance as an antecedent of total quality management and school
Revised Dec 17, 2020                  management effectiveness. The object of research is the vocational high
Accepted Jan 26, 2021                 school with the Regional Public Service Agency status (school-based
                                      enterprise) in Indonesia. The research is a quantitative research with survey
                                      method. The sample of 533 people who are school principals, teachers, and
Keywords:                             students. It was selected by proportional stratified random sampling. The
                                      data analysis using structural equation modeling (SEM). The research finding
Indonesia vocational school           is the total quality management has a significant influence on school
School effectiveness                  management effectiveness. The mediation analysis indicates that school
School-based enterprise               governance as the antecedent of total quality management and school
Structural equation modeling          management effectiveness. The improvement of effectiveness school-based
Vocational school management          enterprises should consider implementing total quality management and it
                                      will be increasingly by school governance application. The modeling that
                                      correlates total quality management and school governance to improved
                                      vocational school management effectiveness, especially at vocational school
                                      with Regional Public Service Agency status (school-based enterprise).
                                                          This is an open access article under the CC BY-SA license.




Corresponding Author:
Arie Wibowo Khurniawan
Student of Postgraduate Department
Bogor Agricultural University
Babakan, Dramaga, Bogor, West Java 16680, Indonesia
Email: arie_wibowo@apps.ipb.ac.id



1.   INTRODUCTION
         The existence of a vocational high school system in Indonesia produces many semi-skilled
graduates; on the other hand, the job market has limited capacity to distribute the graduates. The development
of vocational schools' development has not been in line with industry needs and has not responded to market
needs. The link and match between vocational schools and industry are considered not yet to occur as a
whole and is still limited. It fact has shown from the high vocational school graduates who are not getting the
job properly. Central bureau of statistics (BPS) publications for 2017, 2018, 2019 unemployment rates of
vocational school graduates are 9.27%, 8.92%, and 8.63% respectively [1]. This condition shows that there
are problems in school management in the aspect of compliance with vocational school industry standards.
         Vocational education in Indonesia has the lowest quality index compared to other types of
education. It is proven, which is only 12% of 13,929 schools that have good accreditation. It is shown that
there are many problems in the schools management. Although several vocational high school in Indonesia



Journal homepage: http://ijere.iaescore.com

162                                                                                         ISSN: 2252-8822

has implemented a total quality management (TQM) policy in their schools following the standards required
by Indonesian Government Regulation No. 19 of 2005.
          The TQM philosophy is effective management for perpetual improvement, increase customer value
and satisfaction, and good organizational performance [2]. The TQM concept consists of excellence, value,
and worthiness of educational outcomes and experience to achieve goals, objectives, specifications, and
requirements in education [3]. TQM's use as a model for improving school quality is relevant to many
experiences, as investigated in private and public companies and many university organizations [4]. The
implementation of TQM can be applied successfully in educational organizations, particularly in schools that
focus on improving the potential of students to achieve the top level [5]. Although this model has been used
for many years outside the educational environment, this modeling has been recognized by most university
leaders as one of the innovative approaches to improve the performance of higher education management for
university structure units [4].
          School effectiveness can be reviewed through student academic achievement [6]. National exam
scores in 2018-2019, the academic conditions of students, especially in vocational schools are still not
satisfactory. Nationally, the average national exam scores in 2018/2019 in vocational schools are only 46.7,
with the lowest score on the math test with an average of 35.26. This indicates that vocational schools need to
improve the effectiveness of school management, especially related to student academics.
          This gap indicates the ineffectiveness of management in school governance (SG). The application of
SG principles as an essential value in school management will have a great opportunity to improve school
performances and the quality of education continuously. SG emerged as an effort to improve quality to
produce a solid school organization governance performance. SG has a synergy with TQM because the
company's management style can be adjusted to the concept of quality management if it is strengthened by
the principles used to create good governance [7]. Governance has a direct effect on performance, and of
course, governance principles are also very influential in shaping good governance [8].
          The focus of the Indonesian government at this time is on improving the quality of vocational
schools. This is evidenced by the Presidential Instruction issued on Revitalization of Vocational Schools to
improve the quality and competitiveness of Indonesian human resources at Presidential Instruction Number 9
of 2016. The existence of organizational transformation of State Vocational Schools into a form of Regional
Public Service Agency (school-based enterprise) the efforts to improve the quality of vocational schools as
mandated in the Minister of Domestic Affairs Regulation No. 79 of 2018. Based on this mandated, the
provincial government as the person in charge of vocational school is encouraged to change the state
vocational school's status to a vocational school-based enterprise. The aim of the transformation of vocational
schools organizations into a vocational school-based enterprise is to provide flexibility in vocational schools
financial management based on productivity and economic principles and the application of sound business
practices to be able to maximize cooperation with industry to improve the competency of vocational schools
students.
          The school was initially only an extension of the central government to the school management to
organize educational politics. This centralized education governance system does not give authority to
schools to develop the organization, curriculum, school management, learning, resources, and community
participation. Nowadays, this centralized education system right now has a problem. This system is
considered not to have a positive effect on improving the quality of the education. Therefore, Law Number
32 of 2004 said that the government should give every region authority to take care of the communities'
interests. This authority indirectly encourages changes in the management of education. The transfer of
power and authority to the school level is primarily aimed at empowering school stakeholders in school
decision-making, which was previously only carried out by the central, provincial, or district governments.
The transfer of authority to schools aimed at empowering school stakeholders in determining policies was
previously only carried out by the central, provincial or district governments [9-12]. This decentralized
system assumes that school stakeholders will be more concerned if about the reality that exists in schools,
and that their decisions will be more appropriate [13].
          Education policy from centralistic to decentralize has not yet run maximally and thoroughly for this
implementation. Whereas schools have been given authority and discretion for regulate their school
management. Its has long been launched in line with the implementation's regional autonomy, where the
Ministry of Education and Culture launched school-based management (School Governance) as a new
paradigm in school operations to change school management that used to be center-based. Even though the
government policy has given schools to manage their schools, but there are some education variables are still
regulated by the central government, among others: curriculum, exam implementation, and other education
personnel. This causes the school to be less optimal in utilizing the policy. Principals must be able to
innovate in developing their schools and become policymakers at school. Even though the change in
direction of education that was previously centralized to decentralized is very good to improve school

Int J Eval & Res Educ, Vol. 10, No. 1, March 2021: 161 - 173

Int J Eval & Res Educ                        ISSN: 2252-8822                                               163

management. Many research results show that improving the quality of teaching and learning is highly
dependent on the quality of leadership carried out by the principal. These factors can be used to debate
stronger control over management schools.
          Schools were initially only to extend their hands from the central government to school
administrators for political education. This centralized education governance system will not authorize
schools to develop an organization, curriculum, school management, learning, resources with community
participation. Law Number 32 of 2004 explained that the government is only committed to the regions in
implementing the people's interests of the people's aspirations so that the education system must be
considered because it focuses on improving the quality of education. This authority does not directly provide
a spirit of change in the administration of education. Decisions made previously are only carried out by
central, provincial, or district government authorities [9-12]. This decentralized system assumes that schools
will pay more attention to them, must increase understanding of the existing schools in schools, and how
their decisions will make them more appropriate. The decentralized system will assume that a school will
increase understanding of the school and how their decisions will make it more appropriate [13].
          The novelty of this study is the design of strategies for increasing the effectiveness of SMKs through
the implementation of school governance, both in terms of top-level (school governance) and management in
terms of operational (total quality management). The modeling that connects SG and TQM to the
effectiveness of schools applied to vocational school as shown in Figure 1, especially in vocational school-
based enterprises, has never been proposed before. Besides, the analysis of factors that are valid and can
measure the effectiveness of vocational school-based enterprises based on the application of integrated
school governance and quality management that have not been produced in previous studies are also
discussed in this study. On the other hand, this research proposes a new indicator that is used to build the
effectiveness of school management variables, which are indicators of the flexibility of school budget
management. This indicator is proposed as a novelty because researchers believe that if schools are given
flexibility in budget management they will be able to create effectiveness in school management.




                        Figure 1. Vocational school management effectiveness model


         Total quality management (TQM) is a study of holistic leadership practices or a holistic approach to
school improvement programs. The principal's implementation of TQM practices is considered very good,
which means that the principal can provide a culture that involves quality in all school operations' aspect.
Ralph, et al. [14] show that TQM is part of excellence because it can satisfy stakeholders; meet the specific
needs of end-users; and meet the needs of members of the organization. Leaders are those who continually
work with clients to guide and influence in achieving goals [15]. The principal as a leader is an individual
who has a role to guide and influence elements of the school to achieve school goals. This might mean that
leaders must have an ongoing desire for improvement by expressing their cooperation to achieve common
goals. Senge [16] said that quality-oriented schools believe always make an improvement to meet stakeholder
expectations. The above results can also be related to what Kerzner showed that what distinguishes TQM
from management theory and other improvements is stakeholder satisfaction [17].

The improving of effectiveness school-based enterprise: A structural equation … (Arie Wibowo Khurniawan)

164                                                                                          ISSN: 2252-8822

          School governance (SG) refers implementation of decentralized decision-making is decision making
from the central, regional and school division levels. The status of SG implementation by school principals is
at a "progressive" level, which indicates an increase in resource mobilization and maximum effort from
schools. SG aims to empower school principals to be able to better coordinate teachers and students; support
the provision of quality education services; building partnerships with communities and industry, and
instituting a process of school improvement that is sustainable and participatory. SG is the main tool for the
continuous improvement of schools [18]. Furthermore, according to Grauwe [19], SG is an effective
management system and improving the quality of education. SG formed a community partnership to foster good
relationships between educators, students, families and the community as a whole for better school performance.
          Fullan [20] and Fredriksson [21] state that pedagogical leadership is important advocacy for school
principals [20, 21]. The education administrator must accept and implement this role so that the school is
managed effectively. The contribution of an administrations' school can improve a person's attitude.
Mukhopadhyay emphasizes that development by principals aims to ensure the transformation and continuous
learning of students towards a holistic development [22].
          The relationship between TQM and SG revealed that the principal's role in implementing SG was
very important in staff development, physical development, and student development in terms of improving
school quality [23]. This shows that student development is highly dependent on the leaders' performance in
particular and the school system in general. TQM practices related with leadership, focus on clients,
stakeholders, commitment to change, and continuous improvement. School leadership and school
improvement have a relationship and engagement with data-based decision making, professional learning,
and systems focus. Accordingly, the following hypothesis was formulated:
H1 : "Total Quality Management is positively related to School Governance."
          Implementing educational reforms offered to schools by giving full authority to the schools resulted
in a new management theory. This system reverses the management pyramid, where responsibilities related
to school management are no longer delegated to central or regional state authorities but are given to the staff
of educational institutions. Power and authority at the school level are aimed at the members of the school
stakeholders that have been made by the government [9-11]. This is based on the decision making that can be
done quickly so that a more effective mechanism is created while encouraging a new spirit of performance
for the school principal as the school manager. The delegation of authority related to decision making from
the government to the school level has created a more democratic model of school administration
bureaucracy [10].
          The relationship between SG and the effectiveness of school management is still a heated debate.
Cheng and Mok [24] argue that SG does not contribute to improving student learning and achievement. To
produce improvements, additional interventions from SG are needed. Nir and Hameiri [25] also found that it
was difficult to reach firm conclusions about SG's contribution to improving student learning as well as to
increase school effectiveness. Robinson, et al. [26], which examined the decentralization of organizational
decision makings' the four components, concluded that there was no link between teaching and learning,
teaching design, human resource management, and physical resource management, to school effectiveness.
School authorities will provide several opportunities to make sound and flexible decisions in achieving
significant learning outcomes [27]. Bergman [28] also said that the reputation of the School will increase
excellence, creativity, eager involvement, and staff dedication as a result of SG.
          Many countries believe that decentralization increases school effectiveness because this school
leadership system will be assigned a greater responsibility. The best strategy for implementing decentralized
education reform in the United States and elsewhere is School Governance [29-31]. SG will offer authority to
schools and provide decision-making decisions [31]. The public support's growth for SG is based on the
argument that if school autonomy and flexibility would increase, the design and implementation of school
programs can be implemented better, faster and following the special needs of children [32] and that this is
the most efficient way to improving school practices and meeting the expectations of diverse stakeholders in
a changing environment [24, 29]. This participation allows people and organizations with unique goals to
take responsibility for their destiny [33]. An experimental educational reform process that aims to improve
education in schools in various countries [34, 35]. SG will involve the use of participatory management and
school autonomy related to school capacity [36, 37].
          Odden and Wohlstetter [38] identify conditions that drive increased school effectiveness through
SG. They found that stakeholders in schools where SG had been implemented effectively could improve
school performance with authority over the budget, personnel, and curriculum. Successful schools in
implementing SG by the authorities and authorities in implementing changes directly related to teaching and
learning practices. Decisions about student performance, satisfaction from parents, school resources, and
systematic and creative communication between parents will be effective when professional development,
training to recommend, management, and problem skills of teachers and other stakeholders provide important

Int J Eval & Res Educ, Vol. 10, No. 1, March 2021: 161 - 173

Int J Eval & Res Educ                         ISSN: 2252-8822                                               165

information. Rodriguez and Slate [39] emphasized that with flexibility, proper autonomy in carrying out
school functions, SG can maximize school effectiveness and create conditions that must be met to achieve
various school goals.
          Caldwell [40], who examined the SG sample in Australia, found that schools that used the SG
component would experience a significant teaching and learning process. This research is also supported by
research [34, 40, 41], which states that the decentralization of reforms provides significant improvements,
both in terms of improving education and learning achievement and increasing school effectiveness. SG is
considered capable of improving the quality of education, providing a healthier learning and teaching
environment that can ultimately improve student achievement [40, 42-46]. Lo, et al. [47] suggested that
school autonomy positively affects school governance and management, school-based curriculum, teacher
work, and student learning if there is firm leadership, comprehensive professional development, and adequate
school climate. In conclusion, Leithwood, et al. [48] found that out of 11 scientific journals that reported
SG's effect on school effectiveness, five of 11 scientific journals reported negative or neutral effects, and six
studies reported positive effects. Hence, the following hypotheses:
H2 : "School Governance is positively related to School Management Effectiveness."
          Each school certainly has its picture related to effective schools for improving quality in schools.
The quality of education leads to a prospective future, so insights about the quality index and virtual
implementation need to be made to categories in various strata of education, for example, schools,
universities, education management, and staff. Quality must be brought to the system in all aspects from
infrastructure to classroom teaching, professional development, and scientific temperament development. To
compete in a global context, educational institutions especially schools must promote quality education. All
educational institutions must provide sophisticated infrastructure, quality teaching staff, and quality
management through the implementation of TQM. Not only government-assisted institutions but educational
institutions that are privately managed must be urged to adopt the TQM philosophy. TQM must be applied to
other organizations for better performance [49].
          There are some basic principles and tools in higher education organizations that can be applied
because they have the instruments service institutions and their governance and management boards are
subject to academic mission, goals, and strategies. TQM can be applied successfully in an educational
organization, especially in schools that focus on increasing the potential of students to the highest level [5].
The principles carried out by TQM have wide applications in educational organizations and provide the
results expected by the organization. This ongoing process has created an environment of unity, change and
trust that is carried out by the development of the school [50].
          TQM is a managerial instrument for solving problems related to services and tactics in the academic
industry and can be in line with education industry standards [51, 52]. The same thing was conveyed also by
Koch and Fisher [53]. According to them, TQM were relevant to education, especially higher education,
because TQM is a process-oriented approach designed to increase productivity, reduce costs, and improve
quality. Deming [54] states that TQMs' adoption will help educational institutions to maintain
competitiveness, eliminate inefficiencies in organizations, help concentrate on market needs, achieve high
performance in all fields, and meet the needs of all stakeholders. This is in line with Tribus [55] which states
that education can be improved through quality management TQM is able to improve the educational
process, making the educational environment motivational, improving the education curriculum, increasing
the speed of training services, and reducing costs [56].
          TQM is defined a set of tools used to improve the quality of the company [57]. This shows that
TQM has a flexible nature that can be adjusted according to the existing situation and applies to any
organization [2]. Although TQM which is usually only developed in a manufacturing environment now also
applies to schools because of the benefits of this TQM [58]. This approach focuses on quality improvement
programs for organizational system components in the education sector.
          Sahney, et al. [3] and Sharples, et al. [59] argue that TQM can be applied in education as long as its
adoption is part of a strategic planning process that has TQM as an objective and is adjusted according to a
particular context. After the strategic plan has been adopted, an implementation plan needs to be prepared to
facilitate the achievement of TQM objectives. Principals need to encourage the adoption and implementation
of TQM philosophies that are adjusted in schools by communicating goals and policies and by modeling
commitments to a quality culture [60]. Adopting TQM as a change strategy for schools does not mean that
schools must seek perfection in all their products and services, but schools must strive to provide the best
services & products & the best quality in unique contexts and circumstances. Therefore, quality standards are
contextual and the main objective is to become a starting point for the formation of structures and procedures
that will improve quality [61].
          The use of TQM as a model for improving school performance is relevant to many experiences as
investigated in private and public companies, and many university organizations [4]. Although this model has

The improving of effectiveness school-based enterprise: A structural equation … (Arie Wibowo Khurniawan)

166                                                                                          ISSN: 2252-8822

been used for many years outside the educational environment, this model has been recognized by most
university leaders as an innovative approach to improving the performance of higher education management
for hierarchical university structure units [4]. Evidence from many research studies shows a significant
increase in terms of increased employee productivity and overall changes to advance public services provided
by members of the organization to customers.
         Hoyle [62] states that management theory is related to guiding practices and enables practitioners to
increase organizational effectiveness. In line with this opinion, McMahon [63] adds that management theory
is a practice guideline that also includes decision making and authority for increasing effectiveness. While
Oakland [64] and Summers [65] revealed that TQM is one way of managing an organization as a whole to
increase organizational effectiveness, flexibility, and competitiveness. This indicates a relationship between
management and performance.
         According to Lezotte [6], there is a significant relationship between the principles of integrated
quality management and effective ecology. In the field of education, this quality management practice
provides a perspective to see the problems faced by schools and as a tool to remove obstacles in creating an
effective school. This human-focused approach can contribute fully to improve the educations' quality and
educational organizations' improvement. Educational organizations' inputs and outputs are human, and the
main actors are these humans at all levels and in all organizational processes. Human without satisfaction
(both as customers and providers) will affect the effectiveness of education [66]. Therefore:
H3 : "Total Quality Management has a positive association with School Management Effectiveness."
         The results of Liantos & Pamatmat's research [23] that the implementation of TQM, in general,
influences school leadership. TQM practices have a relationship with staff development and school
leadership in carrying out their role in SG. This implies that the principal can provide a culture that requires
quality in all aspects of school operations and a holistic approach to school improvement programs and the
creation of school effectiveness. In other words, TQM plays a role in creating SG applications that can
improve school performance by making those closest to service delivery (teachers, principals, and the
community) more independent, more involved, and therefore more responsible for decisions taken. Plus,
school management based on TQM is an effective way to improve school quality systems [67].
         On the other hand, Arar and Nasra's research [68] revealed that there is a positive relationship
between SG and school effectiveness. According to him, with the SG practice, the principal's decision-
making authority, school decision-making, and the involvement of the school board could emerge to be able
to create a better teaching and learning environment and student academic achievement. In line with this
research, Bandur [10] and Gamage [45] suggest that SG can empower schools to develop a higher quality
education process, a healthier teaching and learning environment, stronger parent and community
involvement, and stronger student outcomes. Better as an indicator of effective schools [10, 45]. So, it can be
concluded that the application of TQM in schools influences the leadership of principals, which in turn can
maximize the role of the principal in carrying out school governance to achieve goals and maximize school
effectiveness. Therefore, we hypothesize:
H4 : "School Governance mediates the relationship between Total Quality Management and School
      Management Effectiveness."


2. RESEARCH METHOD
2.1. Research design
         This study employed quantitative approach. It is a data-based approach where in the conclusions are
made based on statistical methods. Data collection using survey methods through questionnaires. This
research was conducted in the provinces of East Java and Jakarta as two provinces in Indonesia that have
implemented the Regional Public Service Agency (school-based enterprise) in Indonesia Vocational High
School. This research was conducted in March 2020 to March 2021.

2.2. Population and sample
         The study population was the vocational school with the Regional Public Service Agency status in
Indonesia as the population in this study. Unit population members in this study were 43,142 people who
were principals, teachers, and students. The sample size is calculated using the Slovin formula. Each
vocational school is heterogeneous because it has different characteristics for each school, so stratified
random sampling is used by making each vocational school as strata. This sampling technique considers the
proportion of the sample from each stratum [69]. Then, the proportional stratified random sampling technique
is used so that the distribution of the questionnaire is proportional to the population for each school. The
research sample described in Table 1.


Int J Eval & Res Educ, Vol. 10, No. 1, March 2021: 161 - 173

Int J Eval & Res Educ                        ISSN: 2252-8822                                           167

                                Table 1. Vocational school list and sample size
                           No       Vocational high school     Population   Sample size
                            1    SMKN 1 Surabaya                 2,986         27
                            2    SMKN 5 Surabaya                 3,054         28
                            3    SMKN 6 Surabaya                 2,534         23
                            4    SMKN 1 Buduran Sidoarjo         1,405         13
                            5    SMKN 3 Buduran Sidoarjo         1,547         14
                            6    SMKN 2 Malang                   2,003         18
                            7    SMKN 4 Malang                   3,056         28
                            8    SMKN 11 Malang                  1,927         18
                            9    SMKN 1 Singosari                2,266         21
                           10    SMKN 1 Panji Situbondo          2,344         22
                           11    SMKN 1 Surabaya                 2,986         36
                           12    SMKN 5 Surabaya                 3,054         38
                           13    SMKN 6 Surabaya                 2,534         31
                           14    SMKN 1 Buduran Sidoarjo         1,405         17
                           15    SMKN 3 Buduran Sidoarjo         1,547         19
                           16    SMKN 2 Malang                   2,003         24
                           17    SMKN 4 Malang                   3,056         38
                           18    SMKN 11 Malang                  1,927         24
                           19    SMKN 1 Singosari                2,266         28
                           10    SMKN 1 Panji Situbondo          2,344         30
                           21    SMKN 1 Kalipuro                  260           3
                           22    SMKN 2 Bondowoso                 596           7
                           23    SMKN 5 Jember                   2,689         34
                           24    SMKN 3 Madiun                   1,416         17
                           25    SMKN 1 Pacitan                  1,634         20
                           26    UPTSMKN 2 Pasuruan              1,483         19
                           27    SMKN 3 Boyolangu                2,242         28
                           28    SMKN 1 Glagah                   2,121         26
                           29    SMKN PP Negeri 1 Tegalampel      739           9
                           30    SMKN 1 Jenangan                 2,173         27
                           31    SMKN 57 Jakarta                 1,273         16
                           32    SMKN 27 Jakarta                 1,400         17
                           33    SMKN 36 Jakarta                  854          11
                           34    SMKN 26 Jakarta                  570           7
                           35    SMKN 63 Jakarta                  570           7
                                   Total of respondents         43,142         533



2.3. Variable measurements
          Total quality management (TQM) was a latent exogenous variable. TQM is measured by five
indicators adopted from Bergman & Klefsjö [70]; Kennerfalk [71]. School governance (SG) is an exogenous
latent and intervening variable. The SG measurements use eight principles taken from Hénard & Mitterle [72];
ISSA [73]; Quyen [74]. School Management Effectiveness is an endogenous latent variable. It is measured
by six indicators from Hoy [18]; Verma & Chabra [75]; Scheereens [76]. All items of research instruments
were measured using a 5-point Likert Scale, ranging from 1 (strongly disagree) to 5 (strongly agree). The
variables fefinition and indicators shown in Table 2.




The improving of effectiveness school-based enterprise: A structural equation … (Arie Wibowo Khurniawan)

168                                                                                                           ISSN: 2252-8822

                                      Table 2. Variables definition and indicators
        Variables                           Definition                                                Indicators
         School       The right of school autonomy to implement school      1. Transparency
       governance     management, especially in the management of           2. Accountability
                      human resources, financial and material resources     3. Responsibility
                      available at school [19, 29, 40].                     4. Participation
                                                                            5. Autonomy
                                                                            6. Equality
                                                                            7. Predictable
                                                                            8. Dynamic
                                                                            Henard & Mitterle [72]; ISSA [73]; Quyen [74].
      Total quality   A management strategy system to improve               1. Customer focus
      management      productivity and quality, by responding               2. Process approach
                      appropriately to every change. It aims to satisfy     3. Participation in all parties
                      students, parents, and the government [57, 77, 78].   4. Continuous improvement
                                                                            5. Fact-based decision making.
                                                                            Bergman & Klefsjö [70]; Kennerfalk [71].
         School       The ability of schools to provide quality services    1. Strong leadership
      management      for students with a targeted period [76].             2. Emphasis on basic skill
      effectiveness                                                         3. Secure environment
                                                                            4. The high expectation for achievement
                                                                            5. Continuous assessment
                                                                            6. Budget management flexibility
                                                                            Hoy [18]; Verma & Chabra [75]; Scheereens [76].



          Confirmatory factor analysis is used to test the validity of eight School Governance indicators, five
indicators of Total Quality Management, and six indicators of School Management Effectiveness.
Confirmatory Factor Analysis is an adequate technique in testing the functioning of empirical constructs
(factors) in a structural model [79]. The result of validity and reliability testing described in Table 3.
          The results of the Confirmatory Factor Analysis show the value of loading factors of all School
Governance indicators, Total Quality Management, and School Management Effectiveness variables have
values greater than 0.50. Therefore it can be concluded that all indicators can explain the construct so that it
is feasible to use for the next stage. Cronbach's alpha is a convenient test used to estimate reliability. Testing
the reliability of the construct obtained Cronbach's alpha coefficient 0.936, 0.926, and 0.928 for school
governance, total quality management, and school management effectiveness respectively.


                                         Table 3. Validity and reliability testing
                                                                 School         Total quality   School management
              Item                 Indicators
                                                               governance       management         effectiveness
              X1.1 Transparency                                  0.733
              X1.2 Accountability                                0.813
              X1.3 Responsibility                                0.679
              X1.4 Participation                                 0.823
              X1.5 Autonomy                                      0.836
              X1.6 Equality                                      0.865
              X1.7 Predictable                                   0.875
              X1.8 Dynamic                                       0.829
              X2.1 Customer focus                                                  0.793
              X2.2 Process approach                                                0.839
              X2.3 Participation in all parties                                    0.870
              X2.4 Continuous improvement                                          0.851
              X2.5 Fact-based decision making                                      0.862
              Y1.1 Strong leadership                                                                   0.799
              Y1.2 Emphasis on basic skill                                                             0.885
              Y1.3 Secure environment                                                                  0.898
              Y1.4 The high expectation for achievement                                                0.845
              Y1.5 Continuous assessment                                                               0.854
              Y1.6 Budget management flexibility                                                       0.799
              Cronbach’s alpha                                    0.936            0.926               0.928



2.4. Data analysis
         Hypothesis testing to test whether exogenous latent variables have a significant effect on
endogenous latent variables. The test used the structural equation modeling (SEM) statistical method. The
SEM is a technique to test the causality relationship in which changes in one variable against other variables
are based on theory. Therefore, in developing hypotheses and modeling, theoretical studies are needed [79].

Int J Eval & Res Educ, Vol. 10, No. 1, March 2021: 161 - 173

Int J Eval & Res Educ                          ISSN: 2252-8822                                            169

         After building the theoretical framework model, the model is then drawn into a cross diagram so
that the causality relationship between endogenous and exogenous latent variables described clearly. The
relationship between latent variables or between exogenous variables and endogenous latent variables in a
model is explained in the structural model. This test is carried out to find out how much the percentage of the
variance of each endogenous latent variable that is explained by the exogenous latent variable in the model. It
is explained by the R-squares value. Modification of the model from the results of the evaluation and
interpretation of the model is done if the value of the Goodness of Fit does not meet the established
standards.


3. RESULTS AND DISCUSSION
3.1. Descriptive analysis
         Research respondents were 533 people who are 13 school principals, 172 teachers, and 348 students.
Table 4 shows the female respondents more than male. The majority of respondents as students are 65.3%.


                                    Table 4. Demographics of respondents
                             Demography          Description       Frequency   Percentage
                               Gender              Female             271        50.8%
                                                     Male             262        49.2%
                               Position           Principal            13         2.4%
                                                   Teacher            172        32.3%
                                                   Student            348        65.3%
                            Education level   Junior high school      348        65.3%
                                                  Diploma 4            12         2.3%
                                                Undergraduate         103        19.3%
                                                   Master              67        12.6%
                                                   Doctor              3          0.6%



3.2. Analysis of structural equation modeling
         A preliminary data analysis was carried out, in which the accuracy of the results, the outliers, the
normality, the missing values, and the multicollinearity of all variables were tested. First, a confirmatory
factor analysis using AMOS 21 was carried out to verify the scales of the scales used to assess the convergent
and discriminatory validity. Finally, structural equation modeling was used to test the proposed model and
assess the proposed relationships between total quality management (TQM), school governance (SG), and
School Management Effectiveness. Analysis of structural equation modeling is shown in Figure 2.




                        Figure 2. The result of structural equation modeling analysis
The improving of effectiveness school-based enterprise: A structural equation … (Arie Wibowo Khurniawan)

170                                                                                                        ISSN: 2252-8822

         To assess the model fit, estimates include the χ2-statistic, the goodness of fit index (GFI), root mean
square error of approximation (RMSEA), comparative fit index (CFI), and normed fit index (NFI). The
acceptable values to be >0.9 for the GFI and the NFI; suggest the value to be >0.95 for the CFI. The RMSEA
values less than 0.08 indicate an acceptable range [79]. The goodness of fit results of the model is shown in
Table 5. The model showed a good overall fit on almost all indices, CMIN χ2¼ 362.02, RMSEA=0.055,
CFI=0.978, NFI=0.964, and GFI=0.929.


                                        Table 5. The goodness of fit testing result
                                      Index            Cut off value      Result    Notes
                                    Chi-Square       Expected to below   362.027   Moderate
                                    Probability           ≥ 0.05          0.000    Moderate
                                     CMIN/df                ≤2            2.586    Moderate
                                     RMSEA                ≤ 0.08          0.055     Good
                                       CFI                ≥ 0.95          0.978     Good
                                       NFI                ≥ 0.90          0.964     Good
                                       GFI                ≥ 0.90          0.929     Good
                                      AGFI                ≥ 0.90          0.903     Good
                                       TLI                ≥ 0.90          0.973     Good
                                        IFI               ≥ 0.90          0.978     Good



         Table 6 presents the results of the hypothesis test that determined the relationship between each
variable in the model. The results verify that Total Quality Management support positively influences School
Governance (H1: estimate=0.913, p<0.05, R-squared=0.894). The positive relationship between School
Governance and School Management Effectiveness is also supported by the results (H2: estimate=0.627,
p<0.05). The results further support the positive influence of Total Quality Management on School
Management Effectiveness (H3: estimate=0.375, p<0.05). The size of the influence of Total Quality
Management and School Governance on School Management Effectiveness is shown by R-squared=0.936.
The overall results confirm that School governance mediates the relationship of Total Quality Management
on School Management Effectiveness, thereby supporting H4 with the indirect effect coefficient is 0.572.


                                                Table 6. The hypothesis testing result
                                                         Relationship        Estimate    S.E.    C.R.        P     R-Square
             School governance           <---     Total quality management    0.913     0.052   17.728 <0.05        0.894
      School management effectiveness    <---        School governance        0.627     0.093   6.716     <0.05     0.936
      School management effectiveness    <---     Total quality management    0.375     0.085   4.394     <0.05
      School management effectiveness    <---     Total quality management    0.572                Indirect effect



3.3. Discussion
         The results of testing the first hypothesis resulted in the finding that the TQM variable had a positive
and significant effect on SG. The positive coefficient value explains that the better the application of TQM in
the vocational school-based enterprise, the better governance will be carried out by the school. The results of
this conclusion are in line with research by Liantos & Pamatmat [23]. TQM practices especially relating to
leadership that focuses on stakeholders has a relationship with school leadership that is on school
management and improving staff development. The relationship between TQM and SG revealed that in terms
of improving the quality of schools, the role of the principal in implementing SG was very important in staff
development, physical development, and student development. Strategic factors are leadership as vital in
ensuring a successful implementation of TQM in an organization [80].
         The results of the second hypothesis test produce findings that SG has a positive and significant
effect on the latent variables of school management effectiveness. The positive coefficient value explains that
the better the application of SG in the vocational school-based enterprise, the better its effectiveness. This
finding is in line with research conducted by Bandur [34] and Volansky & Friedman [41] which states that
schools that implement the SG component will significantly improve teaching and learning processes and
provide significant improvements, both improving education and learning achievement and increasing school
effectiveness. SG can improve school effectiveness because schools that have implemented SG can
effectively improve school performance because they have authority over the budget, personnel, and
curriculum [38]. This authority is ultimately used as the power to implement changes that directly affect
teaching and learning practices. The management of vocational schools in Indonesia requires improvements
in line with the vision of Indonesian education. The vision and mission that exist in schools must be

Int J Eval & Res Educ, Vol. 10, No. 1, March 2021: 161 - 173

Int J Eval & Res Educ                          ISSN: 2252-8822                                                171

implemented and able to increase motivation, inspiration, and improve the quality and capacity of the school
community and stakeholders [81].
           The latent variable TQM has a positive and significant effect on the latent variable of school
effectiveness. The results of this conclusion are in line with research conducted by Sadikoglu and Olcay [4];
Wani and Mehraj [49]; Venkatraman [51]; Peat, et al. [52]; and Hasan, et al. [66]. Based on research
conducted by several researchers in several countries it was found that educational institutions need to adopt
the philosophy of TQM to create school effectiveness which is demonstrated through better performance.
The quality management practices in the field of education are able to make a good contribution to improving
the quality of education and educational organizations.
           The influence of TQM latent variables on latency variables of school effectiveness through the
application of SG has never been examined statistically before. However, based on research by Liantos &
Pamatmat [23], TQM implementation, in general, influences school leadership because TQM practices have
a relationship with staff development and school leadership in carrying out its role in SG. With the existence
of SG practices, the principal's decision-making authority, school decision-making [68], as well as school
board involvement can emerge to be able to create a better teaching and learning environment and student
academic achievement that are indicators of effective schools [10, 45]. By combining the results of these
studies it was implied that TQM had a role in creating the application of SG which could ultimately increase
school effectiveness. The combined results of the study are in line with the results of this study which concluded
that the latent variable TQM significantly influences the latent variable of school effectiveness through SG.


4.    CONCLUSION
          The strategy for increasing the effectiveness of the management of the vocational school-based
enterprise, it can be concluded that the implementation of total quality management (TQM) has a significant
positive effect on improving school governance (SG). The implementation of SG and TQM also has a
significant positive effect on the effectiveness of the management of vocational school-based enterprises. The
effectiveness of school management can be maximally implemented by increasing the implementation of
school governance in schools by increasing the criteria for strong and firm leadership.
          This research is still limited to vocational schools that have implemented School-Based Enterprise.
Suggestions are taken into consideration for further research that is analyzing whether there are differences in
strategies in increasing school effectiveness, both for schools with School-Based Enterprise status and for
schools that have not or will be going to School-Based Enterprise.


ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
        The authors are grateful to Bogor Agricultural University, Indonesia and Directorate General of
Vocational Education, Ministry of Education and Culture, Indonesia.


REFERENCES
[1]  Central Bureau of Statistics (BPS), “Monthly Socio-Economic Data Report (in Bahasa),” Jakarta, 2020.
[2]  A. S. M. Sohel-Uz-Zaman and U. Anjalin, “Implementing total quality management in education: compatibility and
     challenges,” Open Journal of Social Sciences, vol. 4, no. 11, pp. 207-217, 2016.
[3] S. Sahney, D. K. Banwet, and S. Karunes, “Conceptualizing total quality management in higher education,” The
     TQM Magazine, vol. 16, no. 2, pp. 145–159, 2004.
[4] E. Sadikoglu and H. Olcay, “The effects of total quality management practices on performance and the reasons of
     and the barriers to TQM practices in Turkey,” Advances in Decision Sciences, vol. 2, pp. 1-17, 2014.
[5] R. Croker, F. Humphrey, and R. Wilson, “Defining instructional quality by employing the Total Quality Management
     (TQM) method: a research project,” American Vocational Association Annual Conference, 1996, pp. 4-25.
[6] L. Lezotte, Creating the Total Quality Effective School. Washington DC: Effective Schools Products Ltd, 1992.
[7] R. Jaya, “Teori stakeholder,” Account. Media, pp. 4-5, 2016.
[8] M. Majeca, “Good governance enhance the efficiency and effectiveness public spending-Sub Saharan countries,”
     African Journal of Business Management, vol. 5, no. 11, pp. 3995-3999, 2011.
[9] W. Anderson, “Site-based management,” in Smith, S.C., Piele, P.K., Eds. School Leadership: Handbook for
     Excellence in Student Learning. SAGE Publications, London, 2006, pp. 223–244.
[10] A. Bandur, “School-based management developments: challenges and impacts,” Journal of Educational
     Administration, vol. 50, no. 6, pp. 845-873, 2012.
[11] T. Bush and D. Gamage, “Models of self-governance in schools: Australia and the United Kingdoms,”
     International Journal of Educational Management, vol. 15, no. 1, pp. 39-44, 2001.
[12] D. Gamage, “School-based management: shared responsibility and quality in education,” Education and Society,
     vol. 24, no. 1, pp. 27-43, 2006.

The improving of effectiveness school-based enterprise: A structural equation … (Arie Wibowo Khurniawan)

172                                                                                                   ISSN: 2252-8822

[13] D. Hopkins, “What we have learnt from school improvement about taking educational reform to scale,” School
     Effectiveness and School Improvement Research Policy Practice, vol. 4, no. 3, 2012.
[14] J. Hanaee, J. Handley, R. Rollins, and G. Worsdale, “An investigation of the role of leadership in the
     implementation of TQM in medical universities of Iran,” in Proceedings of the 5th Quality Conference in the
     Middle East, 2011, pp. 156-164.
[15] K. Leithwood and C. Riehl, “What we know about successful school leadership?” in American Education Research
     Association Annual Conference, 2003, pp. 21-25.
[16] P. M. Senge, The Fifth Discipline: The Art and Practice of the Learning Organization. New York: Doubleday, 1999.
[17] K. H, Project Management: A systems approach to planning, scheduling and controlling, 8th ed. New York: John
     Wiley and Sons, 2003.
[18] C. Hoy, C. Jardine, and M. Wood, Improving Quality in Education. London: Falmer, 2005.
[19] A. de Grauwe, “Improving the quality of education through school-based management: learning from international
     experiences,” International Review of Education, vol. 51, no. 4, pp. 269-287, 2005.
[20] M. Fullan, The New Meaning of Educational Change. Toronto: New Teachers College Press, 2007.
[21] F. Ulf, “Quality Education: the key role of teachers,” Education International Work Paper, vol. 14, no. 1, 2004.
[22] M. Mukhopadhyay, Total Quality Management in Education. New Delhi: SAGE Publications, 2005.
[23] M. G. B. Llantos and F. V. Pamatmat, “Total quality management and school-based management practices of
     school principlas: their implications to school leadership and improvement,” International Research Journal of
     Social Sciences, vol. 5, no. 8, pp. 1-7, 2016.
[24] Y. C. Cheng and M. M. C. Mok, “School-based management and paradigm shift in education: an empirical study,”
     International Journal of Educational Management, vol. 21, no. 6, pp. 517-542, 2007.
[25] H. Lior and A. E. Nir, “School principals' leadership style and school outcomes,” Journal of Educational
     Administration, vol. 52, no. 2, pp. 210-227, 2014.
[26] V. M. J. Robinson, C. A. Lloyd, and K. J. Rowe, “The impact of leadership on student outcomes: An analysis of the
     differential effects of leadership types,” Educational Administration Quarterly, vol. 44, no. 5, pp. 635-667, 2008.
[27] J. O'Neil, “On tapping the power of school-based management,” Educational Leadership, vol. 53, no. 4, pp. 67-70, 1995.
[28] A. Bergman, “Lessons for principals from site-based management,” Educational Leadership, vol. 50, no. 1,
     pp. 48-51, 1992.
[29] K. Arar and A. Abu-Romi, “School-based management: Arab education system in Israel,” J. Educ. Adm., vol. 54,
     no. 2, pp. 191–208, 2016.
[30] A. E. Nir, A. Ben David, R. Bogler, D. E. Inbar, and A. Zohar, “School autonomy and 21st century skills in the
     Israeli educational system: Discrepancies between the declarative and operational levels,” International Journal of
     Educational Management, vol. 30, no. 7, pp. 1231-1246, 2016.
[31] A. E. Nir, “The impact of school-based management on supervision instructors' professional considerations,”
     International Journal of Educational Management, vol. 17, no. 2, pp. 49-58, 2003.
[32] R. Allen, “Does School Autonomy Improve Educational Outcomes? Judging the Performance of Foundation
     Secondary Schools in England,” DoQSS Working Papers. London: University of London, 2010.
[33] A. E. Nir and P. Piri, Self-Management of Schools: From Concept to Action. Jerusalem: Henrietta Szold Institute,
     2007.
[34] A. Bandur, “A study of the implementation of school-based management in Flores primary schools in Indonesia,”
     Thesis, University of Newcastle, 2008.
[35] F. Barrera-Osorio, T. Fasih, H. A. Patrinos, and L. Santibanez, Decentralized Decision-making in Schools: The
     Theory and Evidence on School-based Management. World Bank, 2009.
[36] K. Starr and C. Oakley, “Nurturing new leaders: teachers leading learning: the role of principals,” Australian
     Educational Leader, vol. 30, no. 4, pp. 34-36, 2008.
[37] C. E. Domitrovich, et al., “How do school-based prevention programs impact teachers? Findings from a
     randomized trial of an integrated classroom management and social-emotional program,” Prevention Science,
     vol. 17, no. 3, pp. 325-337, 2016.
[38] E. R. Odden and P. Wohlstetter, “Making school-based management right,” Educational Leadership, vol. 52, no. 5,
     pp. 32-37, 1995.
[39] T.-A. Rodriguez and J. R. Slate, “Site-based management: a review of the literature,” 2005. [Online]. Available:
     http://citeseerx.ist.psu.edu/viewdoc/download?doi=10.1.1.552.9447&rep=rep1&type=pdf.
[40] B. Caldwell, School-Based Management. Education Policy Series. UNESCO: International Academy of Education
     and International Institute for Educational Planning, 2005.
[41] A. Volansky and I. A. Friedman, School-based Management: An International Perspective. London: Routledge, 2003.
[42] A. Bandur and D. Gamage, “How did school councils in Indonesia improve teaching/learning environments and
     student achievements?” Journal of Applied Research in Higher Education, vol. 18, pp. 15-28, 2014.
[43] D. Gamage, Professional Development for Leaders and Managers of Self-Governing Schools. Dordrecht: Springer,
     2006.
[44] D. Gamage and P. Sooksomchitra, “Decentralization and school-based management in Thailand,” International
     Review of Education, vol. 50, no. 1, pp. 289-305, 2004.
[45] D. Gamage and J. Zajda, “Decentralization and school-based management: a comparative study of self-governing
     schools’ models,” Educational Practice and Theory, vol. 27, no. 2, pp. 35-58, 2009.
[46] J. Sabas and S. O. Mokaya, “The influence of governance systems on students’ performance in public secondary
     schools in Karatu,” International Journal of Science and Research (IJSR), vol. 5, no. 10, pp. 1595-1598, 2015.


Int J Eval & Res Educ, Vol. 10, No. 1, March 2021: 161 - 173

Int J Eval & Res Educ                            ISSN: 2252-8822                                                  173

[47] S. M. Lo, H.-P. Shen, and J. C. Chen, “An integrated approach to project management using the Kano model and
     QFD: an empirical case study,” Total Quality Management & Business Excellence, vol. 28, no. 13, pp. 1-26, 2016.
[48] K. Leithwood, A. Harris, and D. Hopkins, “Seven strong claims about successful school leadership,” School
     Leadership and Management, vol. 28, no. 1, pp. 27-42, 2008.
[49] I. A. Wani and H. K. Mehraj, “Total Quality Management in Education: An Analysis,” International Journal of
     Humanities and Social Science Invention, vol. 3, no. 6, pp. 71-78, 2014.
[50] P. M. Terry, “Using total quality management principles to implement school-based management,” International
     Conference of the International Association of Management, 1996, vol. 14, pp. 1-11.
[51] S. Venkatraman, “A framework for implementing TQM in higher education programs,” Quality Assurance in
     Education, vol. 8, no. 1, pp. 103-131, 2007.
[52] M. Peat, C. E. Taylor, and S. Franklin, “Re-engineering of undergraduate science curricula to emphasize development
     of lifelong learning skills,” Innovations in Education and Teaching International, vol. 42, pp. 135-146, 2005.
[53] J. V. Koch and J. L. Fisher, “Higher education and total quality management,” Total Quality Management and
     Business Excellence, vol. 9, no. 8, pp. 659-668, 1998.
[54] W. Deming, “Total quality management in higher education,” Management Services, vol. 35, pp. 18-20, 1993.
[55] M. Tribus, “Why not education: quality management in education,” Journal for Quality and Participation, vol. 16,
     pp. 12-21, 1993.
[56] M. Peak, “TQM transform the classroom,” Management Review, vol. 84, no. 9, pp. 13-19, 1995.
[57] R. K. Michael, V. E. Sower, and J. Motwani, “A comprehensive model for implementing total quality management
     in higher education,” Benchmarking for Quality Management & Technology, vol. 4, no. 2, pp. 104-120, 1997.
[58] J. H and N. F, “Linkages between total quality management and the outcomes- based approach in an education
     environment,” Quality in Higher Education, vol. 11, no. 3, pp. 251-260, 2005.
[59] K. A. Sharples, M. Slusher, and M. Swaim, “How TQM can work in education,” Qualification Program, pp. 75-78, 1998.
[60] K. Barnett, J. McCormick, and R. Conners, “Transformational leadership: panacea, placebo or problem?” Journal
     of Educational Administration, vol. 39, no. 1, pp. 24-46, 2001.
[61] S. M. Widrick, E. Mergen, and D. Grant, “Measuring the dimensions of quality in higher education,” Total Quality
     Management, vol. 13, no. 1, pp. 123-131, 2002.
[62] E. Hoyle, The Politics of School Management. London: Hodder and Stoughton, 1986.
[63] A. McMahon, A cultural perspective on school effectiveness, school improvement and teacher professional
     development. London: Continum, 2001.
[64] J. Oakland, Total Quality Management, 3rd ed. Amsterdam: Text with Cases, 2000.
[65] D. Summers, Quality. New Jersey: Pearson Prentice Hall, 2006.
[66] K. Hasan, et al., “Total quality management (TQM): implementation in primary education system of Bangladesh,”
     International Journal of Research in Industrial Engineering, vol. 7, no. 3, pp. 370-380, 2018.
[67] M. Svensson and B. Klefsjö, “TQM-based self-assessment in the education sector: Experiences from a Swedish
     upper secondary school project,” Quality Assurance in Education, vol. 14, no. 4, pp. 299-323, 2006.
[68] K. Arar and M. A. Nasra, “Linking school-based management and school effectiveness: the influence of self-based
     management, motivation and effectiveness in the Arab education system in Israel,” Educational Management
     Administration & Leadership, vol. 48, no. 1, pp. 186-204, 2018.
[69] R. L. Scheaffer, et al., Elementary Survey Sampling, 7th ed. Boston: Cengage Learning, 2011.
[70] B. Bergman and B. Klefsjö, Quality from Customer Needs to Customer Satisfaction. London and Studentlitteratur
     Lund: McGraw-Hill, 1994.
[71] L. Kennerfalk, Changes in organizational structure related to the implementation of a Total quality management
     strategy. Luleå: University of Technology, 1995.
[72] F. Hénard and A. Mitterle, Governance and quality guidelines in Higher Education. Paris: OECD, 2010.
[73] I. S. S. A., ISSA Guidelines on Good Governance. Geneva: Creative Commons Attribution-No. Commercial-
     NoDerivs, 2013.
[74] Đ. T. N. Quyên, “Developing university governance indicators and their weighting system using a modified Delphi
     method,” Procedia-Social and Behavioral Sciences, 2014, vol. 141, pp. 828-833.
[75] P. Verma and S. Chabra, Application of pedagogical knowledge & skills acquired in teacher training to school
     teachers of mathematics. New Delhi: NCERT, 1996.
[76] J. Scheerens, Improving school effectiveness: Fundamentals of Educational Planning. Paris: UNESCO, 2000.
[77] J. Dotchin and J. Oakland, “Theories and concepts in total quality management,” Total Quality Management,
     vol. 3, no. 2, pp. 133-146, 2006.
[78] E. Sallis, Integrated Quality Management for Education (in Bahasa), (Trans: Ahmad Ali Riyadi). Yogyakarta:
     Ircisod, 2010.
[79] J. F. Hair, G. T. M. Hult, C. M. Ringle, and M. Sarstedt, Primer on Partial Least Square Structural Equation
     Modeling (PLS-SEM). Los Angeles: SAGE Publications, 2014.
[80] F. A. M. Al-Shabibi, “Total quality management performance in Omani small and medium enterprises (SMES),”
     Humanities & Social Sciences Reviews, vol. 7, no. 2, pp. 45-47, 2019.
[81] S. F. Shodiq, et al., “Towards better management of private education in Indonesia: lessons learned from
     Muhammadiyah schools,” Humanities & Social Sciences Reviews, vol. 7, no. 2, pp. 146-155, 2019.




The improving of effectiveness school-based enterprise: A structural equation … (Arie Wibowo Khurniawan)