INTERNATIONAL JOURNAL OF EDUCATION, SOCIAL AND MANAGEMENT SCIENCE
                                                         (IJESMS) VOLUME 1, ISSUE:1.



   ARTIFICIAL INTELLIGENCE AND EFFECTIVE SCHOOL MANAGEMENT IN
                             NIGERIA



                                    Dr Ogbuoka Oby Modest
                             Department of Education Management
                         Faculty of Education, Coalcity University Enugu
                                    obymessages@gmail.com
                                          08038806518

                                 Dr Florence Nchelem Cyrus
                      Department of Office and Information Management
                      Faculty of Administration and Management Sciences
                                  floxysmart123@gmail.com
                                        08032357953

                                Okere Rowland Chinedum
                 Department of Computer Science, Federal Polytechnic Nekede
                               chiagbanwejune12@gmail.com
                                       09065254569

                      Emmanuel Chika Obizue PhD, FMIMPS, FIAPS

                            Department of Banking and Finance,
            Faculty of Management Sciences, Imo State University Owerri, Imo state
                              dremmanuelobizue@gmail.com
                                     +2348068099918
                              ORCID: 0009-0002-9119-1668



                                               Abstract
Artificial intelligence is one of the trending tool that have profound impact on the effectiveness of
school management in Nigerian education sector. This study is a descriptive survey research
design that examined the application of Artificial Intelligence in the management of tertiary
institutions in Nigeria. This study was carried out in six selected universities in the six
geographical zones of Nigeria. Two research objectives, two research questions and a single
hypothesis were respectively formulated to guide this study. A four-point rating scale titled
“Artificial Intelligence and School Management in Nigeria” (AISMN) was structured for the
collection of necessary data required for this study. The questionnaire was validated by expert


              International Journal of Education, Social and Management Science (IJESMS)                58
                                           Volume 1, Issue:1.

              INTERNATIONAL JOURNAL OF EDUCATION, SOCIAL AND MANAGEMENT SCIENCE
                                                         (IJESMS) VOLUME 1, ISSUE:1.



judgement of three academic authorities; each from the department of computer science,
educational administration and educational measurement and evaluation respectively. The
reliability index was 0.84 using the Person Product Correlation coefficient formula (r). The study
adopted the mean and standard deviation in answering the research questions while the single
hypothesis was tested by the z-test statistical tool at 0.05 level of significance. The findings
revealed that the adoption of AI in school management will result to effective curriculum
development, improved management efficiency, data-driven decision making, resource
optimization, enhanced faculty productivity, enhanced security and safety, streamlined
communication and optimized administrative processes in tertiary institutions in Nigeria. The
study therefore came to the conclusion that is very important to begin to use of Artificial
Intelligence (AI) in Nigerian tertiary institution since it has the potential to make school
management processes efficient. The study recommended that the leadership of the tertiary
institutions should prioritise the application of artificial intelligence in their operation through
strategic planning, infrastructure development, and capacity building to ensure effective AI
adoption and mitigate its negative consequences and also that the government should sufficiently
fund the adoption and application of artificial intelligence in formal education activities in Nigeria
and also ensure continuous training of staff so as to maximize the benefits therefrom.

Keywords: Artificial Intelligence, School Management, Education, Tertiary

Introduction
 School management is the whole process of overseeing the affairs and operations of the school
system with a view of the set goals of the institution and ensuring they are realized by the best
application of available resources over a period of time. Generally, managers of educational
institutions deal on the systematic organization, arrangement, integration, evaluation and co-
ordination of both materials and human resources in effective and efficient ways to realize the
general educational objectives. Obizue & Obizue (2021) averred that school management is the
function of the leadership of an institution that involves the determination of the corporate policy,
planning, organizing, directing, coordinating, controlling and evaluating performance against the
stated objectives of the institution with the targeted purpose of goal attainment. Ogbonnaya (2003)
and Mohammed, Ogunode, & Yahaya (2021) defined school management as the utilization of
institutional resources to actualize the institutional objectives. Generally, management or
administration is the application of organization’s human and material resources to realize the
organizational goals within a set time. Administration in its totality is a process which entails the
utilization of human, financial and material resources in maximizing the realization of goals and
objectives. In the same vein, Nwiyi (2018) viewed educational administration is concerned with
integrating the appropriate human and material resources that are made available and made
effective for achieving the purposes of a program of an educational institution.




              International Journal of Education, Social and Management Science (IJESMS)                 59
                                           Volume 1, Issue:1.

              INTERNATIONAL JOURNAL OF EDUCATION, SOCIAL AND MANAGEMENT SCIENCE
                                                         (IJESMS) VOLUME 1, ISSUE:1.



Effective school management ensures that the various aspects of the educations institutions are
implemented as planned and one major expectation is to ensure that all teaching and non-teaching
staff are well supervised to do their works effectively. In generality, Ogunode & Gregory (2025)
posited that school administration covers the following; school planning, organizing, controlling,
coordinating and evaluating performance, decision making, curriculum development and planning,
school plant management, students activities, teachers’ programme, human capacity development,
school-community relationship, academic calendar planning, extra-curriculum programme, school
discipline programme, school sport, school examination and school security. They further posited
that these should be done in effective ways using administrative structures to implement school
programme and realize the school objectives whereby posts are created and assigned for the
optimal performance of the school.

The education sector in Nigeria has been challenged by various factors that have limited its
effectiveness and relevance in the 21st century thereby making it to be at a crossroad. Some of
these challenges are operational inefficiency, curriculum defects, inadequate infrastructure,
insufficient funding, corruption, poor resource allocation, shortage of qualified and experienced
staff, examination malpractices and there is this public outcry for quality education. The successive
administrations of this country have made frantic efforts and huge investment to standardize the
education system towards achieving the set goal but there is still much to be done. Amidst this
situation, there lies an obvious opportunity that brings the much desire transformation of the formal
education in Nigeria from its present state to a better stage and this can be driven by the integration
of Artificial Intelligence-powered solution tools into the sector.

Artificial intelligence has the potentials to bring every expected change in the Nigeria’s formal
education and revolutionalise it by helping the sector to conquer all traditional limitations and
barriers with the adaptive, efficient and inclusive school management experience that AI provides.

The advent of artificial Intelligence is an emerging and trending digital technology that has brought
about transformation and revolution in various sector of the global economy and the management
of the Nigerian education sector cannot be exempted. According to Obiakor and Emenike (2025),
in this era of technological advancement, the integration of AI into educational frameworks has
become a pivotal strategy in transforming teaching and learning processes leading to overall
advancement in the school management strides. By adopting AI in the Nigerian education sector,
there will be general efficiency in the sector given the evidences of data-driven decision making
in curriculum development, institutional administration, personalized learning, innovative and
competitive pedagogies, automated grading with accuracy and other visible change outcomes.

Artificial intelligence is a prevailing tool for driving change management in Nigeria’s formal
education sector with the goal of transitioning staff and school operations from a current state to a
desired future state. The integration of AI in Nigeria formal education system demands effective


              International Journal of Education, Social and Management Science (IJESMS)                  60
                                           Volume 1, Issue:1.

              INTERNATIONAL JOURNAL OF EDUCATION, SOCIAL AND MANAGEMENT SCIENCE
                                                         (IJESMS) VOLUME 1, ISSUE:1.



strategies to drive school management which are capable of addressing concerns around job
placement, equitable access thus providing institutions’ personnel with opportunities to engage in
necessary trainings and skill-support schemes to enable them to effectively integrate and apply the
AI-powered tools.

School management is a systematic approach to transitioning individuals, teams, systems and
organisations from their current state to a desired future state. It is a strategic practice of
identifying, planning and implementing different areas of changes and taking appropriate actions
to sustain them towards the achievement of general and/or specific goals of an organization.
Obizue and Obizue (2018) stated that effective school management strategies help systems to
navigate complex transitions and achieve desire organizational restructuring goals and one way to
appropriate this, is by providing transparent and timely information to enable employees engage
in the change process with the leadership demonstrating committed visible support. Despite the
benefits of effective school management there are still numerous challenging facing formal
education in Nigeria. The major challenges to school management in Nigerian formal education
system lie on the fact that people see change as a hard endeavor and always seek to resist it
especially when it lacks effective communication, funding and other resources like infrastructure
and expertise.

Recently, the Nigerian tertiary education sector has experienced visible growth given the high rate
of students’ intake into the various fields of study with its attending challenges of overcrowding,
poor infrastructures, insufficient number of academic and non-academic staff and unavailability
of other resources coupled with inability and inconveniences of giving personal attention to the
teaming school population. By this situation, the sector is likely to benefit from the revolutionary
and transformative potentials of artificial intelligence in change management in the overall
administrative processes, curriculum development and implementation. In the words of Ibrahim
(2019), the adoption of AI in tertiary institutions in Nigeria are facing numerous challenges
including inadequate infrastructure, limited resources, and poor funding and these challenges have
to some extent, hindered the ability of the education sector to provide high-quality education owing
to level of inefficiency in the curriculum development process and poor administrative strategies.
This less-developed and uncompetitive education system has led to the present decline in the
academic standards and graduate employability level experienced in the country today. For this
reason, the efficacy of AI-powered tools is inevitable. In recent years, Nigeria as a country has sort
for solutions to the challenges inherent in her education sector hence the sector has begun to
explore innovative solutions to address these challenges including the adoption of Artificial
Intelligence (Udekamna & Nwafor, 2022). Obizue & Obizue (2018) observed that the schools in
Nigeria are increasingly exploring and leveraging the potentials of AI to enhance their curriculum
development and general administrative processes hence the system will gradually improve in
efficiency, accuracy, decision-making and quality. The integration of AI has revolutionized the
way curricula are designed, delivered and managed ultimately improving the quality of education

              International Journal of Education, Social and Management Science (IJESMS)                 61
                                           Volume 1, Issue:1.

              INTERNATIONAL JOURNAL OF EDUCATION, SOCIAL AND MANAGEMENT SCIENCE
                                                         (IJESMS) VOLUME 1, ISSUE:1.



and students’ experiences and outcome have been impressive. This is confirmed by the assertion
of Adebisi (2013) that AI has the potential to transform the education sector by improving teaching,
learning and administrative processes and bring the much desired achievement of the goals of
education at all levels. It is widely posited that AI is still an emerging technology in Nigeria and
holds a great future for her education system. Despite the potential benefits of AI, its adoption in
Nigerian tertiary institutions is still in its infancy stage (Campela, 2016). Olatunde and Abioye
(2019) acknowledged that the integration of Artificial Intelligence (AI) in tertiary institutions in
Nigeria is a relatively new phenomenon and its impact on teaching, learning, and administrative
processes is not yet fully understood. This notwithstanding, several institutions have begun to
explore AI-powered solutions, including online learning platforms, student information systems,
and learning management systems.

The Nigerian education system is still using poorly developed with outdated curricula that do not
align with industry needs and technological advancement which is evidenced by inefficient
administrative processes and limited access to quality education in Nigeria. These are some of the
public outcries that necessitated this investigation as it is expected to contribute to the
implementation of effective strategies for leveraging AI in school management toward enhancing
the quality and standard of Nigeria formal education. Udekamna and Nwafor (2022) confirmed
that there is evidence of growing body of research on AI adoption in education yet there is still so
much need for more research on the specific effects, challenges and opportunities facing Nigerian
tertiary institutions because there is scarcity of studies addressing these specific area.

Objectives of the Study
This broad aim of this study is to address this research gap by investigating the Impact of AI on
the effectiveness of school management in Nigeria. This study seeks to pursue the following
specific objective.

   1. To identify the various areas that AI-powered tools will be applied for effective school
      management in Nigeria.
   2. To ascertain the impact of applying the AI-powered tools on the effectiveness of school
      management in Nigeria

Research Questions
Based on the specific objectives, the following research questions were formulated in this study;

   1. What are the various areas that AI-powered tools will be applied for effective school
      management in Nigeria?
   2. In what ways will the application of AI-powered tools impact on the effectiveness of school
      management in Nigeria?




             International Journal of Education, Social and Management Science (IJESMS)                62
                                          Volume 1, Issue:1.

              INTERNATIONAL JOURNAL OF EDUCATION, SOCIAL AND MANAGEMENT SCIENCE
                                                         (IJESMS) VOLUME 1, ISSUE:1.



Research Hypothesis
A single null hypothesis was postulated in this study and it stated thus;

H0: There is no significant difference in the mean ratings of academic and non-academic staff of
selected universities on the application of AI-powered tools for effective school management in
Nigeria.

Conceptual Dialectics
Artificial intelligence (AI)
Artificial intelligence is field of computer science that focuses on developing intelligent machines
that can perform like human being. Artificial intelligence is simulation of human intelligence in
machines that are programmed to think and learn like humans. In other words, AI is defined as the
development of computer software that can perform human like tasks with the potential to
effectively transforming organizational activities and tertiary institutions are not exceptions.

According to Ezekoka and Uzozie (2019) AI machines possess human traits and exhibit human-
like qualities through a broad range of intelligent machines. The major benefit of AI machines is
that they improve efficiency and productivity in a wide range of tasks.

According to AFSA (2022), Artificial Intelligence refers to the development of computer systems
capable of performing tasks that typically require human intelligence. These tasks include learning,
reasoning, problem solving, perception and natural language understanding. Artificial Intelligence
technologies encompass various techniques and approaches, such as machine learning, deep
learning, natural language processing, computer vision and robotics. These technologies enable
computers to analyze vast amounts of data, recognize patterns, make predictions and automate
complex processes.

 Obizue and Obizue (2018) averred that Artificial Intelligence is the development and
advancement of computer systems to perform certain tasks that characteristically require human
intelligence such as learning, problem-solving, reasoning, language perception and understanding.
They further emphasized that AI is digital or technological resource with the potentials to
revolutionise organizational operations transform various industries like education, finance,
health, manufacturing, transport, communication, oil and gas by improving their level of
management efficiency, accuracy, decision making and overall productivity and performance.

Akpan and Nwozuzu (2019) and Udekamna and Nwafor (2022) opined that AI is the convergence
of human ingenuity and technological innovation where machines are designed to mimic human
cognitive abilities such as learning, reasoning and problem solving. American technology giant
International Business Machines Corporation defined Artificial Intelligence as referring to any
human-like intelligence exhibited by a computer, robot, or other machines. Artificial intelligence
(A.I), defined as intelligence exhibited by machines, has many applications in today’s society.

             International Journal of Education, Social and Management Science (IJESMS)                63
                                          Volume 1, Issue:1.

              INTERNATIONAL JOURNAL OF EDUCATION, SOCIAL AND MANAGEMENT SCIENCE
                                                         (IJESMS) VOLUME 1, ISSUE:1.



School Management
Akinwumi and Jayeoba (2004) defined school management as the scientific organization of human
and material resources and programs available for education and using them systematically and
meticulously to achieve educational goals. School administration is the process by which
principles, methods and practices of administration are applied in educational institutions to
establish, maintain and develop such institutions in line with the goals of the institutions. School
administration specifically deal with coordination of all activities and programme in the
institutions towards realization of school goals. School administration is the use of school
resources for the achievement of school objectives.

Artificial Intelligence-Powered Tools in Various Areas for Effective School Management in
Nigeria
This talks about the various department, units and areas where Artificial Intelligence can be applied
or adopted to make school management effective in Nigeria.

Imalah & Alagoli (2015), Obizue & Obizue (2018), Alabi (2020) and Udekamna & Nwafor (2022)
generally accepted that AI can be adopted in the following areas in Nigerian tertiary institutions
for school management efficiency and enhancement in the quality of education in Nigeria.

Curriculum Development
AI helps in optimizing course materials by developing personalized and adaptive curricular

Students’ Assessment
AI is used in assessing students performances, providing feedback and making decisions

Research and Development
AI serves a good aid and support to students, lecturers and scholars in their academic studies and
research work by providing insights, analyzing data and identifying patterns

Institution’s Management
Most institutions adopt the AI in their general management and administration to ensure
effectiveness and efficiency at all levels. This may include teaching and learning programs, human
resources and inventory management etc

Science Education
Different institutions integrate AI in their science education programs to prepare them for the
demands of the digital age thereby improving students’ engagement and learning outcome.

Impact of Artificial Intelligence for Effective School Management in Nigeria
The integration of Artificial Intelligence in school administration is a revolutionalised approach to
enhance the whole management structure and operations of the school system. According to


              International Journal of Education, Social and Management Science (IJESMS)                64
                                           Volume 1, Issue:1.

              INTERNATIONAL JOURNAL OF EDUCATION, SOCIAL AND MANAGEMENT SCIENCE
                                                         (IJESMS) VOLUME 1, ISSUE:1.



Ogunode and Gregory (2025), the application of AI can lead to effective data analysis and decision
making, effective school administrative, resource optimization, student support and intervention,
streamlined communication and engagement and enhanced security and safety.

Obizue & Obizue (2018) and Ogunode & Gregory (2025) explained the following as the key areas
AI could be applied in the school system to ensure effective school management in Nigeria.

Data Analysis and Decision Making
One of the major function of school administrators is to make policies and take decision on school
issues. Decision-making involves the process of choosing from alternative course of action. Many
issues arising in the educational institutions demand decision-making because there is more than
a single option of action. Many alternatives are generated out of which one is taken for
implementation. The manager must have an adequate knowledge of alternative actions available
on an issue, who should be involved in decision-making and mode of implementation of the
decision (Fasasi, 2011). Right decision at appropriate time and place will enhance achievement of
organizational goals. As much as possible, subordinates should be allowed to participate in
decision-making. Decision taking in the level of administration is very crucial for the development
of the school. Al can be used to making effective decision in educational institutions. Al has the
capacity to help school administrator makes right decisions. AFSA (2022) noted that AI can assist
administrators in analyzing large volumes of data, such as student performance data, attendance
records and resource allocation. AI-powered systems can identify patterns, trends and insights that
can inform decision-making processes. Administrators can use this information to develop data-
driven strategies for improving student outcomes, allocating resources effectively, and evaluating
programs and initiatives.

Effective School Management
The management of tertiary institutions in Nigeria is saddled with the responsibility of ensuring
stability and full compliance with the academic calendar and implementation of academic
programmes as planned. Administrators are to ensure full supervision and implementation of
teaching programme. Administrators are saddled with responsibilities of planning school tables
table, teacher’s schedules and school calendar. AFSA (2022) observed that AI can automate
routine administrative tasks, such as managing student records, generating reports, scheduling and
handling routine inquiries. By automating these processes, administrators can save time and
allocate their efforts to more strategic and value-added tasks. AI can be used to improve the
efficiency of administrative tasks in educational institutions. AI-powered systems can automate
routine tasks, such as grading, scheduling, and record-keeping, freeing up educators' time to focus
on more impactful work, such as lesson planning and student engagement (Oztok & Zingaro,
2019). Educational institutions have to deal with a lot of administrative tasks, such as scheduling,
grading, and record-keeping. AI can automate many of these tasks, freeing up educators' time to
focus on teaching and supporting students.


             International Journal of Education, Social and Management Science (IJESMS)                65
                                          Volume 1, Issue:1.

              INTERNATIONAL JOURNAL OF EDUCATION, SOCIAL AND MANAGEMENT SCIENCE
                                                         (IJESMS) VOLUME 1, ISSUE:1.



Resource Optimization
Resources allocation is another fundamental functions of school administrators. Educational
resources are divided into two. Human and materials resources. It is the responsibilities of schools
administrators to ensure these resources are effectively and efficiently allocated to realize the
schools goals and programme. AFSA (2022) asserted that AI can help administrators optimize the
allocation of resources, such as staff, classrooms and materials. By analyzing data on student
enrollment, class sizes and scheduling, AI systems can suggest efficient resource allocation
strategies to optimize learning environments and support student needs.

Student Support and Intervention
It is also the duties of schools administrators to ensure students support services are fully
implemented in the schools. AFSA (2022) opined that AI can assist administrators in identifying
students who may require additional support or intervention. By analyzing various data points,
such as academic performance, attendance and behavior, AI systems can flag students who may
be at risk of falling behind or facing challenges. This allows administrators to proactively
implement interventions and provide targeted support to improve student outcomes.

Streamlined Communication and Engagement
Communication in school involves passing of information from one staff to another staff or
students, parents. School administrators must ensure free flow of information among all members
of his organization. Information on school activities must be relayed at the right time, to the right
people and in clear language. Communication could be verbal, written, electronic or any other
means. The manager serves as a link between his educational institution and the government, the
community and the international bodies (Fasasi, 2011). He should give correct and up to date
information about the school. Information emanating from these bodies should be passed to all
staff members without delay. The School administrators should communicate and allow free
communication in order to guide against rumour, misunderstanding and misrepresentation. Al can
aid effective communication in schools between school administrators, teachers, students and
parents. AFSA (2022) concluded that AI-powered communication systems can streamline
communication between administrators, teachers, students and parents. Chatbots and virtual
assistants can handle routine inquiries, provide information and direct individuals to the
appropriate resources. This can improve efficiency and accessibility in communication, freeing up
administrators' time for more complex interactions and strategic decision making.

Enhanced Security and Safety
One of the responsibilities of school management is to ensure the safety of lives and properties
within the school environment. School administrators can deploy Al facilities to enhance school
security. AFSA (2022) maintained that AI can contribute to school security and safety measures.
Teaching and learning can only take place in a peaceful, secured and conducive environment.
Facial recognition systems and video analytics can help monitor school premises, detect potential


              International Journal of Education, Social and Management Science (IJESMS)                66
                                           Volume 1, Issue:1.

              INTERNATIONAL JOURNAL OF EDUCATION, SOCIAL AND MANAGEMENT SCIENCE
                                                         (IJESMS) VOLUME 1, ISSUE:1.



security threats, and ensure the safety of students and staff. AI-powered systems can also analyze
social media or online platforms to identify potential risks and proactively address them. Artificial
intelligence (AI) can help to improve school security. Security cameras in school environment
from school gate to classrooms. (AI) security cameras can identify people, suspicious behavior
and guns and gather large amounts of information. The images show what people are wearing,
how they walk and other physical mannerisms. If the cameras capture an image of someone who
is banned from a building, the system can immediately inform school officials if the person returns.
Deployment of advanced AI-based gun detection, perimeter protection, and intrusion detection
systems. Embracing intelligent school security systems can help to leverage the power of AI and
machine learning to detect and report anomalies. Such technologies create a security infrastructure
capable of thwarting criminal attempts effectively. AI-powered cameras don’t just record threats
but analyze the video streams as soon as the footage is captured. If an anomaly is detected, it tracks
and reports that in real-time by sending notifications and alerts. Unlike humans, these technologies
do not have limitations such as short attention spans, fatigue, and confusion. We shall now delve
deeper into some of the common school security challenges and figure out how AI video analytics
can solve them

Methodology
This study is a descriptive survey research design on artificial intelligence and effective school
management in Nigeria. The study was carried out in six selected universities, each from the six
geographical zones of Nigeria. Using the stratified random sampling technique, one university
was selected from the six zones of the country and a total of 600 respondents were selected to
represent the population of the staff in the universities. This comprised of 300 academic staff and
300 non-academic staff of the selected universities in the range of 50 academic and 50 non-
academic staff, giving a total of 100 staff from each of the six universities selected. The stratified
random sampling technique was adopted in the selection to ensure adequate representation of each
of the subgroups which include the Lecturers and Administrative staff of all the faculties, ICT
staff, Library staff and this was aimed at generating accurate and generalized findings on the
impact of leveraging AI for effective school management in Nigeria’s education system. The study
formulated two specific objectives, two research questions and one hypothesis. The instrument for
data collection was a researcher structured four-point Likert scale questionnaire titled; Artificial
Intelligence and School Management in Nigeria” (AISMN) which was used to elicit information
from the 600 respondents. The questionnaire was organized into three sections serving specific
purposes within the context of the research objectives. The first section was dedicated to collect
demographic information about the respondents. Section two comprised ten items designed in two
clusters of five question items each to address the two specific objectives in this study. Each of
these questions have four-point Likert scale response format of SA for strongly agree, A for Agree,
D for Disagree and SD for strongly disagree.




              International Journal of Education, Social and Management Science (IJESMS)                 67
                                           Volume 1, Issue:1.

             INTERNATIONAL JOURNAL OF EDUCATION, SOCIAL AND MANAGEMENT SCIENCE
                                                        (IJESMS) VOLUME 1, ISSUE:1.



The face and content validity of the questionnaire was carried out by the expert judgement of three
academic authorities; each from the departments of computer science, educational administration
and educational measurement and evaluation respectively who made inputs there were used to
modify the questionnaire before administering to the respondents. To ensure the reliability of the
instrument, it was first administered and pre-tested with 50 respondents who were not part of the
study population, 25 respondents each from two purposefully selected private institutions in the
zone. The pilot study was aimed at assessing the consistency and stability of the responses. The
reliability index was 0.87 using the Person Product Correlation coefficient formula (r). The
Cronbach alpha was also adopted to reconfirm the internal consistency of the questionnaire which
recorded a correlation coefficient value of 0.89. These two values indicated that the instrument is
very reliable for use hence it was administered to the respondents and only 597 respondents
completely filled the questionnaire and the data retrieved were used in the analysis. The mean and
standard deviation analytical method was used in answering the two research questions while the
single hypothesis was tested using the z-test statistical tool at 0.05 level of significance.

Results and Findings
Research Question 1:
What are the various areas that AI-powered tools will be applied for effective school management
in Nigeria?

Table 1: Mean and standard deviation on the ratings of academic and non-academic staff of
selected Nigerian universities on the various areas that AI-powered tools will be applied for
effective school management in Nigeria

 SN ITEMS                                            X1      SD1     X2      SD2      DECISION

 1    Institutions’ administration                   2.80    1.11    2.73    1.00     Agreed

 2    Curriculum development                         2.78    1.09    2.91    1.17     Agreed

 3    Research and development                       2.60    0.92    2.64    0.90     Agreed

 4    Students’ assessment                           2.64    0.90    2.67    0.92     Agreed

 5    Cleaning supervision                           2.44    0.71    2.39    0.68     Disagreed

                                                     2.65    0.95    2.67    0.93

Table 1 shows the responses of academic and non-academic staff of the selected universities on
the various areas the AI-powered tools can be applied to influence the effectiveness of school
management in Nigeria. From the data in table 1, items 1 to 4 have weighted mean scores above
the criterion mean of 2.5. Given this position, they are adjudged the different areas where AI can

             International Journal of Education, Social and Management Science (IJESMS)               68
                                          Volume 1, Issue:1.

             INTERNATIONAL JOURNAL OF EDUCATION, SOCIAL AND MANAGEMENT SCIENCE
                                                        (IJESMS) VOLUME 1, ISSUE:1.



be applied to drive effectiveness in school management in Nigeria. Item 5 scored lower than the
2.5 bench mark and was rejected as a way AI can enhance school management in Nigeria. This
implies that both the academic and non-academic staff of Nigerian institutions agreed that if AI-
powered tools are used in the administration of the institutions, curriculum development, research
and development as well as students’ assessment, the management of education in Nigeria will
become more effective but it may not have effect on cleaning supervision. Based on the grand
means for the academic and non-academic staff which stood at 2.65 and 2.67 respectively, it can
be judged that the adoption of AI-powered tools will influence the effectiveness of school
management operations in the areas listed in table 1.

Research Question 2
In what ways will the application of AI-powered tools impact on the effectiveness of school
management in Nigeria?

Table 2: Mean and standard deviation on the ratings of academic and non-academic staff on
the impact of AI-powered tools on the effectiveness of school management in Nigeria

 SN ITEMS                                            X1      SD1     X2      SD2      DECISION

 6    Enhanced management efficiency                 3.10    1.26    2.72    1.00     Agreed

 7    Data driven-decision                           2.75    1.07    2.73    1.00     Agreed

 8    Resource optimization                          2.62    0.93    2.65    0.95     Agreed

 9    Streamlined communication                      2.60    0.92    2.77    1.05     Agreed

 10   Enhanced security and safety                   2.61    0.92    2.55    0.86     Agreed

                                                     2.74    1.02    2.68    0.97

Table 2 is an array of the different ways that AI-powered tools will influence the effectiveness of
school management in Nigeria. In analyzing research question 2, the weighted mean scores are
higher than the criterion score of 2.5. This indicates that the two sets of respondents generally
accepted that the items in table 2 are the appropriate ways that the adoption of AI-powered tools
will make school management become more effective in Nigeria. This result actually means that
AI-powered tools help school leadership in Nigeria to attain enhanced management efficiency,
data-driven decision, resource optimization, streamlined communication as well as enhanced
security of students and school plants. This result is further validated by their grand mean values
of 2.74 for the academic and 2.68 for the non-academic staff.




             International Journal of Education, Social and Management Science (IJESMS)               69
                                          Volume 1, Issue:1.

              INTERNATIONAL JOURNAL OF EDUCATION, SOCIAL AND MANAGEMENT SCIENCE
                                                         (IJESMS) VOLUME 1, ISSUE:1.



Testing of Hypothesis
H0: There is no significant difference in the mean ratings of academic and non-academic staff of
selected universities on the adoption of AI-powered tools for effective school management in
Nigeria.

In testing the hypothesis, the average of the grand mean and that of the standard deviation were
computed from the respective mean and standard deviation figures in tables 1 and 2 hence applied
in table 3 below.

Table 3: Summary of z-test analysis on the mean ratings of academic and non-academic staff
on the application of AI-powered tools for effective school management in Nigeria.

 Subjects       N=600       Mean       SD             Df         z-cal      z-critical      Decision
 Academic
 Staff          300         2.70       0.99
                                                      588        1.17       1.96            Rejected
 Non-           300         2.68       0.95
 academic
 Staff

The data on table 2 showed the summaries of the scores, means, standard deviations and the z-test
of difference between the mean ratings of academic and non-academic staff on adoption of AI for
effective school management in Nigerian universities. The average means scores of the academic
and non-academic staff of public tertiary institutions are 2.70 and 2.68 respectively while their
standard deviation stood at 0.99 and 0.95. The z-test calculated value is 1.17 while the z-critical
value recorded 1.96 using 588 degree of freedom at 0.05 level of significance. Given this result,
the z-calculated is greater than the z-critical and this indicates that there is no significant difference
between the mean ratings of academic and non-academic staff on the adoption of AI-powered tools
to drive effectiveness in the management of school in Nigeria. This give enough credence for the
acceptance of the null hypothesis which stated that there is no significant difference in the mean
ratings of academic and non-academic staff of public tertiary institutions on the application of AI-
powered tools for effective school management in Nigeria and the acceptance of the alternative
hypothesis.

Conclusion
This study examined the impact of AI-powered tools on the effectiveness of school management
in Nigeria and the findings revealed that AI can improve management efficiency, communication,
security and safety, personalized learning, curriculum development, student engagement,
innovation and optimize administrative processes. The researcher concludes that the integration of
Artificial Intelligence (AI) in school management activities has the potential to transform the


              International Journal of Education, Social and Management Science (IJESMS)                     70
                                           Volume 1, Issue:1.

              INTERNATIONAL JOURNAL OF EDUCATION, SOCIAL AND MANAGEMENT SCIENCE
                                                         (IJESMS) VOLUME 1, ISSUE:1.



overall education system in Nigeria and result to better quality and standard of education in the
country.

Recommendations
Based on the study findings, the researcher recommended as follows;

   1. The government should prioritise the application of AI- powered tools in the education
      system in Nigeria so as to achieve effective school management and higher standard of
      education.
   2. School managers in Nigeria should develop strategic plans for AI adoption, taking into
      account their unique needs and challenges and should invest in modern infrastructure,
      including high-speed internet connectivity and computer hardware, to support AI adoption.
   3. The Nigerian government should provide funding and support for educational institutions
      to adopt AI and develop AI-powered educational tools and platforms and also develop
      national policies and guidelines for AI adoption in tertiary institutions.
   4. The government should promote AI education and awareness among students, faculty, and
      staff in tertiary institutions.
   5. Institutional leaders should provide training and capacity-building programs for faculty and
      staff in tertiary institutions to develop the necessary skills to effectively deploy and utilise
      AI tools.



                                            References
Adebisi, M. S. (2021). Artificial intelligence in education: A review of the literature. Journal of
     Educational Technology Development and Exchange, 10(2), 266-279.

AFSA (2022) Artificial Intelligence and Education.

Akinwumi, F. & Jayeoba, A. O. (2004). Principles and Practice of Educational Management.
      Ibadan: Bash-Moses Printing Co.

Akpan, E. E. & Nwozuzu, J. (2019). The Impact of artificial intelligence on tertiary education in
     Nigeria. International Journal of Advanced Research in Computer Science, 12(2), 3191-
     3204.

Akubueze, J. O. & Amaefula, M.O. (2017). The benefits and challenges of digital education in
      Nigeria. Journal of Scientific Perspective 8(1), 470-483.




             International Journal of Education, Social and Management Science (IJESMS)                  71
                                          Volume 1, Issue:1.

              INTERNATIONAL JOURNAL OF EDUCATION, SOCIAL AND MANAGEMENT SCIENCE
                                                         (IJESMS) VOLUME 1, ISSUE:1.



Alabi, O. O. (2020). Artificial intelligence and education: A review of the literature. International
       Journal of Emerging Technologies in Learning, 15(1), 4-15.

Bakare, G. A. (2019). The impact of artificial intelligence on student engagement in Nigerian
       universities. Journal of Educational Technology Systems, 48(1), 34-45

Campela, A.M. (2016). Effect of administration of computer education on Nigerian sustainable
     development. International Journal of Computer Education and Contemporary Studies,
     16(2), 344-356

Ezekoka, M.U. & Uzozie, O. (2018). Computer and information technology: Tool for educational
     development in Nigeria. Journal of Educational Technology, 20(1), 237-245

Fasasi, Y. A. (2011). Managerial Behaviour in Educational Organisations in Nigeria.
       International Journal of Academic Research in Business & Social Sciences. 1(2), 127-
       136.

Ibrahim, A. O. (2019). The effect of artificial intelligence on academic performance of Nigerian
       universities. International Journal of Science Education, 14(6), 2242-2255

Imalah, A. & Alagoli, E.M. (2020). Artificial intelligence and education in Nigeria: A review of
       the outcomes in Nigerian universities. Journal of Education and Human Development,
       10(1), 2611-2624

Japhtani, E. S. & Capelo, A. O. (2018). The Role of artificial intelligence in enhancing teaching
      and learning in Nigerian universities. Journal of Computer Education, 6(1), 412-426

Obizue, E.C. & Obizue, M.N. (2018). Politics of digitalisation of education in Nigeria: Programme
     accreditation for quality assurance in Nigerian tertiary education. Journal of African
     Research Scholars. 4(2), 211-226

Ogunode, N.J. & Gregory, D.N. (2025). Artificial intelligence in education administration.
     International Journal on Orange Technology, 7(2), 56-65

Ogunsola, O. O. (2019). The Role of Artificial intelligence in enhancing student learning. Journal
     of Educational Computing Research, 11(3), 144-132

Olatunde, O. & Abioye, B.M (2019). Emerging technologies and learning outcome in Nigerian
     universities: A survey. Journal of Educational Technology and Society, 21(2), 321-335

Udekamna, A. & Nwafor, A. O. (2022). Artificial intelligence in Nigerian education: Challenges
     and opportunities. Journal of Educational Computing Research, 6(2), 1337-1349


              International Journal of Education, Social and Management Science (IJESMS)                72
                                           Volume 1, Issue:1.