Journal of Public Administration and Governance
                                                                           ISSN 2161-7104
                                                                      2022, Vol. 12, No. 2



Transparency and Accountability of Managing School
                         Financial Resources
                                Millie Rose Gaspar
            Department of Education (DepEd) - Division of Nueva Ecija


                                Jocelyn P. Gabriel
  Natural and Applied Sciences Department, Nueva Ecija University of Science and
                                   Technology
       NEUST, General Tinio St., Quezon Dist., Cabanatuan City, Philippines


                                Manuel B. Manuel
             College of Public Administration and Disaster Management
                 Nueva Ecija University of Science and Technology
                                 Sumacab Campus


                                Divina S. Ladrillo
                               College of Education
                      Pampanga State Agricultural University


                              Evangeline R. Gabriel
                           College of Teacher Education
                   President Ramon Magsaysay State University


                     Arneil G. Gabriel (Corresponding author)
College of Public Administration and Disaster Management, Nueva Ecija University of
                               Science and Technology
       NEUST, General Tinio St., Quezon Dist., Cabanatuan City, Philippines
                        E-mail: gabrielarneil77@gmail.com

                                        102                          http://jpag.macrothink.org

                                               Journal of Public Administration and Governance
                                                                                 ISSN 2161-7104
                                                                            2022, Vol. 12, No. 2



Received: June 5, 2022     Accepted: August 2, 2022      Online published: August 4, 2022
doi:10.5296/jpag.v12i2.20146          URL: https://doi.org/10.5296/jpag.v12i2.20146


Abstract
Transparency and accountability are essentials to the operation of governments regardless of
political systems. They are tools to prevent corruption. Transparency and accountability are
twin requirements in managing school financial resources. Transparency as a requirement
ensures that sound and efficient utilization of resources is maintained while transparency
makes opportunity for greater accountability. The study looks into the behavior of school
heads on how they manage financial resources of their schools using the parameters of
transparency and accountability. The locale of the study is in the province of Nueva in the
Philippines. The findings showed that most school heads and finance staff possess
graduate-level educational qualification and experienced financial managers. The least
accountability parameter of the respondents is in the domain of asset management while it
showed the least scores for transparency domain in the area of budgeting. School financial
managers encountered challenges which include policy-related procedures, differences in the
market prices of supplies and equipment against the programmed budget, and limited
opportunities for seminars/trainings regarding school financial management. The late release
of budget allocation to schools, lack of adequate skilled manpower essential for effective
budget utilization, engagement of school management on different duties, lack of planning
and performance of school activities together with stakeholders and interferences of school
principals are among the critical challenges that may render ineffective financial resource
utilization in secondary schools.
Keywords: Transparency, accountability, financial management, corruption, governance
1. Introduction
Transparency and accountability are essentials to the operation of governments. They are
tools to prevent corruption (Gabriel, 2017; Gabriel & Ong, 2018). Its significance compels
governments to provide legal basis for its observance both in terms of theory and practice. In
fact, section 28, Article II of the 1987 Philippine Constitution provides that the State must
adopt and implement a policy of full public disclosure of all its transactions involving public
interest, subject to reasonable conditions prescribed by law. Transactions involving the use of
public funds falls under the concept of “public interest”. Likewise, Chapter 1, Section 5,
Paragraph (c) of the Republic Act No. 9155 also known as "Governance of Basic Education
Act of 2001" emphasizes that; “The principles of accountability and transparency shall be
operationalized in the performance of functions and responsibilities at all levels.” This means
that under all circumstances units and divisions of an agency of the government, the
observance of the twin principles is imperative. The public schools, being funded by the
government, are no exemption. Education funds should be utilized based on the parameters of


                                             103                           http://jpag.macrothink.org

                                                Journal of Public Administration and Governance
                                                                                  ISSN 2161-7104
                                                                             2022, Vol. 12, No. 2

equity, efficiency, transparency, and public accountability.
1.1 School Financial Management
Transparency and accountability is a tool to strengthen school financial management. In the
Philippines, the accomplishments of public schools depend on the way a school head
manages school funds given by the government. They are ; Maintenance and Other Operating
expenses (MOOE), the School-Based Management Grants (SBM), and School-Based Repair
and Maintenance Scheme funds (SBRMS). The SBM and the SBRMS could be released
depending on the identified needs of the school. The request for release is initiated by the
Parents Teachers Association Fund (PTA) from the Special Education Fund (SEF) of the
LGU to be released annually among selected schools. The essence of transparency and
accountability is to strengthen financial management by ensuring in the school system budget
planning and preparation and an efficient implementation and monitoring system.
1.2 Accountability
Anggraini (2013) defined accountability as a state rated for the quality of its performance in
completing a task to which it is responsible. It is the obligation of the managers assigned to
manage public resources and all the aspects related to them. These managers must be able to
answer the things about the fiscal accountability of the organization. By consensus,
accountability ideally encompasses answerability and enforceability.             Answerability
refers to the responsibility of financial managers to provide information and justification for
their actions. Meanwhile, enforceability refers to the possibility of imposing penalties or
consequences on financial managers for failing to answer accountability claims (Goetz &
Jenkins, 2005).
Lastly, the different financial accountability components have been stressed by various
authors. Such components of financial accountability are the following, which will be
explored in this study: budgeting, accounting, procurement, and asset management (Batley,
2006; Goetz & Jenkins, 2005; Harrison et al., 2011; Moyes et al., 2006; Viswesvaran, 2002;
Wilks & Zimbelman, 2004)
1.3 Transparency
According to Castillo & Gabriel (2020), transparency, as a practice, allows the internal and
external forces of governance to inquire into, have access to, and influence to a certain extent
the, government operations. Transparency is opening up government and governance to
public scrutiny and encouraging greater participation of citizens (Castillo & Gabriel, 2020).
For its part, the Department of Education promotes transparency and accountability in school
governance. Schools are mandated to put up a Transparency Board, displaying the liquidation
report of school funds posted in conspicuous places within the school premises. The report
should be clear, easy to read, accessible, and up to date.
Suk Kim et al. (2005), Castillo & Gabriel (2020), Bellver & Kaufmann (2005), Prat (2005),
Birkinshaw (2006), Ferry & Eckersley (2015), Medina (2012), & Puruwita et al. (2014) cited
that the importance of transparency is the stimulation of ethical awareness among citizens.


                                               104                          http://jpag.macrothink.org

                                               Journal of Public Administration and Governance
                                                                                 ISSN 2161-7104
                                                                            2022, Vol. 12, No. 2

Similarly, transparency is being ensured to make all school stakeholders aware of the
financial status of the schools and the financial decisions and actions of the school financial
leaders.
Transparency and accountability are twin requirements of the law in managing school
financial resources. Transparency as a requirement ensures that sound and efficient utilization
of resources is maintained. Regardless of levels of transparency and accountability observed,
the fact remains that observance of this principles creates compelling reason to meticulously
consider potential expenditures and disbursement of government resources in the basic
education in the Philippines thereby preventing graft and corruption.
In the Philippine basic educational system (Reyes Jr., 2007) is considered to be one of the
most corrupt agencies in the Philippines. Among their two programs; Textbook Delivery has
been ineffective in terms of controlling corruption. In addition, corruption in the Philippine
education according to Chua (1999) and Chua (2001), is an educational bureaucracy that is
barely able to deliver the most basic educational services to the country’s 15 million public
school students, It was in 2019 when the Commission on Audit flagged DepED for aging
unliquidated cash advances of 1.9 billion (Araga, 2019). At present, DepEd strengthens
campaign against graft and corruption thru the creation of Anti-Corruption committees
through DepEd Order No. 7 series of 2022 which also provides mobilization of civil society
organization of the private sector as stakeholder representatives to the committee. The
increase in the budget utilization of the Basic Education in the Philippines is useless when
appropriation of the same shall not be the subject of citizens check. Reform in the handling
and management of school financial resources may take effect on the manner transactions are
left open for public scrutiny. In this particular study, the study looks into the behavior of
school heads and the manner they manage and use financial resources of their school using as
parameters transparency and accountability. With the hope that in so doing, gaps in the
management of financial resources of secondary schools in the Philippines may become
rationalize and useful to the needs and reality on the ground. This study will provide useful
inputs.
1.4 Conceptual Framework/Theoretical Framework
This research study was based on the concepts of accountability and transparency and the Felt
Accountability Theory. In the school’s case, financial accountability includes defining the
utilization of school resources for the parents and other school stakeholders.
The connection between the frameworks and the paradigm of this study shows that
accountability and transparency mechanisms are important tools of governance to evaluate
and, when necessary, sanction the behavior of financial managers. The paradigm of this
research study is illustrated in Figure 1.




                                             105                           http://jpag.macrothink.org

                                                                 Journal of Public Administration and Governance
                                                                                                   ISSN 2161-7104
                                                                                              2022, Vol. 12, No. 2




                                        Profile of the School Heads and Finance Staff
      BEST PRACTICES




                                                                                                            CHALLENGES
                         Accountability (budgeting,                        Transparency (budgeting,
                        accounting, procurement, and                     accounting, procurement, and
                             asset management)                                asset management)


                       denotes relationship between variables

                                              Figure 1. Research paradigm
Anchored on the Felt Accountability Theory, the research paradigm highlights the importance
of accountability and transparency in managing school finances. The use of the said theory
guided the researchers in exploring the financial decisions and judgments of the school
financial personnel. Likewise, the theory helped them to analyze their procedural behaviors
particular their behaviors in utilizing school funds. Anchored on the Felt Accountability
Theory, the research paradigm highlights the importance of accountability and transparency
in managing school finances. The use of the said theory guided the researchers in exploring
the financial decisions and judgments of the school financial personnel. Likewise, the theory
helped the researchers analyzed their procedural behaviors particular their behaviors in
utilizing school funds. More importantly, it led the researchers to evaluate the behavior of
school financial managers when it comes to accountability and transparency.
The researchers chose the Felt Accountability Theory as the framework of the study over
other existing financial accountability theories (Legitimacy Theory, Agency Theory, Ethical
Stakeholder Theory, etc.) since it is the most appropriate theory in the context of school
financial management. Felt Accountability Theory highlighted that accountability
mechanisms must be established to evaluate and, when necessary, sanction behavior. In the
case of this study, the theory was used to evaluate the financial accountability and
transparency practices of the school financial managers. From the results of the study,
concerned offices may also be able to reward or sanction school financial managers based on
the school financial performance.
1.4 Objectives of the Study
The study aimed at determining the levels of accountability and transparency of school heads
and finance staff in managing public schools’ finances in the Schools Division of Nueva Ecija,
Jaen South District in the Philippines. It specifically determined the profile of the school
heads and finance staff; and the levels of the school heads’ accountability and transparency in
managing the school finances including the best practices observed as well as the challenges
associated with managing school funds. The paper however dealt with only the insights of

                                                                106                          http://jpag.macrothink.org

                                               Journal of Public Administration and Governance
                                                                                 ISSN 2161-7104
                                                                            2022, Vol. 12, No. 2

school heads, faculty presidents and Parents-Teachers Association(PTA) in the management
of school funds. It does not capture other finance personnel’s insights on financial
management. The paper is a case study and therefore the findings are limited only to the
application for the sample population and other divisions having similar operations. The
study adopts the following null hypothesis: a) There is no significant relationship between the
profile of the school heads and finance staff and their level of accountability and level of
transparency; b) There is no significant relationship between the level of accountability and
the level of transparency appertaining to school finances.
2. Method
The quantitative method of research was employed in this study. The quantitative method of
researcher helped obtain objective data through statistics and numbers regarding school
financial accountability and transparency. The method guided them in testing the hypotheses
and in obtaining quantifiable or number-based results. The study was conducted at the
Schools Division of Nueva Ecija in Jaen South District, Province of Nueva Ecija, Jaen South
District is located in the Fourth Congressional District of Nueva Ecija. It is composed of 13
public elementary schools. This study employed the total population sampling method. In this
regard, all the school heads, finance staff, faculty presidents, and PTA presidents of the
Schools Division of Nueva Ecija, Jaen South District, were the respondents of this research
study. A self-constructed and validated survey questionnaire was utilized to gather necessary
information about the levels of accountability and transparency of school heads and finance
staff in the management of public schools’ finances, particularly in the Schools Division of
Nueva Ecija Jaen South District. Two sets of survey questionnaires were used in this study,
one for the school heads and finance staff; and the other for the faculty presidents and PTA
presidents.
3. Results and Discussion
The profile of the respondents showed that the population of school heads and finance staff
belong to age 41 and above which may mean that they have the experience and familiarity
with their job. This may also suggest that the school heads and finance staff already can
handle the financial school resources given their age and considering their own/personal
financial management experiences.
3.1 Level of Accountability in Managing School Finances
Most school heads and finance staff possess graduate-level faculty and orientation. Majority
of the respondents were younger than middle-aged respondents who were most likely in the
first decade of their financial management experience as school heads and finance staff.
Although some respondents have experienced school financial management for more than
fifteen years, they only participated in less than six trainings. Maybe because the Financial
Management Operation Manual for the Department of Education (DepEd) has just been
cascaded in 2016, and requires dissemination among stakeholders. The following table shows
the level of accountability of school officers in the managing of school resources.



                                             107                           http://jpag.macrothink.org

                                               Journal of Public Administration and Governance
                                                                                 ISSN 2161-7104
                                                                            2022, Vol. 12, No. 2

Table 1. Level of Accountability in Managing School Finances

        Parameters           School Heads and Finance Staff      Faculty President and PTA
                                          (n=24)                      President (n=26)
                                     Mean Response                     Mean Response
         Budgeting                     3.90 (High)                       3.88 (High)
        Accounting                     3.93 (High)                       3.87 (High)
       Procurement                     3.88 (High)                       3.82 (High)
    Asset Management                   3.85 (High)                       3.82 (High)
        Grand Mean                     3.89 (High)                       3.85 (High)

The table shows that both the school heads and finance staff, the faculty president, and the
PTA president agree that there was a “High” Level of Accountability in managing school
finances. The school heads and finance staff have a higher mean response than the faculty
president and PTA president, but their rating is comparable. Across the parameters,
“Accounting” has the highest mean response (3.93) for the school head and finance staff,
followed by “Budgeting” (3.90). Still, for the faculty president and PTA president, it is the
“Budgeting” that has the highest mean response (3.88), followed by “Accounting” (3.87).
The two sets of respondents also agree that “Asset Management” has the least mean response
although it is still high in terms of the level of accountability. Therefore, the school may
further enhance its exercise of accountability when managing the school supplies, facilities,
and equipment.
Based on the statement and the data results, the challenge in budget accountability occurs on
how the school funds will be allocated to accommodate the various needs of the school, given
the limited resources and several liquidation processes. It can be stated that the respondents
agree that the school has high compliance when it comes to accountability in accounting
school finances. They provide proper documentation and follow the government rules and
procedures. Although they have many procedures and reports in accounting school finances.
They still need more training and seminars to increase their capacity to manage school
finances.     The results indicate that the school finances are allocated and utilized based on
the Annual Procurement Plan (APP). Yet, due to the insufficiency of funds and the long
procedures to follow, the procurement process takes time because of the rules and procedures
embodied in the law prescribing a certain period for posting, bidding, and awarding projects.
It can be construed that although the schools are doing their part to manage their supplies and
facilities, it still lacks proper and full security. Most schools are only maintained by school
janitors and utility personnel but not with trained security guards.
3.2 Level of Transparency in Managing School Finances
Based on the summary, the Level of Transparency in managing school finances is “High” as

                                             108                           http://jpag.macrothink.org

                                               Journal of Public Administration and Governance
                                                                                 ISSN 2161-7104
                                                                            2022, Vol. 12, No. 2

perceived by the school head and finance staff (Mean Response=3.89) and the faculty
president and PTA presidents (Mean Response=3.86). The highest rating for the school head
and finance staff was given on the parameter “Asset Management” (3.89). The faculty and
PTA presidents were given both the parameters of “Accounting” (3.90) and “Asset
Management” (3.90). The least rating for the level of transparency was given to the parameter
“Budgeting” by both respondents (3.83 for school finance personnel and 3.76 for teacher and
PTA presidents). Compared to the level of accountability where asset management has the
least accountability rating, the school shows a higher degree of transparency in managing the
school facilities, supplies, and equipment. While the school personnel is accountable for not
following the government rules and procedures, they still have room for improvement when it
comes to transparency in school budgeting. The data show that the school exercises a high
level of transparency by involving the school personnel and relaying the issuances related to
budgeting. However, the school lacks initiatives for inviting external stakeholders during
budget planning. It should be noted that budget planning is a product of agreement and
collaboration between and among stakeholders and not an exclusive domain of school and
financial heads.


Table 2. Level of Transparency in Managing School Finances

              Parameters                School Heads and Finance       Faculty President and
                                               Staff (n=24)           PTA President (n=26)
                                             Mean Response                Mean Response
              Budgeting                         3.83 (High)                 3.76 (High)
             Accounting                         3.91 (High)                 3.90 (High)
             Procurement                        3.88 (High)                 3.88 (High)
         Asset Management                       3.94 (High)                 3.90 (High)
             Grand Mean                         3.89 (High)                 3.86 (High)

Obviously, both groups of respondents have a “High” rating in the level of transparency in
the area of “Accounting”. Most of the school heads and finance staff rated high on the
requirement of putting up “Transparency Board”. In contrast, most of the faculty and PTA
presidents gave a high rating on statement 3 on “Periodic financial statements are placed in
the Transparency Board.” Both statements 1 and 3 are concerned about posting the school
financial statements on the transparency board, and all of the respondents agreed that the
school is exercising it. A transparency board can be utilized in a school context by posting the
financial documents in conspicuous places such as in the hallway, bulletin board, or near the
entrance. The school heads must see to it that there is a transparency board in their area of
jurisdiction. The data gathered showed that the school complies with the national policy of
the Government Procurement Reform Act or the Republic Act 9184. The public schools have

                                              109                          http://jpag.macrothink.org

                                               Journal of Public Administration and Governance
                                                                                 ISSN 2161-7104
                                                                            2022, Vol. 12, No. 2

inspectorates that inspect the procured supplies and equipment. Under the rule on
procurement, competitive bidding is required only on supplies the amount of which exceeds
50,000 pesos. According to most school heads, “they seldom process competitive bidding
since most of their transactions are only small”. It can be said that schools exercise diligence
when it comes to declaring broken or unserviceable government equipment since this would
hinder their output or affect their performance of duties.
School financial leaders have established public asset management transparency practices
based on good governance and accountability. Government schools are accountable for
providing the best possible service to their citizens, and they should be guided by that idea
when managing public assets.
3.3 Best Practices of the School Heads and Finance Staff in Relation to School Financial
Management
The data reveal that the school heads and finance staff mentioned that among the best
practices of the school, the top rank is the “Full compliance to DepEd Orders and Memoranda
regarding the proper use of MOOE funds,” followed by 100% compliance with the Annual
Procurement Plan, engaging external stakeholders to decision-making related to financial
matters, and liquidation of the utilized fund. Noteworthy of mentioning is the full compliance
to DepEd orders and memoranda regarding the proper use of MOOE funds. School heads
adhere to DepEd Order No. s. 2016 (Implementing Guidelines on the Direct Release and Use
of Maintenance and Other Operating Expenses (MOOE) Allocations of Schools, Including
Other Funds Managed by Schools) and the DepEd Order No. 015, s. 2020 (Supplementary
Guidelines on Maintenance and Other Operating Expenses Allocation for Schools to Support
the Implementation of Basic Education Learning Continuity Plan in Time of COVID-19
Pandemic) to strengthen school-based management, accountability, and transparency.
3.4 Challenges Confronting the School Heads and Finance Staff in Terms of School Financial
Management
According to the respondents, some possible challenges encountered by the school personnel
in their financial management include policy-related procedures, differences in the market
prices of supplies and equipment against the programmed budget, and limited opportunities
for seminars/trainings regarding school financial management. The late release of budget
allotments to schools, lack of adequate skilled manpower essential for effective budget
utilization, engagement of school management on different duties, lack of planning and
performance of school activities together with stakeholders, school principals working alone
without inviting others, and interferences of school principals are among the critical
challenges for ineffective financial resource utilization in schools, according to the study.
3.5 Significant Relationship between the Profile of the School Heads and Finance Staff and
their Level of Accountability
It can be observed that based on Goodman and Kruskal’s Gamma, there is no significant
relationship between the profile of the respondents and their level of accountability except
between the sex and the level of accountability. There was a statistically significant strong

                                              110                          http://jpag.macrothink.org

                                               Journal of Public Administration and Governance
                                                                                 ISSN 2161-7104
                                                                            2022, Vol. 12, No. 2

negative relationship between sex and the level of accountability (Gamma= -1.000, p=.046).
It indicates that women are most likely to provide lower levels or ratings of accountability in
managing school finances than men.
3.6 Significant Relationship between the Profile of the School Heads and Finance Staff and
their Level of Transparency
Based on Goodman and Kruskal’s Gamma, there is no significant relationship between the
profile of the respondents and their level of transparency except between the sex and the level
of transparency. The table shows a statistically significant strong negative relationship
between sex and the level of transparency (Gamma= -1.000, p=.028). It indicates that women
tend to provide a lower level or rating of transparency in managing school finances than men.
It is possible since women are more open to providing criticism than men and are more
transparent in dealing with transparency issues in school finances.
3.7 Significant Relationship between the Profile of the School Heads and Finance Staff and
their Level of Transparency
Kendall’s Tau was used to test the significant relationship between the level of accountability
and level of transparency. Based on the result, there is a statistically strong positive
relationship between the level of transparency and the level of accountability. This concurs
with the study of Gabriel (2017) that a higher level of accountability is consistent with a
higher level of transparency. The more public officials and employees exercise their
accountability and exercise of responsibility, the more transparency is needed. This is the key
measure to combat corruption, particularly in managing public funds, the twin principles of
transparency and accountability, which are also among the principles of good governance.
4. Conclusion and Recommendations
The following are the conclusions drawn from the summary of findings:
1. The majority of the school heads and finance staff belong to the 51 to 60 age brackets,
have 1 to 5 years of experiences, Master’s Degree and training attendance. The school heads
and finance staff, the faculty president, and the PTA president agreed to a “high” level of
accountability in managing school finances. Across the parameters, “accounting” had the
highest mean response for the school heads and finance staff, followed by “budgeting.” The
two sets of respondents also agreed that “asset management” had the least mean response,
although it is still high in terms of accountability.
2. The level of transparency in managing school finances was “high,” as perceived by the
school heads and finance staff, and the faculty presidents and PTA presidents. The highest
rating for the school head and finance staff was given on the “asset management” parameter.
The least rating for the level of transparency was given to both respondents' “budgeting”
parameters.
3. Among the schools' best practices, the top rank was the full compliance with DepEd
Orders and Memoranda regarding the proper use of MOOE funds, followed by 100%
compliance with the Annual Procurement Plan, engaging external stakeholders in

                                              111                          http://jpag.macrothink.org

                                              Journal of Public Administration and Governance
                                                                                ISSN 2161-7104
                                                                           2022, Vol. 12, No. 2

decision-making related to financial matters, and liquidation of the utilized fund. While the
teacher presidents and PTA presidents agreed that aside from the full compliance of the
school personnel to DepEd Orders regarding the use of funds, the timely submission of
reports to the District Office and the equitable distribution of supplies among school
personnel, were among the best practices of the public schools.
4. For the school heads and finance staff, challenges encountered by the school personnel in
their financial management included policy-related procedures, differences in the market
prices of supplies and equipment against the programmed budget, and limited opportunities
for seminars/trainings. For the faculty presidents and PTA presidents, the top challenge was
differences in the market prices of supplies and equipment against the programmed budget.
5. There was no significant relationship between the profile of the respondents and their
level of accountability except between the sex and level of accountability. There was a
statistically significant strong negative relationship between sex and the level of
accountability. It indicated that women are most likely to provide lower levels or ratings of
accountability in managing school finances than men. Similarly, there was no significant
relationship between the profile of the respondents and their level of transparency except
between the sex and the level of transparency. There was a statistically significant strong
negative relationship between sex and the level of transparency. It indicates that women tend
to provide a lower level or rating of transparency in managing school finances than men.
6. There was a statistically strong positive relationship between the level of transparency
and accountability appertaining to school finances. A higher level of accountability was
consistent with a higher level of transparency in managing school finances.
It is therefore recommended that:
The school to provide trainings regarding school financial management, the Department of
Education must craft and implement professional development activities along this area.
Similarly, DepEd may tap the services of the Department of Budget and Management and
Commission on Audit in providing school financial management trainings and seminars.
Having obtained the lowest mean response in terms of accountability, stringent reporting
systems must be established on asset management to reinforce a high level of accountability.
Frequent/regular inspections and inventories of the school plant, property, and equipment
must be conducted. Transparency in terms of budgeting can be addressed through the
introduction of bottom-up budgeting among schools. This encourages participation and
promotes transparency among school personnel and stakeholders in planning for the school
budget. The Schools Division Office or the District Office may conduct award ceremonies for
schools with best practices in school financial management. It may reward schools that are
highly compliant with the existing DepEd orders and memoranda regarding the proper use of
MOOE funds.
To address the challenges of school financial management, the Department of Education and
Department of Budget and Management may revisit the MOOE funds of the schools.
Similarly, through the District Office or Schools Division Office, the school heads may


                                             112                          http://jpag.macrothink.org

                                               Journal of Public Administration and Governance
                                                                                 ISSN 2161-7104
                                                                            2022, Vol. 12, No. 2

secure financial help from the Local Government Unit – Special Education Fund for fund
augmentation.
The Department of Education may consider the socio-demographic profiles of the school
heads and the finance staff in providing professional development activities among them.
Heightened implementation of existing accounting and auditing rules and regulations must be
observed to ensure high levels of accountability and transparency. A review of the DepEd
Financial Management and Operations Manual may also be considered to address gaps and
issues. A stringent review of the national and local policies, rules and procedures in terms
of school financial management may be conducted to craft policies attuned to the needs of the
present education set-up. Intensified monitoring of the governance principles of
accountability and transparency in the financial management to discourage corruption at all
levels in the educational system.
Acknowledgments
The authors would like to express their endless gratitude to the following faculty members for
without their assistance the paper should have not been finished. The University President
Feliciana P. Jacoba, Mr. Corinthian Obispo for the typing job and initial evaluation of the
paper, Ms Vilma B Ramos for the criticisms to improve the paper and to Ms. Olive Chester
Antonio for the evaluation of methods and statistical treatments. To all of you the researchers
are forever grateful.
References
Anggraini, R. D. (2013). Transparency, participation, and accountability of BOS budget
management in RKAS program at SDN Pacarkeling VIII Surabaya. Policy and Public
Management, 1(2), 201-208.
Batley, R. (2006). Symposium on non-state provision of basic services. Public Administration
and Development, 26(3), 193-196. https://doi.org/10.1002/pad.417
Bellver, A., & Kaufman, D. (2005) Transparenting transparency: initial empirics and policy
applications, Paper presented at IMF conference on transparency and integrity, 6-7 July.
Washington, DC: World Bank. https://doi.org/10.2139/ssrn.808664
Birkinshaw, P. (2006). ‘Transparency as a Human Right,’ in C. Hood and D. A. Heald (eds.),
Transparency: The Key to Better Governance? Proceedings of the British Academy 135
(Oxford University Press, Oxford). https://doi.org/10.5871/bacad/9780197263839.003.0003
Castillo, L. C., & Gabriel, A. G. (2020). Transparency and accountability in the Philippine
local government. In: Farazmand A. (eds) Global Encyclopedia of Public Administration,
Public           Policy,        and          Governance.         Springer,           Cham.
https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-319-31816-5_3895-1
Chua, Y. (1999). Robbed: an investigation of corruption in the Philippine education. Quezon
city: Philippine Centre for Investigative Journalism. School of Economics Library, University
of the Philippines
Chua, Y. (2001). Stealing from public schools, in S. Coronel (ed.) Betrayals of public trust,
45–55, Quezon City: Philippine Centre for Investigative Journalism

                                             113                           http://jpag.macrothink.org

                                              Journal of Public Administration and Governance
                                                                                ISSN 2161-7104
                                                                           2022, Vol. 12, No. 2

Ferry, L., & Eckersley, P. (2015). ‘Accountability and transparency: a nuanced response to
Etzioni’, Public Administration Review, 75(1), 11–12. https://doi.org/10.1111/puar.12303
Gabriel, A. (2017). Transparency and accountability in local government: Levels of
commitment of municipal councilors in Bongabon in the Philippines. Asia Pacific Journal of
Public Administration, 39(3), 217–223. https://doi.org/10.1080/23276665.2017.1368902
Gabriel, A. G., & Ong D. (2018). Linking transparency and accountability to local legislative
performance in the province of Nueva Ecija in the Philippines. Journal of Public
Administration and Governance, 8(2). https://doi.org/10.5296/jpag.v8i2.13345
Goetz, A. M., & Jenkins, R. (2005). Reinventing accountability: Making democracy work for
human          development.      Basingstoke,       UK:          Palgrave     Macmillan.
https://doi.org/10.1057/9780230500143
Harrison, W., Horngern, C., Thomas, C. & Suwardy, T. (2011). Financial accounting.
International Financial Reporting Standards. 8th ed.
Medina, F. (2012). Faktor-faktor yang mempengaruhi transparansi informasi keuangan pada
website resmi pemerintah daerah di Indonesia, Undergraduate Thesis, Universitas Indonesia.
Moyes, D., Lin., M., Landary, S., & Vicdan, H. (2006). Internal auditors’ perceptions of the
effectiveness of red flags to Detect Fraudulent Financial Reporting. Journal of Accounting,
Ethics & Public Policy, 6(1), 1-28. https://doi.org/10.2139/ssrn.961457
Official Gazette of the Philippines. (2001). Republic Act No. 9155. An Act Instituting A
Frame Work Of Governance For Basic Education, Establishing Authority And Accountability,
Renaming The Department Of Education, Culture And Sports As The Department Of
Education, And For Other Purposes. Official Gazette of the Philippines. The Constitution of
the Republic of the Philippines.
Prat, A. (2005). The wrong kind of transparency. American Economic Review, 95(3), 862-77.
https://doi.org/10.1257/0002828054201297
Puruwita, D., Yunika, M., Darma, R. S., Dewi, N. (2014). Stakeholder perception of
transparency, participation, and accountability of school financial management. Paris
Economics, Finance, and Business Proceedings. Paris: Perancis.
Suk Kim, P., Halligan, J., Cho, N., Oh, C. H., & Eikenberry, A. M. (2005). Toward
participatory and transparent governance: report on the sixth global forum on reinventing
government.          Public       Administration       Review,        65(6),      646-54.
https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1540-6210.2005.00494.x
Reyes, V. Jr. (2007). Corruption and policy implementation in the philippines: a comparative
analysis of the teacher training and textbook delivery programmes, Asian Journal of Political
Science, 15:1, 97-125. https://doi.org/10.1080/02185370701315657
Wilks, T., & Zimbelman, M. (2004). Decomposition of fraud-risk assessments and auditors’
sensitivity to fraud cues. Contemporary Accounting Research, 21(3), 719– 745.
https://doi.org/10.1506/HGXP-4DBH-59D1-3FHJ
Viswesvaran, C. (2002). Assessment of individual job performance: A review of the past
century and a look ahead. In N. Anderson, D. S. Ones, H. K. Sinangil, & C. Viswesvaran
(Eds.), Handbook of industrial, work and organizational psychology, Vol. 1. Personnel

                                            114                           http://jpag.macrothink.org

                                                Journal of Public Administration and Governance
                                                                                  ISSN 2161-7104
                                                                             2022, Vol. 12, No. 2

psychology, 110–126, Sage Publications Ltd. https://doi.org/10.4135/9781848608320.n7


Copyright Disclaimer
Copyright for this article is retained by the author(s), with first publication rights granted to
the journal.
This is an open-access article distributed under the terms and conditions of the Creative
Commons Attribution license (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/).




                                              115                           http://jpag.macrothink.org