QALAAI ZANISTSCIENTIFIC JOURNAL
              A Scientific Quarterly Refereed Journal Issued by Lebanese French University – Erbil, Kurdistan, Iraq
                                      Vol. (5), No (4), Winter 2020
                            ISSN 2518-6566 (Online) - ISSN 2518-6558 (Print)


 [Strategic] Financial school management in Kurdistan region of Iraq


Kameran Noori Abdullah
Department of English Language, Ministry of Education, Erbil, Kurdistan Region, Iraq
Englishhome24@gmail.com




ARTICLE INFO                                                               ABSTRACT

                                      Strategic financial management ability, as one of the key
Article History:                      leverage and key drivers of development, is a subject that
Received: 12/10/2020                  has always been endorsed by experts and executives;
Accepted: 26/11/2020
                                      however, it has been long neglected in the domain of
Published: Winter 2020
                                      education. Considering the importance of this issue in the
                                      area of education, this study aimed at investigating the
Keywords:                             school headmasters’ opinions towards this type of
                                      management and its implementation in the schools of the
Financial management,                 Kurdistan region of Iraq. In this respect, 12 high school
Strategic management,                 principals from this context were selected as the participants
School    management,                 of this study. The interview was used as the research
Headmasters, Principals               instrument in this qualitative study. The findings which are
                                      elaborated in the results section revealed that the education
Doi:                                  system had acted very poorly in developing and improving
                                      the financial management in Kurdistan, and must try to
10.25212/lfu.qzj.5.4.34
                                      provide better and appropriate training for the school
                                      headmasters and increase the school funding to help school
                                      principals remove the problems and difficulties they face in
                                      this regard.




                                                          951

                      QALAAI ZANISTSCIENTIFIC JOURNAL
             A Scientific Quarterly Refereed Journal Issued by Lebanese French University – Erbil, Kurdistan, Iraq
                                     Vol. (5), No (4), Winter 2020
                           ISSN 2518-6566 (Online) - ISSN 2518-6558 (Print)

 I. INTRODUCTION

The strategic financial management as defined by Delkhosh and Mousavi (2016),
refers to a set of decisions and actions for managing the funds and resources which is
the determiner of the organization’s long term performance.

Strategic management is influenced by organizational culture and values. In
determining this kind of strategy we need to know where we are standing now and
where we are heading to. In the educational context for example, in order to act
strategically during the process of financial management, we should know to what
educational needs our activities are going to respond, what problems they are going
to solve, what is the problem solving method, and who is/are going to be affected by
what we do.

Strategic management enables the organization to act in a creative and innovative
way, instead of passively shaping its future. This way of management also makes the
organization take influential activities and consequently helps it to determine its
destiny and to control its future.

However, financial management in the domain of education, as defined by
Oosthuizen (2003), refers to the money distribution and use of the given funds and
school budget in the way of producing and enhancing learner achievement and
providing educational services. Financial management in this area is helpful in
estimating the educational needs, obtaining money and finances based on these
estimated needs, and finally using these finances appropriately and legally to meet
these educational needs (Mpolokeng, 2011).

According to Owen (2006), in the case of education system, all school principals are
supposed to be familiar with the financial numeracy as an important and essential
skill which enables them to set and manage the budget and consequently manage the
expenses.

According to Karadag (2015) and Okafor (2012), it has been believed that poor
financial management practice leads to the poor performance of the organization,
                                                         952

                       QALAAI ZANISTSCIENTIFIC JOURNAL
              A Scientific Quarterly Refereed Journal Issued by Lebanese French University – Erbil, Kurdistan, Iraq
                                      Vol. (5), No (4), Winter 2020
                            ISSN 2518-6566 (Online) - ISSN 2518-6558 (Print)

and is the main cause of organization’s failure. Considering this issue and the fact that
in public schools in the Kurdistan region of Iraq, the financial management is the
responsibility of the school principal or headmaster, the question raises that what
strategies do these principals adopt to manage the school funds and budgets in the
best way and what strategies of financial management do they care and use more.
Finding the answers to these questions can be helpful in determining the best
strategies for this type of management, with regard to the extent of success or failure
of these schools in terms of the students’ educational and learning outcomes.
Moreover, since knowing about the difficulties one may face in doing something can
be helpful in thinking and planning to overcome and eliminate those difficulties,
hence the researcher raises the problem that what challenges or difficulties that
headmasters may face in implementing financial management in their schools.

Accordingly, the aim of this study is to explore the type of strategies used by school
principals in planning financial resources and using the finances for effective financial
management in Kurdistan region. This study also focuses on the priorities the
participants give to the financial management strategies, and the challenges they face
in implementing these strategies.

 It has been widely believed that the strategies adopted to manage finances in an
organization directly or indirectly affect the development and success of that
organization. Therefore, studying these strategies and the challenges in
implementing school financial management is important for the impact it has on the
educational outcomes.

Moreover, reviewing the previous studies on the issue of strategic financial
management in school settings, surprisingly no single study had been observed in the
context of Kurdistan region of Iraq, which highlights the significance of the present
study.

This study addresses the following research questions:



                                                          953

                        QALAAI ZANISTSCIENTIFIC JOURNAL
               A Scientific Quarterly Refereed Journal Issued by Lebanese French University – Erbil, Kurdistan, Iraq
                                       Vol. (5), No (4), Winter 2020
                             ISSN 2518-6566 (Online) - ISSN 2518-6558 (Print)

   (a) What are the most frequent strategies used by high school principals in Iraqi
       Kurdistan?

   (b) What are the challenges and difficulties do high school principals in Iraqi
       Kurdistan face in the process of school financial management?

Methodology

Participants

The population of this study consisted of all high school principals in Erbil City,
Kurdistan region of Iraq. Using simple random sampling method, 12 high schools in
the Erbil of Kurdistan were selected, and since in this context, the head masters are
responsible for managing the school resources and finances, the principals of these
six schools were selected as the participants in this study.

Instruments

A semi-structured interview was used as the research instrument in this study. Hence
this study is a qualitative study.

Interview

A semi-structured interview was used as the data collection instrument in this study.
The main questions asked during interview session included the educational
background and experience of the participants in the area of financial management,
the strategies used by the participants for effective financial management, the main
strategies the participants use to manage the finance of their schools, the sources of
the finances the schools receive, and the challenges and difficulties they encounter
during the implementation of the financial management. Guided questioning was
also used by the researcher during the interview to encourage the participants’ more
explanations and elaborations on the topic wherever needed, and therefore gain
more information and eliminate the ambiguities.

The questions raised in the interview session were as follows:
                                                           954

                      QALAAI ZANISTSCIENTIFIC JOURNAL
             A Scientific Quarterly Refereed Journal Issued by Lebanese French University – Erbil, Kurdistan, Iraq
                                     Vol. (5), No (4), Winter 2020
                           ISSN 2518-6566 (Online) - ISSN 2518-6558 (Print)

   1. In your school who is/are responsible for the financial management, except
      you?

   2. What are the sources of funding for your school? Where do you get the school
      funding from?

   3. What do you think strategic financial management stands for? What
      strategies do you use for school financial management?

   4. What challenges and difficulties do you face in the process of school financial
      management?

   5. How do you prioritize the school budget?

   6. Have you received financial training before taking this responsibility?

   7. Does the school report about the annual school budget and its way of
      spending to parents or any related organization?

   8. Does the school budget suffice the school needs?

   9. Does the school has a safety room or specific office place for keeping and
      managing the school funds?

   10. As a responsible person in this case, do you keep a record of school expenses?

   11. What do you do to raise school funds?

Procedure

The participants were interviewed by the researcher in different days. During the
interview sessions, the researcher asked the questions which were designed in
advance and tried to elicit more information from the participants’ responses and
clarify their responses to the interview questions, whenever needed.

It must be asserted that ethical issues where considered during the administration of
the interview sessions, and the confidentiality of data were guaranteed.
                                                         955

                       QALAAI ZANISTSCIENTIFIC JOURNAL
              A Scientific Quarterly Refereed Journal Issued by Lebanese French University – Erbil, Kurdistan, Iraq
                                      Vol. (5), No (4), Winter 2020
                            ISSN 2518-6566 (Online) - ISSN 2518-6558 (Print)

Data Analysis and Results

Considering the interview results, the qualitative analysis had been conducted. Using
open-coding strategy, the data were reduced to manageable patterns and themes
and these patterns were identified and reported.

According to the participants’ responses to each of the questions raised in the
interview sessions, we came up with the following results and findings:

Participants’ responses to the question ≠1 (In your school who is/are responsible for
the financial management, except you?)

Approximately all of the participants claimed that they were the main person
responsible for the school financial management, while few of these schools (n=3)
hired accountants to help them in the management of the funds and expenses. In this
respect one of the participants explained that:

“…basically, as we can see in developed countries, the schools must have accountants
officially hired by the education ministry, while unfortunately here most of the school
responsibilities are on the back of headmasters including financial management
which is a very important job.”

Accordingly, another participants also elaborated that:

“…the government doesn’t hire accountants for the schools and doesn’t pay for them
if the schools hire them by themselves, because they consider our schools not big
enough to need it. Therefore it is considered the responsibility of the school principals
only. But some big schools with large number of students, use the school budgets to
hire accountants or skilled people to help them in managing the budget and the
financial issues. But even in this case, still the principal remains as the main person
responsible for this work.”

It must be noted that the three school principals which used the help of accountants
in their process of financial management, declared that the accountants they hired

                                                          956

                       QALAAI ZANISTSCIENTIFIC JOURNAL
              A Scientific Quarterly Refereed Journal Issued by Lebanese French University – Erbil, Kurdistan, Iraq
                                      Vol. (5), No (4), Winter 2020
                            ISSN 2518-6566 (Online) - ISSN 2518-6558 (Print)

were paid for one or two days of work for each month, not receiving a full salary.
That is because they only checked and worked on the financial documents and affairs
done by the school principals at the end of each month, not having a full time job.

Participants’ responses to the question ≠2 (What are the sources of funding for your
school? Where do you get the school funding from?)

All participants considered government as the main source of funding in the first place
(although as it will be discussed later, the budget they allocate is very low). The other
sources mentioned by the participants based on the frequency of statement were
parents’ collaboration in helping school financially (91.6%), school fund raising
activities (75%), financial assistance from outside donors (58.3%), and financial
support from specific organizations and production companies (16.6 %).

Participants’ responses to the question ≠3 (What do you think strategic financial
management stands for? what strategies do you use for school financial
management?)

Majority of the participants (91.6%) considered setting goal and making decisions and
planning for the present time and future of the finances and their management based
on those specific goals as the integral part of strategic financial management. One
participant defined it as :

“it stands for considering all school resources, conditions, needs and goals, and then
setting a plan for how to run the school based on them in terms of how to spend and
manage the finances in the future.”

Similarly, another one defined it as:

“…managing the school budget by strategically planning how to spend them in future
based on what is needed like educational instruments, facilities, and like that, and
based on what are our aims of planning for the school budget and how we are going
to raise the school funds.”


                                                          957

                      QALAAI ZANISTSCIENTIFIC JOURNAL
             A Scientific Quarterly Refereed Journal Issued by Lebanese French University – Erbil, Kurdistan, Iraq
                                     Vol. (5), No (4), Winter 2020
                           ISSN 2518-6566 (Online) - ISSN 2518-6558 (Print)

Considering the strategies they use for school financial management, surprisingly all
of the participants referred to collecting data on the school needs, students’ needs,
the overall situation of the school and its properties, and the amount of budget and
finances, and in general the present situation, conditions and needs of the school,
staff and students, and the present and future needs and expectations, as the most
important strategies for an effective financial management. Half of the participants
also referred to the importance of providing short time plans like 2-3 years of financial
plans, so that they can be more manageable and have more chance of becoming
successful.

Participants’ responses to the question ≠4 (What challenges and difficulties do you
face in the process of school financial management?)

The main and the most important challenges that the participants faced in this regard,
as all of them mentioned was the high number of school deficiencies, needs and
requirements while having the insufficient school budget and inadequate school
funding. Interestingly all of them complained about the government and education
ministry for allocating very low school funding while their needs are much more.

The other challenges and difficulties based on the frequency of the participants’
responses are as follows:

- Donations received by school from parents are very low, and the parents usually do
not cooperate well in this respect (75%).

-Finding out-of-school donors is a very hard job (58.3%)

Participants’ responses to the question ≠5 (How do you prioritize the school budget?)

Most of the participants (91.6%) declared that the first thing they do with their budget
is to pay the bills (e.g. electricity).




                                                         958

                      QALAAI ZANISTSCIENTIFIC JOURNAL
             A Scientific Quarterly Refereed Journal Issued by Lebanese French University – Erbil, Kurdistan, Iraq
                                     Vol. (5), No (4), Winter 2020
                           ISSN 2518-6566 (Online) - ISSN 2518-6558 (Print)

The other most frequently stated priorities include equipping the school (83.3%),
paying for maintenance, repairs, and construction (75%), and educational affairs
(75%) respectively.

Participants’ responses to the question ≠6 (Have you received financial training
before taking this responsibility?)

83.3 % of the participants reported that they had received financial training. However,
60% of them were trained before taking this responsibility as one of their university
courses and 40% of them were trained after taking this responsibility during in-service
teacher training courses they had passed. The rest of the participants (16.6%)
reported that they had learned it by self-study and gaining experience.

Considering this issue, the participants in general were not satisfied with the quality
of financial management trainings they had received and they didn’t consider them
enough for making them successful in this respect, as one of the participants stated
that:

“….during our teacher training courses, this specific course were not paid enough
attention and being thought as a serious and important skill, and it was long time ago.
If you ask me, I tell you that I don’t remember about that course. Just few practical
points. The system we were taught with, was old. I think I still need to learn about it.
That is why we need help from an accountant, for I most of the time think something
is wrong.”

Participants’ responses to the question ≠7 (Does the school report about the annual
school budget and its way of spending to parents or any related organization?)

All the participants declared that the report on financial issues including the school
budget, and details about the expenses are reported to both education department
of the education ministry at their own city and to the Parent-Teacher Association.

Participants’ responses to the question ≠8 (Does the school budget suffice the school
needs?)
                                                         959

                      QALAAI ZANISTSCIENTIFIC JOURNAL
             A Scientific Quarterly Refereed Journal Issued by Lebanese French University – Erbil, Kurdistan, Iraq
                                     Vol. (5), No (4), Winter 2020
                           ISSN 2518-6566 (Online) - ISSN 2518-6558 (Print)

Interestingly, none of the participants considered the school budget, enough for
fulfilling the school’s financial needs, specially the fund they receive from the
government

Participants’ responses to the question ≠9 (Does the school has a safety room or
specific office place for keeping and managing the school funds?)

Nearly all participants (n= 11) declared that their schools lack of safety room or
specific place for keeping the financial documents and the related works. However,
the other participant stated that the school has a specific room for the financial
affairs, as he said:

“Yes, in our school we have a small room which is allocated for the works including
financial affairs, though other works are done there too. For example in specific days,
that room is used for different works including paper correction and filing”.

Moreover, all the participants declared that they do not keep any cash at school and
all the school budget are kept in the school’s bank deposit, so that they prevent any
probable problem in this case.

Participants’ responses to the question ≠10 (As a responsible person in this case, do
you keep a record of school expenses?)

All the participants declared that they keep the record of all school expenses along
with the funds they receive, mainly because they were supposed to provide a financial
report for both education department and parent-teacher association.

Participants’ responses to the question ≠11 (What do you do to raise school funds?)

The participants answered this question almost similarly. All the participants reported
that they use out-of-school donors and parents’ financial support. Majority of them
(91.6%) reported that they use fund raising activities, such as holding extracurricular
classes for the students and use part of the tuition they get from the students for the
school needs.16.6% of the participants reported for using charity bazaar, where the

                                                         960

                      QALAAI ZANISTSCIENTIFIC JOURNAL
             A Scientific Quarterly Refereed Journal Issued by Lebanese French University – Erbil, Kurdistan, Iraq
                                     Vol. (5), No (4), Winter 2020
                           ISSN 2518-6566 (Online) - ISSN 2518-6558 (Print)

students sell things like their handmade and save money for school that way.58.3%
of the participants declared that they ask other related organizations or companies
which are willing to be sponsor to financially assist and support the school.

Recommendation:

1- The Ministry of Education has to hire accountants for schools to help them in the
management of the funds and expenses.

2-managing budget and financial issue have to be on back of accountant.

3- Finding a way to increase donations received by school from parents.

4-increasing modern teachers’ training courses.

5-Allocate a big room for the works including financial affairs.

Discussion and Conclusion

As the findings of this study revealed, majority of the participants have almost similar
understanding of financial management and strategic management of finances which
represent that theoretically they are well- informed about the nature of this issue.
However, they mostly complained about the insufficient school funding by the
government and the low quality of financial management training in general and
strategic financial management training in particular during their teacher training
courses, which must be considered by the education system. Moreover, the
difficulties and challenges that the participants proposed in implementing financial
management, are important to be considered and resolved by the education system
to improve the level of strategic financial management in the schools of Kurdistan
region of Iraq.

This study is useful and beneficial for all school principals, head masters, and
education system policy makers.



                                                         961

                       QALAAI ZANISTSCIENTIFIC JOURNAL
              A Scientific Quarterly Refereed Journal Issued by Lebanese French University – Erbil, Kurdistan, Iraq
                                      Vol. (5), No (4), Winter 2020
                            ISSN 2518-6566 (Online) - ISSN 2518-6558 (Print)

References:
Brent, B.O., & Finnigan, K.S. (2009) Financial Management of New York's Charter Schools: A
Normative, Descriptive, and Prescriptive Analysis, Journal of School Choice, 3:4, 368-
396, DOI: 10.1080/15582150903425772.

Delkhosh,M., & Mousavi, H. (2016). Strategic Financial Management Review on the Financial
Success of an Organization. Mediterranean Journal of Social Sciences,7(2),30-34.

Karadag, H. (2015). Financial management challenges in small and medium-sized enterprises:
A strategic management approach. Emerging Markets Journal, 5(1), 26-40.
doi:10.5195/emaj.2015.67

Mpolokeng, T,E. (2011). The Effectiveness of Financial Management in Schools in the
Lejweleputswa Education District. Unpublished MA thesis. Central University of Technology,
Free StateWelkom Campus, South Africa.

Okafor, R. G. (2012). Financial management practices of small firms in Nigeria: Emerging tasks
for the accountant. European Journal of Business and Management, 4(19), 159-169.
Retrieved from http://www.iiste.org/Journals/index.php/EJBM

Owen, J.O. (2006). How to manage. London: Pearson Education Limited.

Oosthuizen, I.J. & Botha, P. (2002). Aspects of education law. 3rd Ed. Pretoria: Van Schaik.




                                                                                                                      :‫پـوخـتـە‬
‫ وەک یەکێک لە کلیلی توانای بەرزکردنەوە و جولە ى‬، ‫توانای بەڕێوەبردنی دارایی ستراتیژی‬
، ‫ بابەتێکە کە هەمیشە لەالیەن پسپۆڕان و جێبەجێکارانەوە پەسەند کراوە‬، ‫کلیلییەکانی گەشەپێدانە‬
‫ بە لەبەرچاوگرتنی گرنگی ئەم بابەتە لە‬. ‫لەگەڵ ئەوەشدا لە مێژە لە بواری پەروەردەدا پشتگوێ خراوه‬
‫ ئەم لێکۆڵینەوەیە بە مەبەستی لێکۆڵینەوە لە ڕای بەڕێوەبەری قوتابخانەکان‬، ‫بواری پەروەردەدا‬
‫ لەم‬. ‫بەرامبەر بەو جۆرە بەڕێوەبردنە و جێبەجێکردنی لە قوتابخانەکانی هەرێمی کوردستانی عێراق‬

                                                          962

                          ‫‪QALAAI ZANISTSCIENTIFIC JOURNAL‬‬
                 ‫‪A Scientific Quarterly Refereed Journal Issued by Lebanese French University – Erbil, Kurdistan, Iraq‬‬
                                         ‫‪Vol. (5), No (4), Winter 2020‬‬
                               ‫)‪ISSN 2518-6566 (Online) - ISSN 2518-6558 (Print‬‬

‫ڕوەوە ‪ 12‬بەڕێوەبەری ئامادەیی لەو چوارچێوەیەدا وەک بەشداربوانی ئەم لێکۆڵینەوەیە دەستنیشان‬
‫کران ‪ .‬دیمانەکە وەک ئامێری توێژینەوە لەم لێکۆڵینەوە چۆنایەتییە بەکار هاتووە ‪ .‬ئەو ئەنجامانەی کە‬
‫لەبەشی ئەنجامەکاندا ورددەبنەوە ‪ ،‬دەریخست کەسیستمی خوێندن زۆر بەخراپی کاری کردووە‬
‫لەپەرەپێدان و پێشخستنی بەڕێوەبەرایەتیی دارایی لەکوردستاندا ‪ ،‬پێویستە هەوڵیش بدات مەشقی‬
‫باشترو گونجاو بۆ بەڕێوەبەری قوتابخانەکان دابین بکات و دەرماڵەی قوتابخانە زیادبکات بۆ‬
‫یارمەتیدانی بەڕێوەبەری قوتابخانەکان بۆ البردنی ئەو کێشەو گرفت انەی کە لەو بوارەدا ڕووبەڕوویان‬
                                                                                                                         ‫دەبێتەوە ‪.‬‬




                                                                                                                         ‫الملخص‪:‬‬

‫تعد القدرة على اإلدارة المالية اإلستراتيجية ‪ ،‬كأحد مفتاح الرئيسية للتنمية ‪ ،‬موضوعًا تم اعتماده دائ ًما من قبل‬
‫الخبراء والمديرين التنفيذيين ‪ ،‬ومع ذلك ‪ ،‬فقد تم إهماله لفترة طويلة في مجال التعليم ونظرا ألهمية هذا الموضوع‬
‫في مجال التعليم ‪ ،‬فقد هدفت هذه الدراسة إلى التعرف على آراء مديري المدارس تجاه هذا النوع من اإلدارة‬
‫وتطبيقه في مدارس إقليم كردستان العراق‪ .‬في هذا الصدد ‪ ،‬تم اختيار ‪ 12‬مدير مدرسة ثانوية من هذا السياق‬
‫ليكونوا مشاركين في هذه الدراسة‪ .‬تم استخدام المقابلة كأداة بحث في هذه الدراسة النوعية‪ .‬أظهرت النتائج التي‬
‫تم تفصي لها في قسم النتائج أن نظام التعليم قد تصرف بشكل سيء للغاية في تطوير وتحسين اإلدارة المالية في‬
‫كردستان ‪ ،‬ويجب أن يحاول توفير تدريب أفضل ومناسب لمديري المدارس وزيادة التمويل المدرسي لمساعدة‬
                                   ‫مديري المدارس إزالة المشاكل والصعوبات التي يواجهونها في هذا الصدد‪.‬‬




                                                             ‫‪963‬‬