Paper—The Role of Edmodo Model for Professional Development: The Uses of Blockchain in School...



         The Role of Edmodo Model for Professional
        Development: The Uses of Blockchain in School
                       Management
                              https://doi.org/10.3991/ijet.v15i12.13571

                                      Fahriye Altınay (*)
                             Near East University, Northern Cyprus,
                             fahriye.altinay@neu.edu.tr

                                          Özge Beyatlı
                Ministry of Labor and Labor Security, Nicosia, Northern Cyprus

                                         Gokmen Dagli
                        University of Kyrenia, Kyrenia, Northern Cyprus

                                         Zehra Altınay
                        Near East University, Nicosia, Northern Cyprus



            Abstract—Schools are social agents to diffuse merits of technology. The uses
        of technology foster professional development. Schools have started to make
        tendencies towards digitalization. Especially learning and teaching contexts be-
        come technology supported. In this respect, school infrastructure and learning
        resources have changed. Teachers play a great role to adopt new changes in learn-
        ing teaching process to the new generation. This makes innovation in schools to
        use new technologies and applications for better education practices. This re-
        search study aims to create awareness on Edmodo model to teachers and develop
        their skills on new learning contents for establishing more digitalized school at
        the secondary education level and analyze the uses of blockchain in school man-
        agement. The research study was conducted with 21 volunteer teachers working
        at the secondary level that they get training on the use of Edmodo Content Man-
        agement System. Case study through action research was done in this research
        study that self-report was used to gain experiences of teachers. By this way, ed-
        ucational online environment was created for teachers for the uses of learning-
        teaching process. Research results revealed that teachers enhance their skills and
        knowledge about the use of the Edmodo content management system increased
        compared to the pre-seminar. In addition, they gained online collaboration and
        research skills. This practice created the culture of technology based innovation
        for their schools.


        Keywords—Blockchain, Edmodo, Content management system, Social net-
        works, Professional development




256                                                                           http://www.i-jet.org

Paper—The Role of Edmodo Model for Professional Development: The Uses of Blockchain in School...



1       Introduction

    Internet has become an indispensable part of our lives due to the rapid progress of
developments in information and communication technologies in the 21st century.
Thanks to internet, individuals reach desired information any time and communication
between individuals in different places of the world is becoming easier.
    Main aim in the education system is success. Studies and new searches for improving
success highlight the system of governance in education. Success is a chaotic topic and
it is linked to more than one factor. For example, for these factors, countries historical
savings, political and economic situations, the sum of sources that are reserved for ed-
ucation, qualifications of teachers, family styles, the importance that is given to educa-
tion by political structure and physical opportunities of educational institutions can be
counted.
    Technology and internet leads to changes in several areas including education and
training. [1]; [2] emphasized in their study that integrating information and communi-
cation technologies in learning and teaching processes was necessary in order to in-
crease student performance. Information and communication technologies not only fa-
cilitate learning; they also help effective learning [3,4,5]. The study of [3] underlines
the importance of digitalization and changes in school systems through the importance
of technology. In addition, having a culture in school within the framework of adoption
and diffusion of technology is crucial for making professional development and inno-
vation.
    Especially with Web 2.0 technologies, individuals communicate with each other,
make friends, and share videos, photos, course contents etc. using social settings. Using
Web 2.0 tools in education ensures that learners enjoy permanent learning [6], under-
take the responsibility of self-learning, strengthen their relations with group works and
improve advanced thinking abilities [7].
    Social networks which are products of Web 2.0 technologies allow online chat and
content sharing as well as introducing oneself by means of areas of interest, personal
information and photographs; they also provide an environment where students can in-
teract using their works and participate in cooperative formations. The fact that today’s
students can effectively use social networks has been noticed by teachers and studies
were initiated on how to use social networks as a tool for learning and teaching [8, 9].
Effective use of social networks in education settings provides such advantages as in-
creasing the learning of students, including them in learning processes, improving their
motivation, developing their writing skills, and facilitating teacher-student and student-
student interaction [10].
    Social network settings not only make learning and teaching in classroom environ-
ment easier; they also provide effective learning environment to people outside the
classroom. Contrary to these advantages, it is stated that using social networks in edu-
cation settings can affect learning process in negative direction [11, 12].
    The study of [13] gives an insight of being global citizenship and underlines the
importance of having technological and managerial skills in the transformation of edu-
cation. In this respect, being leader and managing technology become crucial to foster
knowledge construction [14].




iJET ‒ Vol. 15, No. 12, 2020                                                                   257

Paper—The Role of Edmodo Model for Professional Development: The Uses of Blockchain in School...


   Social networks become people to be connected and exchanging the ideas, infor-
mation. It becomes medium of learning and make learners be active and inclusive to
the learning context. Although social networks have positive sights, it is claimed that
using social networks compromise the authority of the teacher in classroom [14] and
that increase of usage frequency is correlated with the decrease of average grades of
students [15, 16]. According to [15] teachers and parents make more deliberate use of
social networking sites due to such problems and that some schools have even banned
the usage of social networks. Opposite to claimed discussions, educative social network
sites play a great role to induct learners to the learning context and emerge the uses of
technology in interaction and collaboration. “Edmodo” can be given as an example to
such sites. Educative social networking sites allow for teachers and students to use so-
cial network technologies for educative purposes; they also ensure that security and
confidentiality problems can be minimized [17].
   The fact that Edmodo is similar in its appearance to Facebook, which is one of the
most widely used social networking sites, increased its popularity among students [17].
Edmodo is a global education network which helps all students to connect people and
resources which they need to fully realize their potentials. The advantages provided by
Edmodo to teachers are as follows: non-registered people do not have access to the site,
teachers can prevent uncontrolled participation in classes, and it provides a secure ed-
ucation environment which prevents abuse of information on students for malign pur-
poses [17].
   The uses of blockchain is a new platform for the school management. The applica-
tions in storing records, learning identity verification, information security, lifelong
learning for the ownership and protection of content make the potential value of block-
chain in education. School management has an intensified need to moderate merits of
blockchain by increasing the capacity of participatory management through the uses of
blockchain system.
   In this respect, school management gains a value for the trust, security through the
uses of block chain. The subjects of governance and data mining are new; therefore,
education administrators have not got information at sufficient level to foster learning
[18].
   With the development of mobile, connected and personal technologies, mobile learn-
ing has become a basic TEL paradigm with the merits of blockchain system. Mobile
learning emphasizes the use of mobile devices and, unlike traditional types of educa-
tion, focuses on student mobility. It also emphasizes that learning can take place any-
time and anywhere without the limitations of time, location and environment. Designs
that combine both real and virtual learning environments are significant in intelligent
education.
   As the blockchain system become a merit for the qualification and verification of
school management, partnership, collaboration and support for to open opportunities
for the school environments to reconsider and use new learning structures become im-
portant. All data that will be obtained from every shareholder during the process of
governance should be evaluated healthfully and a mechanism which will produce ad-
ministrative results from the available sources should be created. Data mining comes
first among the important tools for this process. Blockchain application in education




258                                                                           http://www.i-jet.org

Paper—The Role of Edmodo Model for Professional Development: The Uses of Blockchain in School...


especially in school management plays a great role to gain trust and security for the
quality [19].
   The uses of blockchain models in management especially in schools make decreas-
ing the costs and increasing the validations.
   It has been witnessed in the literature in recent years that educative online settings
have made contribution to education environments. They particularly provide an effec-
tive learning environment in terms of increasing interaction between students, continu-
ing communication after the class and integrating these settings in the course process
for more permanent learning. In this sense, it has been essential to examine the role of
Edmodo in learning-teaching processes as an education-oriented social learning net-
work [20].
   Today there is need for individuals who are able to think, produce, apply what they
think and find solutions to problems. Integrating new technologies, applications and
settings in learning and teaching processes in educating such individuals is essential so
as to ensure effectiveness of learning. In this case, it is particularly necessary to ensure
the adaptation of teachers, who will integrate these innovations in learning-teaching
processes, to new technologies or applications. In this context keeping teachers posted
about these innovations displays the essence of this research.
   Currently, in addition to the practices implemented for teaching in learning-teaching
process, the change in learning settings is remarkable. It is clear that educative online
settings make contribution to learning and teaching processes, increase student motiva-
tion for the course and make positive contribution to education settings. In this context,
the purpose of this study is to examine the use of Edmodo, which is an educative online
setting for teachers aiming at evaluating Edmodo Content Management System Educa-
tion which is designed for secondary school teachers and to gain opinions concerning
the usage of Edmodo in learning-teaching process.
   The sub-objectives determined in order to reach this goal are as follows:
• What is the level of secondary school teachers as regards Edmodo Content Manage-
  ment system?
• What are the opinions of secondary school teachers concerning the usage of Edmodo
  Content Management system in learning-teaching process?
• What are the opinions of secondary school teachers concerning awareness in the end
  of Edmodo Content Management system seminar?


2       Materials and Methods

   In this section, detailed information is given on research model, study group, data
collection process, data collection tools, research process and application, preparation
of education setting, application and the role of the researcher.




iJET ‒ Vol. 15, No. 12, 2020                                                                   259

Paper—The Role of Edmodo Model for Professional Development: The Uses of Blockchain in School...


2.1     Model of the research
   The objective of this study is to provide education on Edmodo to secondary school
teachers at Ministry of National Education of Turkish Republic of Northern Cyprus and
obtain the opinions of these teachers on Edmodo; thus the study was conducted using
qualitative research method. [21] defined qualitative study as “a knowledge-producing
process with a view to understand the lifestyles, stories, behaviors, organizational struc-
tures of people and social change”.
   In the research, “Case Study” model has been used among qualitative research meth-
ods. Case study is a method which examines one or more cases, situations, settings or
interconnected systems in depth [22]. Understanding the case is an essential element of
data analysis which deserves elaboration. Data are mostly obtained from interviews,
field observations and documents” [23].

2.2     Study group

   The pilot study group of the research consists of 138 of the 221 teachers who worked
at Near East College in academic year.
   The study group which received education in the study consisted of 21 volunteer
teachers who worked at secondary level and participated in “Usage of Edmodo Content
Management System” series of seminars.

2.3     Data collection process
   In the data collection stage of the study, needs analysis was conducted with the pur-
pose of determining the knowledge, skill and experience level of teachers as regards
Edmodo content management system. Semi-structured interviews were conducted with
teachers using interview forms and these interviews were recorded. Later, the interview
records were transcripted. Prior to attending at “Usage of Edmodo Content Manage-
ment System” seminar a preliminary evaluation form was used in order to determine
the preliminary information level of teachers concerning Edmodo. Then a final evalua-
tion for was applied with the purpose of determining the acquisitions of teachers at the
end of the seminar.

2.4     Data collection tools
   During data collection, needs analysis was conducted as the first step. In the needs
analysis, 3 open-ended interview questions were prepared which were developed by the
researcher with the purpose of determining the information level of teachers. At the
stage of preparing open-ended interview questions, literature search was conducted and
problems and expectations were taken into consideration. While preparing the open-
ended questions, recognized principles were taken into consideration and attention was
paid to ensure that they were understandable, free from direction and multi-dimension-
ality, made use of alternative questions and were organized in a logical order [24]. The
prepared open-ended questions were evaluated by 2 field experts, 1 language expert,




260                                                                           http://www.i-jet.org

Paper—The Role of Edmodo Model for Professional Development: The Uses of Blockchain in School...


and 1 measuring and assessment expert. Based on the feedback provided by the experts,
corrections were made and the final form was given to the questions. In addition, other
data collection tools used in the study were preliminary evaluation form and final eval-
uation form.

2.5     Preparation of education setting and designing of materials
   At the preparation of education setting stage, as it would be possible to follow the
face-to-face classes online at uzem.neu.edu.tr address, an application was filed to Dis-
tance Education Centre Directorate of Near East University. This system was chosen
because the participants were knowledgeable about the usage of Edmodo Content Man-
agement System, it provided a high-quality education setting, and it was a course man-
agement system which was previously experienced.

2.6     Application

   Usage of Edmodo Content Management System seminar consisted of 21 participants
who worked at secondary stage of Ministry of National Education schools. Participants
who attended the seminar brought their laptop computers with them. Those who did not
have their laptop computers participated in the class using their smart phones. Wireless
internet was provided to the participants at the classroom where the seminar was orga-
nized.
   Course contents were prepared using “Microsoft Power Point” program and reflected
using a projection so that participants could follow. In addition, application was per-
formed with participants and EDMODO program was covered step by step. At the end
of each class, course contents were uploaded on Uzem system by means of an audio-
visual video which was produced using “Camtasia 9 Studio” program.

2.7     Analyzing and interpreting the data
   In the study, interview questions prepared in order to determine the needs of teachers
working at secondary stage concerning the usage of Edmodo Content Management Sys-
tem, findings obtained from Needs Analysis, findings obtained from preliminary eval-
uation form and findings obtained from final evaluation form were analyzed based on
their answers using content analysis method.

2.8     Reliability and validity
   In order to ensure the validity and reliability of the study, internal validity (plausi-
bility), external validity (transmissibility), internal reliability (consistency) and external
validity (repeatability) actions were taken.




iJET ‒ Vol. 15, No. 12, 2020                                                                   261

Paper—The Role of Edmodo Model for Professional Development: The Uses of Blockchain in School...


2.9     Researcher and role
   After having obtained the necessary permissions required for performing the needs
analysis in order to determine the problem, the researcher passed on to application
stage. In the light of identified needs, preparations were launched for the education
seminar which was delivered by the researcher to teachers who worked at secondary
stage. Seminar promotion posters were prepared and teachers were informed. Seminar
topics were organized using Power Point presentation program; in addition, course con-
tents which were uploaded to distance education center system were prepared using
Camtasia Studio 9 program. Following the preparations, seminar process was initiated.


3       Finding and Interpretations

  In qualitative research process the perceptions of participants concerning Edmodo
Content Management System Application and obtained findings are included.

3.1     Findings on needs analysis
   In the needs analysis, 138 of the 221 teachers answered the questions. Needs analysis
questions consist of 3 open-ended questions. The themes related to the open-ended in-
terview questions are given below. Need analysis becomes an evidence on understand-
ing the nature of awareness on the use of new application in education context and
learning process.

 Table 1. Findings concerning answers given to the question “What is the contribution of Ed-
                modo application to language education?” in the needs analysis form
 Teachers (138 persons)     Perceptions concerning language education of Edmodo application   F
                          Opportunity for effective communication                             26
                          It makes positive contribution                                      18
                          It has no contribution                                              17
                          Does not know/No answer                                             77


   An examination of Table 1 shows that, among the 138 answers to the question “What
is the contribution of Edmodo application to language education?”, 26 people men-
tioned “effective communication opportunity”, 18 people said “it had positive contri-
bution”, 17 people said “it has no contribution”, and 77 people said “I have no infor-
mation” and thus did not answer the question. These questions shed a light on the aware-
ness on new application in language education.




262                                                                           http://www.i-jet.org

Paper—The Role of Edmodo Model for Professional Development: The Uses of Blockchain in School...


 Table 2. Findings concerning the answers given to the question “what are your opinions and
                    recommendations as regards Edmodo?” in the needs analysis
 Teachers (138 persons)     Perceptions concerning language education of Edmodo application   F
                          Opportunity for effective communication                             26
                          It makes positive contribution                                      18
                          It has no contribution                                              17


   An examination of Table 2 shows that among the 138 answers to the question “what
are your opinions and recommendations as regards Edmodo?” 11 people said “it affects
education positively”, 6 people explained “it is not an effective system”, 1 person said
“lack of infrastructure. It is witnessed that 120 people did not answer the question as
they did not have any information. It is clear that a majority of teachers do not have
adequate information concerning Edmodo content management system.

Table 3. Findings concerning the answers given to the question “do you think that Edmodo ap-
                         plication has deficiencies?” in the needs analysis
 Teachers (138 persons)                       Deficiencies of Edmodo application               F
                          Technological infrastructure deficiency                               2
                          It has deficiencies                                                   4
                          It does not have any deficiencies                                    11
                          Does not know/No answer                                             121


   An examination of Table 3 shows that among the 138 answers to the question “do
you think that Edmodo application has deficiencies?”, 2 people indicated technological
infrastructure deficiencies, 4 people said “it has deficiencies”, 11 people said “it has no
deficiencies”, and the remaining 121 people did not answer the question as they did not
have any information on the application.

3.2     Findings obtained from preliminary evaluation form
   Preliminary evaluation form consists of 4 open-ended questions. Below themes re-
lated to open-ended preliminary interview form are provided.

Table 4. Findings concerning the answers given to the question “What are your opinions as re-
                     gards using Edmodo?” in the preliminary evaluation form
  Teachers (31 people)                      Perceptions towards using Edmodo                  F
                          Positive opinions                                                   16
                          Does not have information about the application                     15


   An examination of Table 4 shows that among the 31 answers to the question “What
are your opinions as regards using Edmodo?” 16 people provided positive opinions
whereas 15 people stated that they did not have any information on the application.




iJET ‒ Vol. 15, No. 12, 2020                                                                   263

Paper—The Role of Edmodo Model for Professional Development: The Uses of Blockchain in School...


 Table 5. Findings concerning the answers given to the question “Briefly define Edmodo con-
                    tent management system” in the preliminary evaluation form
  Teachers (31 people)                             Defining Edmodo                            F
                         Social education network                                             18
                         Does not have information about the application                      13


   An examination of Table 5 shows that among the 31 answers to the question “Briefly
define Edmodo content management system” 18 people indicated “social education
network” and 13 people said that they did not have any information on the application.

 Table 6. Findings concerning the answers given to the question “What are the contributions
             made by Edmodo to learning process?” in the preliminary evaluation form
  Teachers (31 people)           Contributions made by Edmodo to learning process             F
                         Fast communication                                                   18
                         Does not have information about the application                      11


   An examination of Table 6 shows that among the 31 answers to the question “What
are the contributions made by Edmodo to learning process?” 18 people stated fast com-
munication and 11 people said that they did not have any information on the application.
Research participants underlined that Edmodo applications makes learning smarter by
adding a value of communication and it makes a need for upgrading knowledge on this
new application.

 Table 7. Findings concerning the answers given to the question “What are the contributions
             made by Edmodo to learning process?” in the preliminary evaluation form
  Teachers (31 people)              Contributions made by Edmodo to learning process          F
                         It affects education positively                                      17
                         Does not have information about the application                      14


   An examination of Table 7 shows that among the 31 answers to the question “What
are the contributions made by Edmodo to learning process?”, 11 people stated that it
supported individual learning, 6 people said “education opportunity outside school”,
and people 14 said that they did not have any information on the application.

3.3     Findings on final evaluation based on the outcomes of training
  Final evaluation questions consist of 6 open ended questions. Themes regarding
open-ended final evaluation questions are given below.

 Table 8. Findings concerning the answers given to the question “I have detailed information
         on the nature of Edmodo content management system?” in the final evaluation form
  Teachers (21 people)                     Awareness concerning Edmodo                        F
                         Those who have information about Edmodo                              21




264                                                                           http://www.i-jet.org

Paper—The Role of Edmodo Model for Professional Development: The Uses of Blockchain in School...


   After the series of seminars, as can be seen in Table 8, to the question “I have detailed
information on the nature of Edmodo content management system?”, 21 people stated
that they had information about Edmodo.

Table 9. Findings concerning the answers given to the question “I know the impact of Edmodo
        content management system on learning-teaching process” in the final evaluation form
  Teachers (21 people)             The impact of Edmodo on learning-teaching process          F
                         It affects learning-teaching process positively                      21


   As can be seen in table 9, to the question “I know the impact of Edmodo content
management system on learning-teaching process”, 21 participants answered that they
had information on the impact of Edmodo content management system on education
process. This shows that research participants increased the awareness on changing
learning contexts by the use of technology.

 Table 10. Findings concerning the answers given to the question “I know that Edmodo con-
            tent management system makes contribution to the professional development of
                           teachers who use it” in the final evaluation form
  Teachers (21 people)            Contribution of Edmodo to professional development          F
                         It affects professional development positively                       21


   Seminars are tools for the professional development. As can be seen in table 10, to
the question “I know that Edmodo content management system makes contribution to
the professional development of teachers who use it”, 21 people answered that they had
information on the impact of Edmodo content management system on the professional
education of teachers.

 Table 11. Findings concerning the answers given to the question “I have information on the
             usage of Edmodo content management system?” in the final evaluation form
  Teachers (21 people)                     Awareness for Edmodo usage                         F
                         Those with knowledge on Edmodo usage                                 21


   As can be seen in table 11, to the question “I have information on the usage of Ed-
modo content management system?” 21 people answered that they had information on
using Edmodo.

Table 12. Findings concerning the answers given to the question “I have information on what
            can be done as teacher, student and parent in Edmodo content management sys-
                                   tem?” in the final evaluation form
  Teachers (21 people)               Using Edmodo as teacher, student and parent              F
                         Characteristics of Edmodo                                            21




iJET ‒ Vol. 15, No. 12, 2020                                                                   265

Paper—The Role of Edmodo Model for Professional Development: The Uses of Blockchain in School...


   As can be seen in table 12, to the question “I have information on what can be done
as teacher, student and parent in Edmodo content management system?” 21 people an-
swered that they had information on the characteristics of Edmodo.

    Table 13. Themes obtained as regards 6th question in the final evaluation interview form
    Teachers (21 people)              Perceptions on the effectiveness of the seminar           F
                           Acquired knowledge and skills                                        21


   As can be seen in table 13, to the question “Please write down the knowledge and
skills you acquired on Edmodo Content Management System” in the end of the seminar,
21 people stated that they were knowledgeable about the characteristics of Edmodo.


4        Conclusion and Recommendations

   The conclusions obtained from the research are explained consistent with sub-objec-
tives and findings.

4.1      Knowledge level of teachers concerning Edmodo Content Management
         System
   Within the framework of the research, a preliminary evaluation form was applied in
order to assess the knowledge and skill levels of teachers concerning Edmodo content
management system prior to the 10 hours seminar applied to the teachers. The prepared
preliminary evaluation form was prepared taking the content of the seminar into con-
sideration. After the seminar, a post-test was prepared and applied so as to evaluate the
knowledge acquired during the study. Seminars were organized to make a change of
according to the obtained findings, it was found out that teachers did not have adequate
information on Edmodo content management system before the seminar but that their
awareness related to Edmodo increased after the series of seminar which was shown by
their answers. [25] obtained the same conclusion in their study.

4.2      Opinions as regards the contribution of Edmodo content management
         system on learning-teaching process
   Another sub-objective of the study was the contribution of Edmodo content manage-
ment system on learning-teaching process. When we examine the foregoing, it has been
found out that the teachers who attended the seminar did not have adequate information
about Edmodo content management system prior to the seminar. During the seminar
which continued for 5 weeks, information was given to the teachers on Edmodo content
management system and its usage and several applications were performed. Teachers
who attended the seminar entered Edmodo system both as student and teacher and con-
tributions that Edmodo content management system could make to learning-teaching
process were discussed. At the end of the seminar process participants stated that they
supported the view that Edmodo content management system could be effective on




266                                                                              http://www.i-jet.org

Paper—The Role of Edmodo Model for Professional Development: The Uses of Blockchain in School...


learning-teaching process. In their study, [26] concluded that 50% of students stated
that Edmodo increased their learning. [27] argues that Edmodo ensures healthy com-
munication not only in classroom environment but also outside the classroom.

4.3     Opinions of teachers concerning Edmodo usage at the end of Edmodo
        content management system seminar
   By means of Edmodo learning environment, teachers can increase the motivation of
students for the class, reach students easily, perform group works and support cooper-
ative learning, participate in groups in various parts of the world and follow the devel-
opments in their field and other fields which, in turn, contributes to their professional
development. In this study the participants were not knowledgeable about Edmodo con-
tent management system prior to the seminar, but they provided positive opinions about
Edmodo after the seminar. This result is similar to other studies in the literature [27,
28]. As Edmodo has a multi-functional learning and teaching opportunities through in-
frastructure and learning styles, after series of seminars, research participants recog-
nized the merits of group work, cooperative learning which make their learning moti-
vation to the learning tasks.

4.4     Recommendations
    Taking the contributions made by technology to education today, encouraging activ-
ities can be performed for the teachers to use Edmodo content managerial system, which
is free, easy-to-use and safe for information sharing, in their classes in order to make
learning environment more efficient. Edmodo content managerial system can be used
to increase the responsibility of students towards the class in their learning environment.
    As schools are change agents to diffuse create knowledge through the merits of tech-
nology, professional development can be gained and school can make adoptions to be
smart learning context. When they become smart learning context, there is an intensi-
fied need to create technology supported learning and teaching environments. Being a
leader of managing learning environments through the use of new technology and ap-
plication is essential. Therefore, teachers as leaders of classrooms need to upgrade their
knowledge in the use of towards digitalization. Within the mission of this way, entre-
preneurship and innovation in schools through the managerial and technological at-
tempts are essential [27, 28].
    School administrators-leaders should consider many factors in order to provide suc-
cessful education. These factors are curriculums, economic sources, competition and
regulations. In modern education systems, school administrators should work with
many stakeholders with an interactive way. School governance foresees that all stake-
holders should be involved in decision making process in order to increase human rights
values [31]. Headmasters and teachers as partners of school culture need to concentrate
on the use of Edmodo in order to support learning and teaching. This way of learning
become a step to diffuse digitalization to make smart learning context in order to en-
hance learning [32].




iJET ‒ Vol. 15, No. 12, 2020                                                                   267

Paper—The Role of Edmodo Model for Professional Development: The Uses of Blockchain in School...


   Teachers in different parts of the world in the same branch can meet at certain times
in Edmodo settings and transfer each other new technologies and methods they use in
their classes. For this reason, it is recommended that teachers at secondary stage should
be member of Edmodo so that they can obtain contribution to their professional devel-
opment and knowledge of field.
   Both educators, administrators and learners can benefit blockchain powered appli-
cations. Educators can efficiently use this kind of application for storing or sharing
teaching material or activities. On the other hand, administrators can record degrees of
students and open access for other institutes [18]. Blockchain will provide administra-
tors to make their organizations more secure and reliable. Moreover, blockchain will
allow learners to access to education easier and more affordable. As the blockchain
applications are decentralized, directly communicating with educators is possible [33].
   This study was conducted with teachers at secondary stage of Ministry of National
Education. Further studies are advised to consider different sample groups.
   Teachers can cooperate with parents using Edmodo learning environment and in-
crease the responsibly of students towards class.
   Technology, which exists almost in every part of life, has started to make traditional
methods become insufficient in every field. Therefore, especially in 2000’s studies and
searches for new methods have seriously increased. Ministry of National Education is
advised to develop educative learning environments according to education needs and
infrastructure [29].


5       References
 [1] Chen, R. J. Investigating models for preservice teachers’ use of technology to support stu-
     dent-centered learning. Computers & Education, 2010, 55(1), 32-42. https://doi.org/10.
     1016/j.compedu.2009.11.015
 [2] Govender, D.; Govender, I. The relationship between information and communications tech-
     nology (ict) integration and teachers’ self-efficacy beliefs about ict. Education as
     Change, 2009, 13(1), 153-165. https://doi.org/10.1080/16823200902943346
 [3] Aksal Altınay, F. Are headmasters digital leaders in school culture? Education and Science,
     2015, 40 (182), 77-86. https://doi.org/10.15390/eb.2015.4534
 [4] Hew, K.F.; Brush, T. Integrating technology into K-12 teaching and learning: Current
     knowledge gaps and recommendations for future research. Educational technology research
     and development, 2007, 55(3), 223-252. https://doi.org/10.1007/s11423-006-9022
     -5
 [5] Lawless, K.A.; Pellegrino, J.W. Professional development in integrating technology into
     teaching and learning: Knowns, unknowns, and ways to pursue better questions and an-
     swers. Review of Educational Research, 2007, 77(4), 575-614. https://doi.org/10.3102/
     0034654307309921
 [6] Boshuizen, H.P.A.; Wopereis, I.G.J.H. Pedagogy of training in ınformation and communi-
     cations technology for teachers and beyond. Technology, Pedagogy and Education, 2003,
     12(1), 149-159. https://doi.org/10.1080/14759390300200150
 [7] Lim, C.P.; Ching, C.S. An activity-theoritical approach to research of ICT integration in
     Singapore schools: Orienting activities and learner autonomy. Computers & Education,
     2004, 43(3), 215-236. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.compedu.2003.10.005




268                                                                           http://www.i-jet.org

Paper—The Role of Edmodo Model for Professional Development: The Uses of Blockchain in School...


 [8] Schwartz, H. Facebook: The new classroom commons. The Chronicle of Higher Education,
     2009, 56(6), B12–B13.
 [9] Sekkal, H., Amrous, N., & Bennani, S. (2019). Knowledge Management and Reuse in Vir-
     tual Learning Communities. International Journal of Emerging Technologies in Learning
     (iJET), 14(16), 23-39. https://doi.org/10.3991/ijet.v14i16.10588
[10] Ajjan, H.; Hartshorne, R. Investigating faculty decisions to adopt Web 2.0 technologies:
     Theory and empirical tests. The Internet and Higher Education, 2008, 11(2), 71–80. https://
     doi:10.1016/j.iheduc.2008.05.002
[11] Karpinski, A.C.; Duberstein, A. A description of facebook use and academic performance
     among undergraduate and graduate students. In American Educational Research Association
     Annual Meeting, San Diego, California, 2009.
[12] Altınay, F.; Altınay, M.; Dagli, G.; Altınay, Z. Being leader in global citizenship at the in-
     formation technology age. Quality & Quantity, 2018, 52(1), 31-42. https://doi.org/10.10
     07/s11135-017-0585-5
[13] Karasel, N.; Altınay, Z.; Altınay, F.; Dagli, G Paternalist leadership style of the organiza-
     tional trust. Quality & Quantity, 2018, 52(1), 11-30. https://doi.org/10.1007/s1113
     5-017-0580-x
[14] Warner, B.; Esposito, J. What’s not in the syllabus: Faculty transformation, role modeling
     and role conflict in immersion service-learning courses. International Journal of Teaching
     and Learning in Higher Education, 2009, 20(3), 510–517.
[15] Junco, R. Too much face and not enough books: The relationship between multiple indices
     of Facebook use and academic performance. Computers in Human Behavior, 2012 28(1),
     187-198. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.chb.2011.08.026
[16] Rakic, S., Tasic, N., Marjanovic, U., Softic, S., Lüftenegger, E., & Turcin, I. (2020). Student
     Performance on an E-Learning Platform: Mixed Method Approach. International Journal of
     Emerging Technologies in Learning (iJET), 15(02), 187-203. https://doi.org/10.
     3991/ijet.v15i02.11646
[17] Maguth, B.M.; Harshman, J.R. Social networking and the social studies for citizenship edu-
     cation. Journal of the Research Center for Educational Technology, 2013, 9.
[18] Brady, K.P.; Holcomb, L.B.; Smith, B. V. The use of alternative social networking sites in
     higher educational settings: A case study of the e-learning benefits of Ning in educa-
     tion. Journal of Interactive Online Learning, 2010, 9(2).
[19] Chen, G.; Xu, B.; Lu, M.; Chen, N.S. Exploring blockchain technology and its potential
     applications for education. Smart Learning Environments, 2018, 5(1), 1 https://doi.org/10.
     1186/s40561-017-0050-x
[20] Sun, H., Wang, X., & Wang, X. (2018). Application of blockchain technology in online
     education. International Journal of Emerging Technologies in Learning (iJET), 13(10), 252-
     259. https://doi.org/10.3991/ijet.v13i10.9455
[21] Grech, A; Camilleri, A.F. Blockchain in Education. Publications Office of the European
     Union, Luxembourg, 2017, 132 S, (JRC Science for Policy Report), urn:nbn:de:0111-pe-
     docs-150132
[22] Denzin, N.K.; Lincoln, Y. S. Collecting and interpreting qualitative materials; SAGE: Lon-
     don, United Kingdom, 2003.
[23] McMillan, J.H.; Nash, S. Teacher Classroom Assessment and Grading Practices Decision
     Making. Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the National Council of Measurement in
     Education, NewOrleans, United States, 2000.
[24] Merriam, B.S. Nitel Araştırma Desen ve Uygulama İçin Bir Rehber, (tr ed: Turan, S.); Nobel
     Akademik, Ankara, Turkey, 2013.




iJET ‒ Vol. 15, No. 12, 2020                                                                   269

Paper—The Role of Edmodo Model for Professional Development: The Uses of Blockchain in School...


[25] Yıldırım, A. ve Şimşek, H. Sosyal Bilimlerde Nitel Araştirma Yöntemleri, 9th ed.; Seçkin
     Yayınevi: Ankara, Turkey, 2013
[26] Kongchan, C. How a non-digital-native teacher makes use of Edmodo. 2012. Available
     online: www.conference.pixel-online.net (accessed on 3.9.2019)
[27] Dere, E.; Yücel, Ü.A.; Yalçınalp, S. İlköğretim öğrencilerinin eğitsel bir çevrimiçi sosyal
     öğrenme ortami olan edmodo'ya ilişkin görüşleri. Ilkogretim Online, 2016, 15(3). https://
     doi.org/10.17051/io.2016.49794
[28] Kılıçkaya, F. Edmodo: Make your language classroom o communit. AATSEEL Newsletter,
     2012 55(1), 7-10.
[29] Altinay, F.; Fedai, L.; Altinay, Z.; Dagli, G. The Impact of Open Leadership in Being Learn-
     ing Organisations for Professional Learning. In Proceedings of the 9th International Confer-
     ence on Computer Supported Education, Porto, Portugal, 2017, 1(FOLSC), 732-735
     https://doi.org/10.5220/0006384807320735
[30] Altinay, F.; Dagli, G.; Altinay, Z. Role of technology and management in tolerance and
     reconciliation education. International Journal of Methodology, 2017, 15(3), 68-72.
[31] Lesinger, F. Y.; Altinay, F.; Altinay, Z.; Dagli, G. Examining the role of leadership, trust for
     school culture and policy. Quality & Quantity, 2018, 52(2), 983-1006. https://doi.org/
     10.1007/s11135-017-0553-0
[32] Gurbuzer, E.; Altınay, F.; Altınay, Z; Dagli G. An evaluation of educational and administra-
     tive decision making process in tolerance school context for job motivation. Quality &
     Quantity,2018, 52(2),1059-1076.https://doi.org/10.1007/s11135-017-0557-9
[33] Özdilekler, M.A.; Altınay, F.; Altınay, Z.; Dagli G. An evaluation of class-teachers’ roles in
     transferring values. Quality & Quantity, 2018, 52(2), 1043 https://doi.org/10.1007/s1113
     5-017-0556-x
[34] Garbade, M.J. The blockchain technology and the tokenization of learning. Altcoin Maga-
     zine, 2018


6       Authors

   Prof. Dr. Fahriye Altinay is Director of Graduate School of Educational Sciences
at Near East University. She is co-chair of Societal Research and Development Center.
Her research interests are management, disability, smart society, online education
   Dr. Ozge Beyatli is graduated from Near East University. She is working at Ministry
of Labor and Social Security. Her research interest is computer education.
Email:ozge_beyatli@hotmail.com
   Prof. Dr. Gokmen Dagli is Vice rector of University of Kyrenia. Dean of Faculty
of Education and Head of department of educational management in Near East Univer-
sity.Email: gokmen.dagli@kyrenia.edu.tr
   Prof. Dr. Zehra Altinay is head of department of educational sciences at faculty of
education. She is vice director of graduate school of educational sciences at Near East
University. She is co-chair of Societal Research and Development Center. Her research
interests are management, disability, online education. Email: zehra.alti-
naygazi@neu.edu.tr

   Article submitted 2020-02-04. Resubmitted 2020-03-27. Final acceptance 2020-03-22. Final version
published as submitted by the authors.




270                                                                            http://www.i-jet.org