Monographic Section

DOI: 10.25115/eea.v39i12.6463
                                                                          Volume 39-12, November 2021 // ISSN: 1133-3197



              Interplay of Shared Leadership Practices of Principals,
           Teachers’ Soft Skills and Learners’ Competitiveness in COVID
           19 Era: Implications to Economics of Educational Leadership
                      KANITTHA CHARERNNIT1, ANSHU MATHUR2, KANNAPAT KANKAEW3,
               JOEL ALANYA-BELTRAN4, P. JUSTIN SUDHAKAR5, SHRADHANVITA SINGH6, GILBERT C.
               MAGULOD, JR.7, JOSEPH JEAN SINCHITULLO GÓMEZ8, NGANGBAM DEVKANTA SINGH9
                        1
                        SUAN SUNANDHA RAJABHAT UNIVERSITY, THAILAND, E-mail: kanittha.ch@ssru.ac.th
                                 2
                                  AMITY UNIVERSITY NOIDA, INDIA, E-mail: amathur@amuty.edu
                                     3
                                      SUAN SUNANDHA RAJABHAT UNIVERSITY, THAILAND
                           4
                            UNIVERSIDAD TECNOLÓGICA DEL PERÚ, PERÚ, E-mail: c18121@utp.edu.pe
                                                 5
                                                  JIGJIGA UNIVERSITY, INDIA
                                               6
                                                AMITY UNIVERSITY HARYANA
                                          7
                                           CAGAYAN STATE UNIVERSITY, PHILIPPINES
                         8
                          UNIVERSIDAD NACIONAL DE INGENIERÍA, PERU, E-mail: jsinchitullog@uni.edu.pe
                                9
                                 MANIPUR UNIVERSITY, INDIA, E-mail: ngangbamdev@gmail.com


                                                              ABSTRACT

          The COVID 19 pandemic had a significant impact on both the administration and instructional delivery. A close
          partnership between administrators and teachers is essential to students' overall growth, particularly in this
          COVID 19 era. This study employed a descriptive correlational research design. A survey was done using online
          to selected schools in South East Asian countries. From the study, it can be inferred that the highly positive results
          are seen on the level of principal shared leadership practices are manifested by the school heads, teachers' soft
          skills enhancement, and learners' competitiveness. The school heads are capable of exuding shared leadership
          aspects on effective communication, proper coordination, direction, and influence. Test of relationship showed
          a positive interplay between principals' shared leadership with the selected variables on teachers' soft skills and
          learners' competitiveness. Research on the comparative impacts of leadership styles will assist policymakers and
          practitioners in better understand which leadership techniques are most successful for specific elements of
          school reform efforts, in our view. Further, the implications of this study will help teachers better their
          interpersonal and administrative abilities while administrators are urged to continue to improve their leadership
          techniques. The result of this present study will provide a way for policymakers and other stakeholders to fund
          allocation and develop a plan of action to strengthen principal leadership in the COVID 19 era.
          Keywords: Shared leadership; Soft skills; Learners’ performance; COVID 19; Learning.
          JEL Classification: M00, M10, M19


            Received: June 24, 2021
            Accepted: September 10, 2021

    Sección Monográfica

DOI: 10.25115/eea.v39i12.6463
                                                                      Volumen 39-12, Noviembre 2021 // ISSN: 1133-3197



            Interacción de las Prácticas de Liderazgo Compartido de los
             Directores, las Habilidades Blandas de los Profesores y la
                Competitividad de los Alumnos en la Era COVID 19:
              Implicaciones para la Economía del Liderazgo Educativo
                      KANITTHA CHARERNNIT1, ANSHU MATHUR2, KANNAPAT KANKAEW3,
               JOEL ALANYA-BELTRAN4, P. JUSTIN SUDHAKAR5, SHRADHANVITA SINGH6, GILBERT C.
               MAGULOD, JR.7, JOSEPH JEAN SINCHITULLO GÓMEZ8, NGANGBAM DEVKANTA SINGH9
                        1
                        SUAN SUNANDHA RAJABHAT UNIVERSITY, THAILAND, E-mail: kanittha.ch@ssru.ac.th
                                 2
                                  AMITY UNIVERSITY NOIDA, INDIA, E-mail: amathur@amuty.edu
                                     3
                                      SUAN SUNANDHA RAJABHAT UNIVERSITY, THAILAND
                           4
                            UNIVERSIDAD TECNOLÓGICA DEL PERÚ, PERÚ, E-mail: c18121@utp.edu.pe
                                                 5
                                                  JIGJIGA UNIVERSITY, INDIA
                                               6
                                                AMITY UNIVERSITY HARYANA
                                          7
                                           CAGAYAN STATE UNIVERSITY, PHILIPPINES
                         8
                          UNIVERSIDAD NACIONAL DE INGENIERÍA, PERU, E-mail: jsinchitullog@uni.edu.pe
                                9
                                 MANIPUR UNIVERSITY, INDIA, E-mail: ngangbamdev@gmail.com


                                                             RESUMEN

          La pandemia de COVID 19 tuvo un impacto significativo tanto en la administración como en la enseñanza. Una
          estrecha colaboración entre los administradores y los profesores es esencial para el crecimiento general de los
          estudiantes, especialmente en esta era de COVID 19. Este estudio empleó un diseño de investigación descriptivo
          correlacional. Se realizó una encuesta a través de Internet en escuelas seleccionadas de países del sudeste
          asiático. Del estudio se desprende que los resultados son muy positivos en cuanto a las prácticas de liderazgo
          compartido de los directores, la mejora de las habilidades sociales de los profesores y la competitividad de los
          alumnos. Los directores de los centros educativos son capaces de exudar aspectos de liderazgo compartido en
          cuanto a la comunicación efectiva, la coordinación adecuada, la dirección y la influencia. Las pruebas de relación
          mostraron una interacción positiva entre el liderazgo compartido de los directores y las variables seleccionadas
          sobre las habilidades sociales de los profesores y la competitividad de los alumnos. La investigación sobre los
          impactos comparativos de los estilos de liderazgo ayudará a los responsables políticos y a los profesionales a
          comprender mejor qué técnicas de liderazgo son más exitosas para elementos específicos de los esfuerzos de
          reforma escolar, en nuestra opinión. Además, las implicaciones de este estudio ayudarán a los profesores a
          mejorar sus habilidades interpersonales y administrativas, al tiempo que se insta a los administradores a seguir
          mejorando sus técnicas de liderazgo. El resultado del presente estudio proporcionará una vía para que los
          responsables políticos y otras partes interesadas financien la asignación y desarrollen un plan de acción para
          fortalecer el liderazgo de los directores en la era COVID 19.
          Palabras clave: Liderazgo compartido; Habilidades blandas; Rendimiento de los alumnos; COVID 19; Aprendizaje.
          Clasificación JEL: M00, M10, M19


            Recibido: 24 de Junio de 2021
            Aceptado: 10 de Septiembre de 2021

  Kanittha Charernnit, Anshu Mathur, Kannapat Kankaew, Joel Alanya-Beltran, Shradhanvita Singh, P. Justin
         Sudhakar, Gilbert C. Magulod, Jr., Joseph Jean Sinchitullo Gómez, Ngangbam Devkanta Singh

1. Introduction

    Academic leaders made a choice to adopt a "digital campus" approach after considering the
increased unpredictability and severity of the next coronavirus pandemic (Harris, 2020). Deciding to
turn to remote teaching and learning necessitated transformational learning for all stakeholders, and
working through the many administrative and organizational obstacles have been tiring and frustrating
(Al Saidi et al., 2020, Vu et al., 2020). Many different stakeholders will probably have a hard time
adapting to delivering online courses, which may demand a variety of adjustments, including methods
of thinking, handling values, and even how to run a company. When faced with social distancing
techniques, leadership practitioners chose to start doing their classes remotely, despite some
professors being unhappy with the fact that they weren't informed on the issue (Ziauddeen et al.,
2020). To acquaint faculty with contemporary remote digital teaching and learning technologies,
academic leaders throughout the country hurriedly planned events. Faculty who are hesitant about
technology-enhanced education will be motivated by genuine leaders. Some academics have no idea
what they're doing and are worried about their well-established teaching and learning routines being
disturbed. Crisis management in academics will need appropriate leader behaviours suited to the
environment of empathy, compassion, and adaptability (Boin, Lodge, & Luesink, 2020, Hutagalung,
Purwanto, & Prasetya, 2020, Arcinas et al., 2021, Ignacio et al., 2020, Lopez et al., 2021, Nuncio et al.,
2020).
    A new toolset of intellectual stimulation, idealized influence, and inspiration is needed for academic
leaders to assist the school community in making the switch to online learning (Bacher-Hicks,
Goodman, & Mulhern, 2021, Dong, Cao, & Li, 2020, Hussein, et al., 2020). Academic administration
should moderate faculty expectations, even though some faculty have rapidly created acceptable
online course offerings due to their inherent desire to innovate. Online courses that have been thrown
up in a hurry aren't always ideal, and some may be poor. Faculty performance will be boosted by
academic leaders who can use the abilities and talents of the campus collective by using a distributed
situational leadership approach (Chiodini, 2020, Hussein et al., 2020, Swaminathan et al., 2021).
    A shared leadership style encourages collaboration and inclusivity. The long-established leadership
theory (Gyang,2020, Love et al., 2020, Netolicky, 2020) works well in academia where followers are
experienced, knowledgeable, and intrinsically motivated. Faculty may be capable of building better
quality online course offerings that establish a community of learners capable of working together to
overcome the teaching and learning challenges posed by the current coronavirus crisis when
leadership is decentralized. A school head must encourage their teachers to embark on new learning
tasks, which helps them feel empowered to improve their abilities. Everyone becomes ecstatic when
the boss recovers. It's critical for the success of a team to have leadership play a central role. Shared
leadership is a successful means of helping schools remain relevant and competitive in an ever-
changing environment. Shared leadership increases group spirit and trust and has a positive effect on
how members collaborate on their shared beliefs and goals (Gonzales & Jackson, 2020, Mukaram et
al., 2021, Price, 2021).
    While leading others, principals set goals and objectives for them to achieve. As a leader, you have
an impact on how events are interpreted, how goals and strategies are chosen, how work is organized,
how people are motivated to achieve goals, how you maintain cooperative relationships, how
members develop their skills and confidence, and how you enlist the support and cooperation of
people outside of your organization (Ardley & Goodloe, 2020, Reyes-Guerra et al., 2021, Sterrett &
Richardson, 2020, Sumarjoa & Muhammadc, 2021). In education, leadership includes collaboration,
where individuals (stakeholders) at various levels work together to achieve a common goal. An
effective leader transforms policy into actionable behaviors and attitudes by using creative and
imaginative methods. In addition, it encourages students to respond quickly and adapt their studies to
unpredictable, high-speed classroom situations. Teacher collaboration with administrators may help
teachers discover innovative strategies for achieving the potential of their pupils, supporting student




                                                                                                            3

  Interplay of Shared Leadership Practices of Principals, Teachers’ Soft Skills and Learners’ Competitiveness in
                       COVID 19 Era: Implications to Economics of Educational Leadership

participation while offering more resources (Ahlström et al., 2020, Allal-Chérif et al., 2021, Chaaban et
al., 2021).

1.1. Research Context and Gap
    Although we do not yet know how to define the shared leadership of managers as related to
company structure, job assignments, and success principles, there are still information gaps in this
area. School governance, effective schooling, and improved performance are among the essential
modern educational administration issues the South East Asian countries face. Our new research
focuses on school administrators and instructors to be more effective at developing educational
programs and using current policies to make students more prepared, more skilled, and more
competitive. To improve the services provided in the local school system, the board of education
should study existing practices and available resources since these details would allow the
administration to figure out how to best use available resources.
    In this study, the researchers attempted to determine whether principal leadership and teachers'
soft skills training were essential to student performance in the classroom. Administrators believed it
was necessary to combine the ideas and efforts of instructors to keep them focused on improving
teaching quality and driving a commitment to the school's growth goals. This may be accomplished by
exploring the school's resources. It will take greater trust and accountability for teachers to feel
comfortable collaborating in an atmosphere that promotes learning. Teachers who are prepared with
such abilities as problem-solving, critical thinking, and communications can better adapt to the ever-
changing situation of the country. Learner-centric decentralization gets a boost with this. Principals are
also given more flexibility for stakeholders to improve their instructional procedures, which helps them
become more empowered and be responsible for their school-site personnel.
    Administrators' responsibility is to guarantee that their teachers have the necessary tools to
achieve their goals (Díez et al., 2020, Navaridas-Nalda et al., 2020, Shen et al., 2021, Smith et al., 2021,
Zhou, 2021). Teachers' professional development should include guidance from their mentors to help
them reach their goals, and mentors should construct their lesson plans to follow this guideline. It is
vital that they create positive, respectful, and trustworthy connections with their workers to make
them feel valued and supported by administrators who are satisfied in their jobs have an easier time
getting along with colleagues and collaborating. Teachers who spend time working with school
administrators to learn about educational programs and initiatives tend to have more cooperative
relationships with them. In turn, if educators continuously strive to improve their own instruction, they
may positively influence their students' education.
    Since teachers must take on so many duties in school, they help administrators by doing other tasks.
It is common for teachers to be alone in the school while they oversee it. Teachers have to handle
classroom management and the school. The principals turn over administrative tasks to teachers while
they are out of the office. Teacher background has a significant role in the issue. The study aims to
discover the administration's level of cohesiveness with teachers and their positive influence on their
pupils through strong communication, problem-solving, and a strong support network. Teachers may
increase their productivity using deficiencies as opportunities when their principals follow an effective
strategy presented by different systematic reviews (Schott, van Roekel, & Tummers, 2020, Shen et al.,
2020, Smith et al., 2021). Teachers who have confidence in their job have the propensity to help others
perform to the same level as them, going above and beyond the expectations of the business and
assisting them with reaching their objectives. People are far more likely to do their best if their boss is
leading them. Hence, this study was conducted.

1.2. Objectives of the Study
   Generally, this study aims to assess the interplay between the principals' shared leadership
practices, teachers' soft skills development, and pupils' competitiveness. Specifically, it seeks to: (1)
assess the level of shared leadership practices of the principals in terms of communication,


                                                                                                                   4

  Interplay of Shared Leadership Practices of Principals, Teachers’ Soft Skills and Learners’ Competitiveness in
                       COVID 19 Era: Implications to Economics of Educational Leadership


coordination, direction, and influence; (2) ascertain the level of soft skills development of the teachers
in terms of problem-solving, work ethics, flexibility, and interpersonal relationship; (3) explore the
interplay the principals’ shared leadership practices, teachers’ soft skills development, and pupils’
competitiveness.

2. Methodology

2.1. Research Design
    A descriptive survey correlational research strategy was used in this study's analysis. Surveys
with closed-ended questions were utilized to achieve the study's goals. It is essential to examine
the relationships between variables in a research project. Thus, correlational research is being
utilized (Bloomfield & Fisher, 2019, Zadeh et al., 2021). Correlational research may be used to
assess the degree of a relationship between two variables. The researcher may make an informed
prediction based on the connections found throughout the research process. G-Power analysis
with a 0.25 effect size was used to identify them. To conduct the study, a researcher created a
questionnaire based on reading a variety of sources. Four education professionals endorsed
them. As a result, the instrument's dependability was determined by Cronbach's alpha. The
authorities issued a letter asking for authorization, signed by them. Mean, and rank was used to
characterize the collected data. Correlational analysis was used to evaluate the study's
hypotheses. Mean, rank, and correlational analysis were used in the research.

2.2. Research Participants, Sampling Procedure, and Ethical Considerations
    It was carried out in 38 selected schools with a 'large' population of teachers that merits a principal
item for the school head. Respondents were assured that the survey data shall be held highly
confidential and shall only be used for the study. From a population of 1,890, the selected 480
instructors were used to create the survey. A Raosoft Sampling Size Calculator with a margin of error
of 5% and a confidence level of 95% was used to calculate the number of samples. According to the
following criteria, research locations were chosen: : (1) Must have a student population of at least
1,000, (2) Must be performing school according to Ministry of Education statistics, (3) "Must be a large
school" Random stratification was employed in the research. Three were the random start number
for instructor replies and five being the random start number for student answers, as shown by the
table below. Participation in the study was voluntary for both groups of individuals, who gave their
informed permission before participating.
                                  Table 1 Participants Gender-Profile Characteristic
                                       Teacher-respondents                        Percentage Distribution
     Male                                      162                                         34%
     Female                                    318                                         66%
     Total                                     480                                        100%
Legend: 4.20-5.00: Very High/ Strongly Agree; 3.40-4.19: High/ Agree; 2.60-3.39: Moderate/ Undecided; 1.80- 2.59: Low/
Disagree; 1.79: Very Low/ Strongly Disagree

   Table 1 shows that women outnumbered males in the poll. According to this, the majority of
teachers are women. Before the research began, each participant was given a copy of the participant
information and data protection forms. Additionally, the respondents' names, confidentiality, and
privacy were carefully monitored both before and after the data was made available to the public and
later. To them, it was essential that they were fully aware of the research's only purpose. Any
information collected about them was kept strictly private and was only used for this purpose. As a
result of the COVID 19 epidemic, data was collected through google survey, zoom application phone,
and messenger video call. Data collection was primarily placed at night to accommodate participants'
schedules. The participants were promised that the information they provided would remain private.




                                                                                                                    5

  Interplay of Shared Leadership Practices of Principals, Teachers’ Soft Skills and Learners’ Competitiveness in
                       COVID 19 Era: Implications to Economics of Educational Leadership

2.3. Research Instruments
2.3.1. Principal Shared Leadership Questionnaire
   Principals' leadership behaviors were assessed using the distributed leadership scale established by
Özkan and Çakır (2017) for the school setting. Thirty-two components make up the scale, which is
based on existing research on dispersed leadership. On a 5-point Likert-type scale, each question asks
teachers to rate how often their principal engages in dispersed leadership activities. There are four
aspects to this: formal framework communication, coordination, direction, and influence (CFA & EFA).
As a whole, the scale is well-suited to the educational setting (X2/df is 2.23 and RMSEA and SRM are
both 0.063, NFI is 0.96, and CFI = 0.98).

2.3.2. Teachers’ Soft Skills
   The teachers’ soft skills were measured using Ngang, Yunus, and Hahim (2015) questionnaire. Some
people define soft skills as non-academic talents, such as communication, critical thinking, and
problem-solving. Others define soft skills like entrepreneurship, ethics, professional moral skills, and
leadership abilities. They include three components of soft skills that will be taught at colleges and
universities. The respondents are required to answer each of the items by selecting the response or
Likert option that they believe is most relevant regarding what is currently in place at the school
regarding staff motivation by the principals. The instrument has computed Cronbach alpha of (0.87).

2.3.3. Learners’ Competitiveness
    To measure leaners’ competitiveness. It was based on the questionnaire of Grum and Grum (2015)
on the competitiveness, training, and culture of students. Responses were solicited on a 5-point Likert
scale ranging from 1 (strongly disagree) to 5 (strongly agree). Frey and Tatum (2016) reported a
reliability coefficient of .91 for this scale.

2.4.   Data Analysis
   To do this, the researchers utilized the following data analysis methods: Responses were evaluated
using frequency distribution and percentile rankings, while the mean, as well as the weighted average
and standard deviation, were utilized to calculate the variables' values. For factors, a formal
comparison was made using a T-test and an ANOVA. Scales like these were used: 4.20-5.00: Very High/
Strongly Agree; 3.40-4.19: High/ Agree; 2.60-3.39: Moderate/ Undecided; 1.80- 2.59: Low/ Disagree;
1.79: Very Low/ Strongly Disagree. SPSS 23 was used to analyze the data.

3. Results and Discussion

3.1. Assessment of the principals' Shared Leadership
    There are four main areas of standard leadership practices among principals: communication,
coordination, training, and influence, as seen in Table 1. The total communication mean was 4.58,
which is considered to be extremely high by most. According to the study's findings, a strong
communication system among instructors is essential for administrators to accomplish the institution's
aims and objectives. According to studies, principals' shared communication methods empower school
constituents to address problems and concerns in a more meaningful and pressure-free manner,
allowing them to see the other side of the coin (Elfrianto et al., 2020, Sapianet al, 2020, Smith et al.,
2021). In like manner, Yao, You, & Zhu (2020) also agreed with this result. As part of a working
environment that may develop trust among its instructors, school heads' communication abilities must
be dynamic and a linking element.




                                                                                                                   6

  Interplay of Shared Leadership Practices of Principals, Teachers’ Soft Skills and Learners’ Competitiveness in
                       COVID 19 Era: Implications to Economics of Educational Leadership


                     Table 1 Principals’ Motivational Skills and Teachers’ Perception of their work
     Principals’ Shared Leadership                     Mean
                                                                                 StD                Description
                Practices                             (n=480)
             Communication                              4.58                    0.54                 Very High
              Coordination                              4.28                    0.23                 Very High
                Direction                               4.65                    0.67                 Very High
                Influence                               4.46                    0.23                 Very High
    Legend: 4.20-5.00: Very High/ Strongly Agree; 3.40-4.19: High/ Agree; 2.60-3.39: Moderate/ Undecided; 1.80- 2.59: Low/
Disagree; 1.79: Very Low/ Strongly Disagree

    In this case, the total coordination score was 4.28, which is considered extremely high. However,
this result suggests that administrators have a modest sense of coordination when it comes to
educating and motivating their teachers to carry out their duties for school improvement. Researches
showed that administrators' influence on teachers impacted the teaching-learning process in school
climates by encouraging educational possibilities (Debbarma & Durai, 2021, Schott, van Roekel, &
Tummers, 2020, Shen et al., 2020). It was concluded that school administrators must follow
educational advances to enable teachers to create dynamic classroom environments.
    There is a fairly high value of 4.65 in the overall mean for direction. The findings suggest that
administrators guide their instructors in school programs and activities in a moderate manner,
according to Situational Leadership Theory (Fernandez & Vecchio, 1997, Goodson et al., 1989, Vecchio,
1987). The principal's leadership style adapts to the development level of teachers and the objectives
to be accomplished. This result lends credence to this theory. As a result, principals' shared leadership
approaches establish excellent connections with teachers, students, and stakeholders inside the
institution for the development of the curriculum and teaching-learning process as well as school
policies and the excellent academic performance of its students. The study concluded that school
administrators' initiative behaviors impacted instructors' views on work. Due to the introduction of a
beneficial circumstance, the connection between the headteachers and their pupils may improve.
    Overall, the influence score was 4.46, which is considered to be strong. According to this study,
administrators have a modest effect on their teachers because they serve as role models for excellent
leadership techniques. Leadership style affects staff performance, resulting in increased productivity
(Al-Mekhlafi & Osman, 2019, Lai et al., 2014, Magulod Jr, 2017, Saleem et al., 2020). Hence, teachers'
dedication to delivering excellent teaching, work efficiency, and school equality is indicated by the
article's shared influence practice of effective principals.

3.2. Teachers’ Soft Skills Assessment
    Table 2 shows the respondents' views of the degree of soft skill development among instructors in
terms of problem-solving, work ethics, adaptability, and interpersonal relationships. As can be seen,
the total mean was 4.28, which many consider being extremely high. As a result of this study,
instructors seem to be excellent problem solvers. As a result, it seems that instructors can resolve their
own internal issues with the help of feasible interventions. Researchers found that problem-solving
skills positively impacted innovation behavior (Kar et al., 2010, Qizi, 2019, Yavuz et al., 2010). Problem-
solving skills are thus crucial for teachers to collect the knowledge they need to make informed choices.
Delegating responsibility for finding alternative answers methodically prevents more harm from
occurring in the institution. Further, it entails the creation, execution, and assessment of a plan of
action to alleviate the problems at hand.
    The total mean for work ethics was 4.25, which is considered to be extremely high. As a result, the
instructors are expected to adhere to a strict code of conduct. This implies that instructors adhere to
a set of moral standards that includes ideals towards excellent work. It means that instructors with
high ethical standards are more likely to resolve workplace disputes transparent and accountable. It
also acts as a moral compass for developing professional competence in their everyday interactions
with one another (Sanger & Osguthorpe, 2011). Finally, a score of 4.34, which is considered to be quite



                                                                                                                        7

  Interplay of Shared Leadership Practices of Principals, Teachers’ Soft Skills and Learners’ Competitiveness in
                       COVID 19 Era: Implications to Economics of Educational Leadership

good in this case. As a result of this study, teachers seem to be extremely adaptable when it comes to
their different duties. As anticipated, teachers can adjust to every circumstance since they work with
a variety of students, parents, and coworkers to improve their school's performance. That's because
flexibility is the capacity to alter one's behaviors and emotions to react to various emotions effectively,
according to studies (Star et al., 2015, Wanner & Palmer, 2015). Teachers' flexibility skill allows them
to retain a sense of balance and adjust to changes in the workplace such as curricular, methodological
and instructional changes while maintaining a high level of productivity.
                                       Table 2 Assessment of Teachers’ Soft-Skills
                                                      Mean
                                                                                StD                Description
                                                     (n=480)
              Problem-solving                          4.28                    0.12                 Very High
                Work ethics                            4.25                    0. 15                Very High
                 Flexibility                           4.34                    0.34                 Very High
         Interpersonal relationship                    4.26                    0.56                 Very High
    Legend: 4.20-5.00: Very High/ Strongly Agree; 3.40-4.19: High/ Agree; 2.60-3.39: Moderate/ Undecided; 1.80- 2.59: Low/
Disagree; 1.79: Very Low/ Strongly Disagree

    Overall interpersonal connection scores were 4.46, which is regarded as extremely high. As a result
of the study, instructors seem to have a strong working relationship with their coworkers. As a result
of this, instructors are better equipped to express their sympathy, support, and respect to their
coworkers. The results are in line with studies that interpersonal relationships in education are
assessed in terms of affiliation, which defines the degree of emotional immediacy, warmth, and
support in the encounter (Rebele & Pierre, 2019. Bhute et al., 2021). Teacher soft skills enable them
to establish a solid connection with their principal, colleagues, and students by exercising excellent
interactions and conduct while working more successfully as a team, according to the study's
conclusion

3.3. Assessment of Learners Competitiveness
    On the basis of competition, training, and school culture, respondents' average views of students'
competitiveness are given in Table 3. There was a mean of 4.45, which is considered high. Students are
somewhat exposed to contests depending on their acquired potentials, according to the study's
findings. In other words, students typically improve their talents and skills before contests. The result
is an increase in self-confidence, which they use to accomplish their goals. As a result, students'
intrinsic motivation pushes them to improve their performance by adopting excellent work habits and
displaying responsible and competitive conduct (Erol & Kurt, 2017, Whitaker & Valtierra, 2018).
                                    Table 3 Assessment of Learners Competitiveness
                                                      Mean                     StD                Description
                                                     (n=480)
             Competitiveness                           4.45                    0.17                Very High
                Training                               2.59                    0. 19               Moderate
              School culture                           4.47                    0.33                Very High
    Legend: 4.20-5.00: Very High/ Strongly Agree; 3.40-4.19: High/ Agree; 2.60-3.39: Moderate/ Undecided; 1.80- 2.59: Low/
Disagree; 1.79: Very Low/ Strongly Disagree

   On average, there was a high average score of 2.59, which is considered moderate on training.
According to the findings, due to budgetary limitations and inadequate resources, students are only
minimally exposed to training. Contests encourage students to work harder and accomplish more in a
more competitive atmosphere. As Shimotsu-Dariol, Mansson, & Myers (2012) noted, participating in
competition helps youngsters to overcome their anxieties and insecurities. Students' potential, talents,
and abilities are harnessed through adopting new ideas and techniques. Students benefit from a
competitive atmosphere when it comes to developing abilities and sportsmanship in their academic
and non-academic activities. Their well-being improves as a result of the instruction they receive.
   There was an overall mean score of 4.47 in the table. According to the study, the findings suggest
that students have a reasonable understanding of their fundamental beliefs, habits, and set of goal-


                                                                                                                        8

  Interplay of Shared Leadership Practices of Principals, Teachers’ Soft Skills and Learners’ Competitiveness in
                       COVID 19 Era: Implications to Economics of Educational Leadership


oriented activities. Findings from Grosemans et al. (2015) research confirm the importance of teachers'
assistance and schools focusing on students' interests and abilities to create the school's culture.
Overall, good school culture enables students to participate successfully in the teaching and learning
process. As the study concluded, encouraging meaningful parental participation, setting norms and
values, recognizing personal accomplishments, and modeling good conduct, also adds to the school's
high-quality educational environment.

3.4. Relationship between Principals Level of Leadership and selected Variables
    Table 4 depicts the relationships between the principal level of shared leadership, teachers' soft
skills, and learners' competitiveness. This shows that there is a significant positive interplay of principal
shared leadership and the selected variables. Hence, the null hypothesis of the study is rejected. This
would imply that principal leadership and empowerment influence all spheres of school operations,
human resources, and academic performance. A closer look at the data shows that Principals' Shared
Leadership and Teachers' Soft Skills Enhancement are positively correlated with the r-value of .79 and
as evidenced with the computed p-value of 0042, which is lower than the alpha level of 0.05. this
means that the higher the principal shared leadership in four domains such as communication,
coordination, direction, and influence, the higher the teachers also manifest soft skills enhancement
along with problem-solving, work ethics, flexibility, and interpersonal relationship. This finding shows
that the ability of the school head to manage the human resource is a factor of quality school
leadership amidst COVID 19 pandemic. Hence, school heads to manifest shared solid leadership skills
to carry out school plans and operations despite the implementation of remote learning. When school
heads will manifest stronger communication and coordination direction and influence the higher the
teachers' ability to foster problem-solving skills, work ethics, flexibility, and interpersonal relationships
(Lee et al., 2011, Hulpia & Devos, 2010) Selamat et al., 2013). In like manner, when principals' Shared
Leadership and Learners Competitiveness are taken into account, the data reveal that it is likewise
positively correlated with the computed r-value of .83 and p-value of .004 lower than the alpha level
of 005. This would imply that there is a positive interplay among the two variables. Such a positive
relationship means that the higher the school head promotes strong shared leadership practices on
communication, coordination direction, and influence, the higher the teachers also manifest soft skills
enhancement along competitiveness, training, and school culture. This justifies that when school
heads are capable of manifesting good leadership practices, the more likely the schools will have
stronger learners' perspectives on competitiveness, training, and school culture (Shen et al., 2020,
Scott-Young et al., 2019).
                               Table 4. Correlations of Principals’ Shared and related variables
                                                                     Interpretation                Interpretation of
               Bivariate                        Pearson-r                             p-value
                                                                          of r²                         p-value
   Principals’ Shared Leadership
                                                                                                    *significant at
      and Teachers’ Soft Skills                     .79*              Correlated       .042
                                                                                                         0.05
           Enhancement

  Principals’ Shared Leadership                                       Correlated                    *significant at
                                                    .83*                               .004
  and Learners Competitiveness                                                                           0.05

   *= significant at 0.05 level; ns= not significant at 0.05 level
   Note: all other variables are not significant

   One research looked at principal leadership practices, teachers' effectiveness, and academic
achievement are found to have a significant correlation. After conducting research, it was found that
shared leadership had a greater effect on teachers' commitment. On the other hand, shared leadership
may have contributed to the difference in academic communities, particularly the teachers (Sun & Xia,
2018). Administrators must establish a school's vision, monitor the quality of teaching, and supervise
teachers' professional development to be effective in instructional leadership. The heroism of teachers


                                                                                                                       9

  Interplay of Shared Leadership Practices of Principals, Teachers’ Soft Skills and Learners’ Competitiveness in
                       COVID 19 Era: Implications to Economics of Educational Leadership

may have a modest influence on their perceptions of efficacy, trust, and academic attention as a result
of teaching and transformational leadership. However, a school environment with shared leadership
may boost teachers' academic confidence. They trust teachers, interact openly with them, provide
them the chance to be school leaders, give them the power and duty to make critical choices. They
could develop a stronger sense of belonging and commitment to their work, collaborate on school
improvement issues and build more trust and respect among themselves and students if they had
access to strong distributed leadership (Bellibas & Liu, 2018).

4. Conclusion

    This study shed light on the interplay of principal shared leadership, teachers' soft skills
development, and learners' competitiveness. It employed a descriptive correlational research design.
The survey was done using online. From the study, it can be inferred that the highly positive results
are seen on the level of principal shared leadership practices are manifested by the school heads,
teachers' soft skills enhancement, and learners' competitiveness. The school heads are capable of
exuding shared leadership aspects on effective communication, proper coordination, direction, and
influence. Test of relationship showed that there is a positive interplay between principal's shared
leadership with the selected variables on teachers' soft skills and learners' competitiveness. The result
of this present study will provide a way for policymakers and other stakeholders to develop a plan of
action to strengthen principal leadership in the COVID 19 era. Research on the comparative impacts of
leadership styles will assist policymakers and practitioners in better understanding that leadership
techniques are most successful for specific elements of school reform efforts, in our view.

5. Recommendations and Implications to Economics of Education

    According to findings from this research, school leaders should examine their leadership methods
to better support teachers' soft skills to perform effectively and help students become more
competitive. As an implication to the economics of education, this paper may be used by education
authorities to allocated funding and develop programs to improve the leadership skills of principals,
particularly those in rural or distant locations. Government agencies may also allocate funds for the
education sector, focusing on the competencies of school principals in this COVID 19 era. Further,
principals need to improve their leadership practices based on the evaluation results to better advise
their teachers to accomplish effective school programs and activities. Teachers may maintain their soft
skills by often exercising throughout their everyday interactions in the classroom. In order to boost the
morale of students, principals are encouraged to assist them in their preparation for any competition
by providing them with sufficient resources. Learners are reminded to have a positive attitude
throughout. The research suggests that additional factors be investigated to improve the effectiveness
of primary school instructors. Regarding self-realization for instructors in terms of job commitment
and devotion, may they utilize this research as trustworthy information on the reward of being
performance- and service-oriented? The study suggests more research among public elementary
schools using new ideas on motivating school administrators' skills, teachers' work environment, and
their gross salaries to future researchers. We suggest looking at other aspects that may help instructors
perform better. More research with larger sample size is needed to examine the connection between
teachers' performance and their principals' motivating abilities, work environment, gross salaries, and
other variables that were not included in the study. There were only a restricted number of volunteers.
Thus, the study could be kept under control, allowing for a more comprehensive outcome as a
consequence. We couldn't access our target audience, but we got enough overall responses to meet
the criteria. It is hoped that this limitation would serve as a springboard for further study in the future.

5.1. Theoretical Implications
   Results of the research corroborate Bandura's Social Cognitive Theory, which emphasizes the
individual's cognition concerning his environment. According to the article, students' ability to


                                                                                                               10

  Interplay of Shared Leadership Practices of Principals, Teachers’ Soft Skills and Learners’ Competitiveness in
                       COVID 19 Era: Implications to Economics of Educational Leadership


compete depends on their ability to do the activities and their will to attain whatever objectives they
want, given the encouragement and support of instructors. According to McClelland's Theory of Needs,
people's achievement needs are affected by their behavior. Principals' roles and responsibilities are
becoming increasingly complicated as schools confront growing accountability demands. A fresh
viewpoint on leadership emerges as a result of this. The term shared leadership is unclear and changes
from one source to another. Scholars don't have a single word to refer to it by. Determining the
dispersed viewpoint of shared leadership is for improved educational results. Every employee must
work together and assume a leadership role (Liu, Bellibaş, & Gümüş, 2021). According to another line
of study, shared leadership is the participation of various individuals in the school's decision-making
processes (Abrams et al., 2020). Involvement encourages everyone involved in the school's educational
procedures and outcomes to take greater responsibility, particularly this onslaught of the COVID 19
Pandemic.

References

1. Abrams, E. M., Shaker, M., Oppenheimer, J., Davis, R. S., Bukstein, D. A., & Greenhawt, M. (2020).
   The challenges and opportunities for shared decision making highlighted by COVID-19. The Journal
   of Allergy and Clinical Immunology: In Practice.
2. Ahlström, B., Leo, U., Norqvist, L., & Isling, P. P. (2020). School leadership as (un) usual. Insights
   from principals in Sweden during a pandemic. International Studies in Educational Administration
   (Commonwealth Council for Educational Administration & Management (CCEAM)), 48(2), 35-41.
3. Al Saidi, A. M. O., Nur, F. A., Al-Mandhari, A. S., El Rabbat, M., Hafeez, A., & Abubakar, A. (2020).
   Decisive leadership is a necessity in the COVID-19 response. Lancet (London, England), 396(10247),
   295.
4. Allal-Chérif, O., Guijarro-García, M., Ballester-Miquel, J. C., & Carrilero-Castillo, A. (2021). Being an
   ethical leader during the apocalypse: Lessons from the walking dead to face the COVID-19 crisis.
   Journal of Business Research, 133, 354-364.
5. Al-Mekhlafi, A. M., & Osman, M. E. T. (2019). The effect of a holistic school improvement model in
   enhancing school effectiveness in Oman. Malaysian Journal of Learning and Instruction, 16(2), 187-
   200.
6. Arcinas, M. M., Sajja, G. S., Asif, S., Gour, S., Okoronkwo, E., & Naved, M. ROLE OF DATA MINING IN
   EDUCATION FOR IMPROVING STUDENTS PERFORMANCE FOR SOCIAL CHANGE. Turkish Journal of
   Physiotherapy and Rehabilitation, 32, 3.
7. Ardley, J., & Goodloe, A. (2020, June). Working with Principal Interns during the 2020 Pandemic of
   COVID 19: Moving From Frustrations to Resolutions. In EdMedia+ Innovate Learning (pp. 1-11).
   Association for the Advancement of Computing in Education (AACE).
8. Bacher-Hicks, A., Goodman, J., & Mulhern, C. (2021). Inequality in household adaptation to
   schooling shocks: Covid-induced online learning engagement in real time. Journal of Public
   Economics, 193, 104345.
9. Bhute, V. J., Inguva, P., Shah, U., & Brechtelsbauer, C. (2021). Transforming Traditional Teaching
   Laboratories for Effective Remote Delivery–A Review. Education for Chemical Engineers.
10.Bloomfield, J., & Fisher, M. J. (2019). Quantitative research design. Journal of the Australasian
   Rehabilitation Nurses Association, 22(2), 27-30.
11.Boin, A., Lodge, M., & Luesink, M. (2020). Learning from the COVID-19 crisis: an initial analysis of
   national responses. Policy Design and Practice, 3(3), 189-204.
12.Chaaban, Y., Arar, K., Sawalhi, R., Alhouti, I., & Zohri, A. (2021). Exploring teachers’ professional
   agency within shifting educational contexts: A comparative study of Lebanon, Qatar, Kuwait, and
   Morocco. Teaching and Teacher Education, 106, 103451.
13.Chiodini, J. (2020). Online learning in the time of COVID-19. Travel medicine and infectious disease,
   34, 101669.



                                                                                                               11

  Interplay of Shared Leadership Practices of Principals, Teachers’ Soft Skills and Learners’ Competitiveness in
                       COVID 19 Era: Implications to Economics of Educational Leadership

14.Debbarma, I., & Durai, T. (2021). Educational disruption: Impact of COVID-19 on students from the
   Northeast states of India. Children and youth services review, 120, 105769.
15.Díez, F., Villa, A., Lopez, A. L., & Iraurgi, I. (2020). Impact of quality management systems in the
   performance of educational centers: educational policies and management processes. Heliyon,
   6(4), e03824.
16.Dong, C., Cao, S., & Li, H. (2020). Young children’s online learning during COVID-19 pandemic:
   Chinese parents’ beliefs and attitudes. Children and youth services review, 118, 105440.
17.Elfrianto, E., Dahnial, I., & Tanjung, B. N. (2020). The competency analysis of principal against
   teachers in conducting distance learning in Covid-19 pandemic. Jurnal Tarbiyah, 27(1).
18.Erol, O., & Kurt, A. A. (2017). The effects of teaching programming with scratch on pre-service
   information technology teachers' motivation and achievement. Computers in Human Behavior, 77,
   11-18.
19.Fernandez, C. F., & Vecchio, R. P. (1997). Situational leadership theory revisited: A test of an across-
   jobs perspective. The Leadership Quarterly, 8(1), 67-84
20.Frey, T. K., & Tatum, N. T. (2016). Hoverboards and “hovermoms”: helicopter parents and their
   influence on millennial students’ rapport with instructors. Communication Education, 65(3), 359-
   361.
21.Gonzales, M. M., & Jackson, I. (2020). Going the Distance: What School Administrators Can Learn
   from One-to-One Laptop Schools. Journal of School Administration Research and Development, 5,
   55-60.
22.Goodson, J. R., McGee, G. W., & Cashman, J. F. (1989). Situational leadership theory: A test of
   leadership prescriptions. Group & Organization Studies, 14(4), 446-461.
23.Grosemans, I., Boon, A., Verclairen, C., Dochy, F., & Kyndt, E. (2015). Informal learning of primary
   school teachers: Considering the role of teaching experience and school culture. Teaching and
   Teacher Education, 47, 151-161.
24.Grum, D. K., & Grum, B. (2015). Competitiveness and motivation for education among university
   students. IJONTE.
25.Gyang, T. S. (2020). Educational Leadership Response to the COVID-19 Pandemic Crisis in Nigeria.
   International Studies in Educational Administration (Commonwealth Council for Educational
   Administration & Management (CCEAM)), 48(3), 73-79.
26.Harris, A. (2020). COVID-19–school leadership in crisis?. Journal of Professional Capital and
   Community.
27.Hulpia, H., & Devos, G. (2010). How distributed leadership can make a difference in teachers'
   organizational commitment? A qualitative study. Teaching and teacher education, 26(3), 565-575.
28.Hussein, E., Daoud, S., Alrabaiah, H., & Badawi, R. (2020). Exploring undergraduate students’
   attitudes towards emergency online learning during COVID-19: A case from the UAE. Children and
   youth services review, 119, 105699.
29.Hutagalung, L., Purwanto, A., & Prasetya, A. B. (2020). The Five Leadership Style in Time of
   Pandemic Covid-19 throughout Industrial Revolution 4.0 as compared to Humane Leadership.
   International Journal of Social, Policy and Law, 1(1), 79-87.
30.Ignacio, L. B. R., Arcinas, M. M., Eusebio, M. C., Cruz, J. M. D., Dagalea, A. B., Aifianus, M., ... &
   Doron, R. O. (2020). Correlates of Perception of COVID-19 health risk among Filipino youth in a
   private university in Manila, Philippines. Asia Pacific Journal of Multidisciplinary Research, 8(4).
31.Kar, T., Özdemir, E., İpek, A. S., & Albayrak, M. (2010). The relation between the problem posing
   and problem solving skills of prospective elementary mathematics teachers. Procedia-Social and
   Behavioral Sciences, 2(2), 1577-1583.
32.Lai, T. T., Luen, W. K., Chai, L. T., & Ling, L. W. (2014). School principal leadership styles and teacher
   organizational commitment among performing schools. Journal of global business management,
   10(2), 67.




                                                                                                               12

  Interplay of Shared Leadership Practices of Principals, Teachers’ Soft Skills and Learners’ Competitiveness in
                       COVID 19 Era: Implications to Economics of Educational Leadership


33.Lee, J. C. K., Zhang, Z., & Yin, H. (2011). A multilevel analysis of the impact of a professional learning
   community, faculty trust in colleagues and collective efficacy on teacher commitment to students.
   Teaching and teacher education, 27(5), 820-830.
34.Liu, Y., Bellibaş, M. Ş., & Gümüş, S. (2021). The effect of instructional leadership and distributed
   leadership on teacher self-efficacy and job satisfaction: Mediating roles of supportive school culture
   and teacher collaboration. Educational Management Administration & Leadership, 49(3), 430-453.
35.Lopez, K. R. B., Gaticales, N. P., Provido, A. V. C., Santelices, S. M. B., & Arcinas, M. M. (2021). Social
   Contagion of Astrology in the Social Media amid COVID-19 Pandemic. International Journal of
   Multidisciplinary: Applied Business and Education Research, 2(4), 349-363.
36.Love, P. E., Ika, L., Matthews, J., & Fang, W. (2020). Shared leadership, value and risks in large scale
   transport projects: Re-calibrating procurement policy for post COVID-19. Research in
   Transportation Economics, 100999.
37.Magulod Jr, G. C. (2017). Factors of school effectiveness and performance of selected public and
   private elementary schools: implications on educational planning in the Philippines. Asia Pacific
   Journal of Multidisciplinary Research, 5(1), 73-83.
38.Mukaram, A. T., Rathore, K., Khan, M. A., Danish, R. Q., & Zubair, S. S. (2021). Can adaptive–
   academic leadership duo make universities ready for change? Evidence from higher education
   institutions in Pakistan in the light of COVID-19. Management Research Review.
39.Navaridas-Nalda, F., Clavel-San Emeterio, M., Fernández-Ortiz, R., & Arias-Oliva, M. (2020). The
   strategic influence of school principal leadership in the digital transformation of schools. Computers
   in Human Behavior, 112, 106481.
40.Netolicky, D. M. (2020). School leadership during a pandemic: navigating tensions. Journal of
   Professional Capital and Community.
41.Ngang, T. K., Yie, C. S., & Shahid, S. A. M. (2015). Quality teaching: Relationship to soft skills
   acquisition. Procedia-Social and Behavioral Sciences, 191, 1934-1937.
42.Nuncio, R. V., Arcinas, M. M., Lucas, R. I. G., Alontaga, J. V. Q., Neri, S. G. T., & Carpena, J. M. (2020).
   An E-learning outreach program for public schools: Findings and lessons learned based on a pilot
   program in Makati City and Cabuyao City, Laguna, Philippines. Evaluation and Program Planning,
   82, 101846.
43.Özkan, M., & ÇAKIR, Ç. (2017). Development of distributed leadership scale. Int. J. Eurasia Soc. Sci,
   8, 1629-1660.
44.Price, D. C., & Mansfield, K. C. (2021, February). Leadership in the Time of COVID: Connecting
   Community Resources to Meet the Needs of North Carolina Students. In Frontiers in Education (Vol.
   5, p. 313). Frontiers.
45.Qizi, E. D. A. (2019). Improvement of problem solving skills of english teachers through case study.
   Наука и образование сегодня, (12 (47)).
46.Rebele, J. E., & Pierre, E. K. S. (2019). A commentary on learning objectives for accounting education
   programs: The importance of soft skills and technical knowledge. Journal of Accounting Education,
   48, 71-79.
47.Reyes-Guerra, D., Maslin-Ostrowski, P., Barakat, M. Y., & Stefanovic, M. A. (2021, March).
   Confronting a Compound Crisis: The School Principal’s Role During Initial Phase of the COVID-19
   Pandemic. In Frontiers in Education (Vol. 6, p. 87). Frontiers.
48.Saleem, A., Aslam, S., Yin, H. B., & Rao, C. (2020). Principal leadership styles and teacher job
   performance: Viewpoint of middle management. Sustainability, 12(8), 3390.
49.Sanger, M. N., & Osguthorpe, R. D. (2011). Teacher education, preservice teacher beliefs, and the
   moral work of teaching. Teaching and teacher education, 27(3), 569-578.
50.Sapian, N. R. B., Abdullah, R. B. B., Ghani, M. F., Abdullah, Z., & Omar, I. M. B. (2020, February). The
   Relationship Between Principal" s Communication Style and School Climate. In 3rd International
   Conference on Research of Educational Administration and Management (ICREAM 2019) (pp. 197-
   205). Atlantis Press.


                                                                                                               13

  Interplay of Shared Leadership Practices of Principals, Teachers’ Soft Skills and Learners’ Competitiveness in
                       COVID 19 Era: Implications to Economics of Educational Leadership

51.Schott, C., van Roekel, H., & Tummers, L. (2020). Teacher leadership: A systematic review,
   methodological quality assessment and conceptual framework. Educational Research Review,
   100352.
52.Scott-Young, C. M., Georgy, M., & Grisinger, A. (2019). Shared leadership in project teams: An
   integrative multi-level conceptual model and research agenda. International Journal of Project
   Management, 37(4), 565-581.
53.Selamat, N., Nordin, N., & Adnan, A. A. (2013). Rekindle teacher's organizational commitment: the
   effect of transformational leadership behavior. Procedia-Social and Behavioral Sciences, 90, 566-
   574.
54.Shen, J., Ma, X., Mansberger, N., Wu, H., Palmer, L. A. B., Poppink, S., & Reeves, P. L. (2021). The
   relationship between growth in principal leadership and growth in school performance: The teacher
   perspective. Studies in Educational Evaluation, 70, 101023.
55.Shen, J., Wu, H., Reeves, P., Zheng, Y., Ryan, L., & Anderson, D. (2020). The association between
   teacher leadership and student achievement: A meta-analysis. Educational Research Review,
   100357.
56.Shimotsu-Dariol, S., Mansson, D. H., & Myers, S. A. (2012). Students' academic competitiveness and
   their involvement in the learning process. Communication Research Reports, 29(4), 310-319.
57.Smith, T. E., Reinke, W. M., Herman, K. C., & Sebastian, J. (2021). Exploring the link between
   principal leadership and family engagement across elementary and middle school. Journal of School
   Psychology, 84, 49-62.
58.Star, J. R., Newton, K., Pollack, C., Kokka, K., Rittle-Johnson, B., & Durkin, K. (2015). Student, teacher,
   and instructional characteristics related to students' gains in flexibility. Contemporary Educational
   Psychology, 41, 198-208.
59.Sterrett, W., & Richardson, J. W. (2020). Supporting professional development through digital
   principal leadership. Journal of Organizational & Educational Leadership, 5(2), 4.
60.Sumarjoa, B., & Muhammadc, M. I. (2021). The Principal in Forming Teacher Work Motivation in
   the Covid-19 Pandemic Period at Senior High School 1 Sigli. teaching and learning, 15(5).
61.Sun, A., & Xia, J. (2018). Teacher-perceived distributed leadership, teacher self-efficacy and job
   satisfaction: A multilevel SEM approach using the 2013 TALIS data. International Journal of
   Educational Resea Bellibas & Liu, 2018rch, 92, 86-97.
62.Swaminathan, N., Govindharaj, P., Jagadeesh, N. S., & Ravichandran, L. (2021). Evaluating the
   effectiveness of an online faculty development programme for nurse educators about remote
   teaching during COVID-19. Journal of Taibah University Medical Sciences, 16(2), 268-273.
63.Vecchio, R. P. (1987). Situational Leadership Theory: An examination of a prescriptive theory.
   Journal of applied psychology, 72(3), 444.
64.Vu, C. T., Hoang, A. D., Than, V. Q., Nguyen, M. T., Dinh, V. H., Le, Q. A. T., ... & Nguyen, Y. C. (2020).
   Dataset of Vietnamese teachers’ perspectives and perceived support during the COVID-19
   pandemic. Data in brief, 31, 105788.
65.Wanner, T., & Palmer, E. (2015). Personalising learning: Exploring student and teacher perceptions
   about flexible learning and assessment in a flipped university course. Computers & Education, 88,
   354-369.
66.Whitaker, M. C., & Valtierra, K. M. (2018). Enhancing preservice teachers’ motivation to teach
   diverse learners. Teaching and Teacher Education, 73, 171-182.
67.Yao, J., You, Y., & Zhu, J. (2020). Principal–teacher management communication and teachers’ job
   performance: the mediating role of psychological empowerment and affective commitment. The
   Asia-Pacific Education Researcher, 29(4), 365-375.
68.Yavuz, G., Arslan, C., & Gulten, D. C. (2010). The perceived problem solving skills of primary
   mathematics and primary social sciences prospective teachers. Procedia-Social and Behavioral
   Sciences, 2(2), 1630-1635.
69.Zadeh, E. F., Parry, Y., & Eshghi, P. (2021). Hope in Iranian mothers of children with cancer: a
   descriptive correlational study. Supportive Care in Cancer, 29(7), 3697-3705.



                                                                                                               14

 Interplay of Shared Leadership Practices of Principals, Teachers’ Soft Skills and Learners’ Competitiveness in
                      COVID 19 Era: Implications to Economics of Educational Leadership


70.Zhou, C. (2021). The effectiveness of 5E model to improve the scientific creativity of teachers in
   rural areas. Thinking Skills and Creativity, 41, 100900.
71.Ziauddeen, N., Woods-Townsend, K., Saxena, S., Gilbert, R., & Alwan, N. A. (2020). Schools and
   COVID-19: Reopening Pandora’s box?. Public Health in Practice, 1, 100039.




                                                                                                              15