Higher Education (2023) 85:1281–1298
https://doi.org/10.1007/s10734-022-00890-0




Theorising pedagogical dimensions of higher education
leadership—a non‑affirmative approach

Janne Elo1       · Michael Uljens1

Accepted: 20 June 2022 / Published online: 22 July 2022
© The Author(s) 2022


Abstract
Today, multilevel analytics on educational governance, management, and leadership are
common in educational leadership research, drawing on a variety of approaches and aca-
demic disciplines. This article develops a threefold critique of the state of the art. First, this
article argues that research on higher education leadership often represents an unreflected
position regarding the societal role of higher education—decontextualising leadership from
external practices and disregarding its internal object. Second, the approaches applied in
leadership as a multilevel phenomenon can be problematic. On one end of the spectrum,
we find particularist approaches focusing on individual levels representing disparate and
often incompatible theoretical perspectives. As these positions rarely communicate, they
have difficulties producing a coherent representation of higher education leadership. Uni-
versalist approaches, in turn, study leadership on several levels but offer identical concep-
tual tools for any societal practice, thereby losing the sensibility of the societal, cultural,
and economic tasks of higher-education institutions, and for their specific character as
institutions for research and teaching. Thirdly, research on educational leadership mostly
fail to provide adequate theory of pedagogical interaction and influence. This is a twofold
challenge. On the one hand, research lacks a theory of the object of educational leadership,
namely teaching and studying. On the other, although research often defines leadership as
a process of influence aimed at supporting learning, it lacks a theory able to explain what
constitutes this influence. This article elaborates the possibilities for non-affirmative theory
of education to provide a theory and language to overcome these challenges.

Keywords Higher-education leadership · Educational leadership · Pedagogical leadership ·
Systemic curriculum leadership · Educational theory




* Janne Elo
  janne.elo@abo.fi
    Michael Uljens
    michael.uljens@abo.fi
1
    Faculty of Education and Welfare Studies, Åbo Akademi University, Rantakatu 2, 65101 Vaasa,
    Finland


                                                                                          13
                                                                                  Vol.:(0123456789)

1282                                                         Higher Education (2023) 85:1281–1298


Introduction

As a growing field, higher-education leadership (HEL) research applies an increasing
variation of perspectives and theoretical positions. Approaches range from individualistic
heroic conceptions, viewing leadership competence as individual characteristics, to posi-
tions emphasising the social, structural, or processual nature of leadership, in addition to
transformational, transformative, and transactional approaches (Crevani, 2018; Shields,
2014; Wang, 2018). One might assume that this variety of perspectives demonstrate vital-
ity in the field. However, studies on leadership and educational leadership (EL) have not
been ideal regarding theoretical foundations (Alvesson, 2019; Niesche & Gowlett, 2019;
Wang, 2018). The pace of theoretical and conceptual development appears more mod-
est than the increase in the volume of empirical research (Alvesson, 2019; Wang, 2018).
Niesche and Gowlett (2019), however, observe a sort of theory turn in recent critical EL
research. In this article, we contribute to this increased focus on theory by addressing three
critiques pointing at some of the conceptual challenges in contemporary research on EL
and HEL. With HE we are referring mainly to universities. In the following, we shortly
outline the three critiques.
    First, EL research demonstrates an unclear position in conceptually and theoretically
relating HEL practices to other societal fields of practice such as economy or politics.
The lack of an articulated position risks resulting in isolated or partial interpretations of
the relations between HE and other societal fields and interests framing HE institutions.
Second, many approaches to EL as a multilevel phenomenon draw on universal terminol-
ogy or generic theories, thereby losing a necessary conceptual sensitivity for leadership of
educational institutions. Universal approaches conceptually treat multilevel leadership the
same, regardless of which institution is in question. On other occasions, when the object of
research is specifically education institutions, particularistic research approaches tend to
focus on separate levels of leadership in isolation, losing the ‘big picture’ of HEL. Third,
research on leadership and EL concludes that one aspect of leadership is to create direction,
create conditions for change, and intervene in or influence others’ learning. Thus, research
has widely recognised that leadership includes a pedagogical element. While understand-
ing pedagogical change processes theoretically is crucial, the field is severely undertheo-
rized. Despite various initiatives (e.g. Kasworm & Bowles, 2012), HEL research lacks a
language both for the pedagogical dimensions of leadership, as well as for the ultimate
object of HEL, namely research, teaching, and supervision.
    This article argues that a way to overcome the limitations sketched above is to recognise
that (i) HEL requires an idea of how education relates to other societal practices, (ii) EL
and pedagogical leadership (PL) are phenomena occurring at different leadership levels
simultaneously, and (iii) HEL theory requires an idea of the pedagogical process because
pedagogical processes constitute its object, and because HEL itself features a pedagogical
dimension. Theory acknowledging these dimensions could better explain the pedagogical
dimensions of leadership at and between different levels, while understanding the object
of HEL: HE teaching, studying, and learning. Based on these assumptions, our aim is to
take educational theory as a starting point for approaching HEL by studying whether non-
affirmative theory of education and Bildung (NAT) (Benner, 2015) may provide a theoreti-
cal language for elucidating the pedagogical character of relational leadership interaction
in HE, at and between all levels of governance and leadership. NAT draws on the relational
and processual theory of Bildung, positioned in a Western tradition identified as the Hum-
boldtian model of HE.


13

Higher Education (2023) 85:1281–1298                                                       1283


EL as a multilevel phenomenon—three critiques

Difficulties related to the societal role of HE

HEL always occurs in relation to, and in complicated dialogues with, different stakehold-
ers. In a historical and contemporary perspective, most research agrees that it is not pos-
sible to understand HEL in a decontextualized fashion (McLendon, 2003). The question is
not if, but how, conceptual positions on HEL, policy, and teaching understand the relation
between HE and other societal practices.
   Given the complexity of the field, we illustrate our critique by identifying two broad
positions on how research relates education and EL to societal fields and interests. First, tra-
ditional leadership research has been grounded in structural functionalism, partly through
organisational systems theories (see Uljens & Ylimaki, 2017, 48–54). These ideologically
naïve positions see education functionally, often subordinating education and EL to con-
temporary economic or political interests. Second, critical-transformative research often
superordinates education and EL to contemporary society (e.g. Giroux, 1980; McLaren,
2014; Shields, 2014). We view these positions as end positions on a spectrum, as much of
contemporary research falls somewhere in between (e.g. Mezirow, 1991).
   EL research in the first position either remains unarticulated to how HE and HEL relates
to other societal fields or focuses on uncritically reaching some predefined present-day
need. Examples of the many positions could be distributed leadership (e.g. Leithwood &
Riehl, 2003), instructional leadership (e.g. Apkarian & Rasmussen, 2021), or team leader-
ship (e.g. Koeslag‑Kreunen et al., 2021). If HEL is treated as a closed system, not address-
ing the critical question of the role of HE in society, leadership, and leadership research can
principally be put into the service of virtually any ideology or agenda. Positions focused
on meeting present-day conservative needs could be focused on topics such as student
employability, labour market expectations (e.g. Varga, 2006), or HE rankings. These posi-
tions risk instrumentalizing HE and HEL to serve interests external to the core tasks of HE
that are independent academic research and education of students towards self-determined,
ethically reflecting, and politically aware subjects.
   In contrast to the ideologically naïve functionalist positions, critical positions approach
HE and HEL as normatively driven societal transforming forces. In traditional critical edu-
cation research, it is typical to view education as having the potential to ‘shape those who
will go on to become future educators, lawmakers, and politicians’ (Tolman, 2019). In their
radical form, transformative HE and HEL not only defend education’s emancipatory task
as aiming at negative liberty (Berlin, 1969), i.e. liberating students from represented preju-
dices, but this leadership also positions itself as superordinate to existing society by aim-
ing at leading students to predefined future ideals representing own interests. Examples of
EL research positioned in this category include specifically targeting normatively closed
understandings of sustainability, gender perspectives, or equality and social justice, a topic
on the rise in EL research (McArthur, 2010; Wang et al., 2017), rather than identifying
various positions to these issues as objects for elaborations.
   What unites both leadership research positions above is that they risk subordinating HE
and HEL either to existing societal interests or to normative ideals. In Kantian terminology,
normatively closed external interests do not treat universities, research, or university stu-
dents as representing ends in themselves but rather see education as a strategic instrument
for reaching something decided upon in advance. Broadly speaking, economic, political,
cultural, and religious interests and ideologies all represent societal practices regulating HE


                                                                                    13

1284                                                         Higher Education (2023) 85:1281–1298


research and teaching, which can operate both as conservative and transformative forces.
We see it as crucial that a theory of HEL represents a reflected position in this matter, that
seeks to avoid instrumentalism. The non-affirmative position elaborated on later, positions
itself beyond those described above.


Difficulties with approaching multilevel HEL

HE has in many countries witnessed a shift in leadership policies and practices from a
collegial and bureaucratic model towards a neo-liberally inspired model characterised by
accountability, managerialism, and leaderism (Bolden et al., 2014; Crevani et al., 2015;
Croucher & Lacy, 2022; O´Reilly & Reed, 2010; Välimaa et al., 2016). The shift is a move
from government in Old Public Administration to governance in New Public Management.
Parallel to, and partly because of this, situational, contextual, and multilevel approaches to
studying educational governance and leadership have strengthened, drawing on a variety
of academic disciplines (Alvesson, 2019; Wang, 2018; Wang et al., 2017). We agree that
understanding leadership, governance, and management of HE requires a multilevel per-
spective (e.g. Bolden et al., 2008; Frost et al., 2016; Uljens & Elo, 2020). However, we find
it troublesome how this multilevel character of HEL is conceptualised, which we explain
below.
    Today, there are several multilevel approaches to EL, such as actor-network theory
(Czarniawska & Sevón, 2005), discursive institutionalism (Schmidt, 2008), and refraction
(Goodson & Rudd, 2012). Despite a variation in terminology, leadership comes across as a
mediating activity between different levels and actors. Mediation in terms of negotiations,
re-contextualising, and discourses always includes an element of interpretation, pointing
towards a hermeneutic dimension of translation. Despite their obvious strengths, we argue
that the weakness of many previous multilevel approaches to EL is that they offer univer-
sal vocabularies that are neutral towards the practice/praxis in question, which, for HE,
obviously, is education and the creation of new knowledge through the research that HE
is based on. The dilemma with universal approaches is their insensitivity towards what is
lead and where leadership occurs. Universal approaches offer identical conceptualisations
for understanding the policy and practice of any societal field, such as healthcare, educa-
tion, and private businesses. The strength of these frameworks—their intended universal
validity—is simultaneously their weakness, as they lack a specific vocabulary for grasping
the studied object. We argue that understanding the leadership of HE at different levels
requires insight both in research-based teaching and studying (the object) and in the soci-
etal role of education (the context). To theorise leadership as separate from its object and
its context fails to capture the unique character of leadership of education. However, we
are not suggesting disparaging, for example, the rich tradition of organisational or policy
implementation research. These and other fields of leadership expertise provide important
additional perspectives, but their limitation operating as foundational points of departure
needs to be acknowledged.
    Viewing context- and content-neutral universalist approaches to multilevel EL as one
end of a continuum, the other end is represented by particularist positions, focusing on
specific levels and aspects of EL in isolation. Thus, research on policy and policy borrow-
ing has generally focused on the macro level (e.g. Capano & Pritoni, 2020; Rhoades &
Sporn, 2002). Research on academic leadership generally focuses on the meso- or organi-
sational level (e.g. van Ameijde et al., 2009; Floyd & Preston, 2018), while curriculum,
instructional theory, teaching theory, and research on learning and instruction (Didaktik)

13

Higher Education (2023) 85:1281–1298                                                      1285


typically focus the micro level (e.g. Bovill & Woolmer, 2019; Stes et al., 2010). Particu-
laristic approaches have the advantage of providing vocabularies that capture nuances
and details of the studied objects. However, the lack of a uniting theoretical frame hin-
ders research-informed communication and dialogue between research on different levels,
leaving findings from different fields and levels unconnected, resulting in ‘siloed’ research
(Wang et al., 2017). Thus, the ‘big picture’ of HEL is lost. We propose NAT as a position
with the capacity to conceptualise the multilevel character of HEL without losing the how,
what, and where of leadership—pedagogical dimensions, the content and context.

Difficulties related to understanding pedagogical processes

In the current HEL research, pedagogical interaction is under-theorised. This is a challenge
in two respects. Firstly, this means that the pedagogical qualities of leadership interaction
that occur within and between different levels are under-theorised. Secondly, it means that
HEL research often lacks a developed idea of the core object of HEL, namely research-
based teaching and studying.

Pedagogical qualities of EL

EL at any level covers a wide variety of tasks and assignments related to, for example,
economy, organisation, jurisprudence/law, technology, facilities, and communication. One
of these areas involves creating favourable conditions, either directly or indirectly, for pro-
fessional learning, growth, and the development of all staff (academic and professional),
as well as initiating and participating in change processes concerning the organisational
culture. In these respects, leadership in any institution includes a pedagogical dimension:
to intentionally support the learning of others by direct or indirect measures. Even though
supporting professional learning is a decidedly central dimension of leading in any expert
organisation, leadership literature on this topic is insufficient. Statements such as leader-
ship being about ‘influencing’ (Alvesson, 2019) or ‘influencing learning’ are frequent, but
what these statements mean theoretically or conceptually is surprisingly vague. In interna-
tional literature, there is a disturbing gap between the central role of pedagogical activities
and the core notions of EL theories and models explaining how we can understand peda-
gogical influence (Alvesson, 2019; Niesche & Gowlett, 2019; Wang, 2018).

The object led—study programmes, teaching, and research

As previously observed, theories in HEL seldom pay attention to curricular issues (aims,
contents, and methods of study programmes) or to teachers’ educational professionalism.
In HEL research, instructional leadership (Shaked, 2020) and curriculum leadership (Stark
et al., 2002) are rare, despite being very common in school leadership research (Hallinger,
2005). Curriculum leadership is sometimes defined as ‘a facilitating process in which the
leader works with others to find common purpose’ (Wiles, 2009, p. 21). Curriculum lead-
ership also covers the university’s freedom to formulate the aims, contents, and structure
of research and teaching, connecting directly to the autonomy of research and teaching.
Freedom to research, to teach and to learn are inseparable dimensions of academic freedom
with a long history (Robertson, 1969). Given that the study programmes are typically in
the hands of the university, leading collaborative work developing these programmes is a
main issue at any leadership level. Developing study programmes in HE is naturally related

                                                                                   13

1286                                                                     Higher Education (2023) 85:1281–1298


to and intertwined with the creation of new knowledge through research. Creating condi-
tions for research (to study something) has a pedagogical element at its core, as it aims
at supporting a form of academic professional development characteristic for HE. Lead-
ing and developing the university as a haven for academic learning includes focusing on
teachers’ professional development as teachers as well. If empirical studies on instructional
leaders’ practices indicate a lack of knowledge of teaching and learning, this also appears
as a lack of pedagogical interaction theory.



Bildung centred non‑affirmative education theory as an analytical
framework

To overcome the indicated limitations productively, we will draw on non-affirmative theory
of education and Bildung (NAT) (Benner, 2015, forthcoming; Uljens & Ylimaki, 2017;
Uljens, 2015). NAT includes an interpretation of the modern tradition of Bildung as devel-
oped by Rousseau, Fichte, and Herbart (e.g. Benner, 2015, forthcoming; English, 2013;
Horlacher, 2004; Uljens, 2015), but it must be related to the concept of education to be
pedagogically meaningful (Siljander et al., 2012). Figure 1 lays out the fundamental regu-
lative and constitutive principles of NAT. The two regulative principles to the right focus
on how education relates to society, while the two constitutive principles to the left focus
on pedagogical interaction.


Regulative and constitutive principles

The first regulative principle in the bottom right-hand corner concerns how we define the
relation between education and other societal practices including politics, culture, religion,
and economics. This principle relates to our first critique and argues that modern societies
are characterised by a non-hierarchical relation between societal practices; they all influ-
ence each other while simultaneously being influenced by each other. For example, while
politics decide on laws, laws regulate political practice itself. Education operates under

                                                             s


  A                            Summoning to self-        y                                           of
                                                                         societal influences and
                                                                         requirements


 B Theories of Bildung         Bildsamk                      of humans   Non-hierarchical order of cultural
                                                                                             s
                               corporeity, freedom, historicity, and
                                           y


Fig. 1  Two constitutive and two regulative principles organising four basic concepts as related to theory of
education and theory of Bildung
(modified from Benner, 2015, p. 130)


13

Higher Education (2023) 85:1281–1298                                                         1287


the influence of many societal practices while simultaneously preparing the individual for
participation in and transformation of all of them. A political system influences how HE
is organised, yet it is dependent on how education prepares new generations for the sys-
tem in question. Benner (forthcoming) reminds us that although the principle of the non-
hierarchical relation of societal practices is non-pedagogical, it is necessary as a point of
departure for a general theory of education. It regulates educational activities, as we cannot
meaningfully outline any human education without having an idea of the world and the
future. This Bildung theoretical position accepts a non-teleological view of history and the
future, meaning that the future is radically open and depends on what we and future gen-
erations make of it.
    The second regulative principle (top right-hand corner) relates to our second critique
and asks how policy, financing, administration, and other forms of governance and leader-
ship, occurring on levels ranging from supranational down to teacher levels, contribute to
transforming societal interests to pedagogical work. Given the many levels of decision-
making in the education system, this principle asks to what extent autonomous action to
determine the meaning and value of aims and contents of educational influences exists on
and between levels of EL.
    Both constitutive principles to the left of Fig. 1 relate to our third critique on the absence
of a theory of pedagogical interaction in EL models. Pedagogical interaction is dependent
on, what in the German language is called the learner’s Bildsamkeit, the first constitutive
principle (bottom left-hand corner). In the literature, the notions of Bildsamkeit (origi-
nally developed by J. F. Herbart) and Bildung are interpreted very differently (Benner &
Brüggen, 2004; Lenzen, 1997). In this context, Bildsamkeit refers not to the human ability
to learn, to human plasticity, but to the subject’s self-active, spontaneous, and never-ending
dynamic relation to the world, in which we relate to and may transcend our current way of
understanding and being in the world (Benner, forthcoming). If the first regulative princi-
ple describes an assumption regarding the interdependent dynamics on the societal level
operating in a non-hierarchical way, Bildsamkeit describes a similar relational assumption
regarding dynamics on the individual level.
    The second constitutive principle (top left-hand corner) defines a pedagogic interven-
tion as a summons of self-activity. Pedagogical intervention is understood as an invitation
or provocation to an already self-active other, to direct her attention in a certain direction
and engage in self-transcending activity that likely will result in intended changes through
a process of learning. A pedagogical intervention is thus an interruption in the relation
between the other and the world. Due to constitutive subjective freedom, the summoner
does not possess coercive power over the Other’s way of perceiving themselves and the
world, and is unable to directly transfer ideas, knowledge, values, and competencies, to the
other. PL, understood as a pedagogic summons, entails directing an Other’s self-activity
to transcend their current state through a process of self-directed transformation. PL is not
tied to any formal leadership positions, as all actors are potential objects as well as initia-
tors of pedagogical summoning.
    NAT has made use of the concept of recognition, originally developed by Fichte and
Hegel (Williams, 1992), and more recently by Charles Taylor (1989) and Axel Honneth
(1995). In the present context, the notion does not itself refer to pedagogical activity.
Instead, it means, first, that each recognises the other as an anthropologically indetermined
subject (free, actively relating to the world) and second, paying due respect to the experi-
enced life realities, possibilities, limitations, and potentials of the other. By recognition,
summoning takes the other’s life reality and orientation as its starting point. Recognition is
a dual relation and includes the other recognising the summons directed at them.

                                                                                      13

1288                                                          Higher Education (2023) 85:1281–1298


   Learning, emanating from study activity, which in turn is influenced by a PL summons,
is not a direct linear consequence of the intentions of the summoner. Rather, learning may
occur as a consequence of the learners’ own actions, resulting from the interplay between
the summons, the context, and the interpretations of the summoned. In this way, summon-
ing and Bildsamkeit are relational concepts—summoning assumes Bildsamkeit, which
always points to experiencing influences. In this respect, how the subject develops depends
on, but is not determined by, pedagogical intervention. As actors in HEL stand in an open
relation to the world, they are in constant transformation and do not identify as stable enti-
ties. A pedagogical intervention, defined as the summoning of self-activity through PL or
teaching, can thus be understood as an act of directing the others’ self-activity in a specific
direction with the ambition of inducing activities that may result in learning. In a teaching
context, Uljens (1997) describes this as the teaching-studying-learning process, denoting
that learning is not something we do; it is something that may happen to us resulting from
the activity of studying. Teaching, in turn, does not lead to learning, but facilitates studying
as the teacher and learner intersubjectively construct a situational shared experience within
which the teacher may direct the learner’s attention to new forms of self-activity (Uljens &
Kullenberg, 2021).


Answering the critiques: non‑affirmative HEL

In this section, we answer the three critiques presented at the outset.



Critique 1—the dynamic relation between HE and other societal practices

The fundamental freedom in research, teaching, and studying characterising universities
following a Western tradition, identified as the Humboldtian model of HE, states that
new knowledge and its teaching must not be determined by economic, political, or reli-
gious powers and authority. Such a view relates education constitutively to the societal
role of an institution. However, soon after the ideal of independent university research
and teaching was, once again, confirmed by the Bologna Declaration of 1988—the
‘Magna Charta of European universities’—the division between East and West Europe
ended by the collapse of the Soviet Union and fall of the Berlin wall. The ‘market state’
became the dominant model, resulting in obvious steps to bringing together liberal and
vocational forms of higher education (Anderson, 2006). The rhetoric around the emerg-
ing knowledge-based society, requiring research and teaching to be economically rel-
evant, has influenced governance, leadership, and financing of HE. Thus, beyond any
doubt, HEL theory needs to provide a relevant point of departure for dealing with these
issues.
   To clarify how non-affirmative theory deals with education’s relation to other soci-
etal practices, an analytical-descriptive lens is required. From this perspective, NAT asks
to what extent education is sub-ordinate and superordinate to other societal practices.
Universities can seldom, if ever, act independently of the rest of society, standing above
other interests in absolute autonomy. It is, however, equally rare that universities are
completely sub-ordinate to or determined by political, economic, or religious interests.
This means that different societal practices, of which HE is one, must recognise the inter-
ests of each other. Typically, educational institutions and educational actors have relative


13

Higher Education (2023) 85:1281–1298                                                         1289


autonomy, as they are not operating totally without either outside influence or bounda-
ries, nor are they in total subordination to these influences (Uljens & Ylimaki, 2017).
    The contribution of non-affirmative theory of education is a non-linear and non-hierar-
chical view, offering a theoretical construct for empirical analysis to what extent instances
owning a superior role in relation to other practices recognise the relative autonomy of
these action levels. If external interests strictly govern universities, or if there is a top-down
hierarchy within them, leadership forces actors to affirm external or internal interests. If
universities not only recognise but also affirm such interests, education institutions sub-
ordinate themselves in relation to these.
    While the above argumentation applies for empirical studies regarding how and to what
extent various interests and actors require affirmative action from others, non-affirmative
education theory itself takes a critical stand in this question. It argues in favour of recognis-
ing the interests external or superior to each operational level, reminding of the importance
of maintaining a space and capacity for autonomous action, recommending actors not to
affirm these interests. The motive for supporting non-affirmative EL and teaching relate to
the societal task of the universities described above. Affirmative pedagogy and leadership
run the risk of not reaching the aims of the universities of promoting the development of
self-determining, reflective, and critical citizens able to contribute to existing practices and
develop new ones.
    To conclude, the non-affirmative position offers an analytical construct for how to relate
HE to other societal practices beyond functionalist and transformation-oriented positions,
providing an analytical gaze, emphasising that HE institutions are indeed expected to rec-
ognise legitimate interests and aspirations of different stakeholders, yet maintaining that
these aspirations cannot in any case be expected to be affirmed without serious consid-
eration. At different levels, recognition without affirmation creates a space for collabora-
tive, joint reflection and repositioning activities of individuals and organisations. Non-
affirmative analytics asks to what extent EL manages to take into account interests such as
those of the labour market, science, and politics, but avoiding instrumentalization, which
would violate HE’s relative autonomy in education and research. Autonomy is crucial for
educational institutions, as education in liberal economies and political democracies has
an emancipatory task aiming at developing students’ professional, personal, and societal
self-determination. This entails supporting students to develop their ability of analytical
and critical reflection as individuals, problematizing existing theoretical answers to various
dilemmas. In this respect, existing knowledge offers itself as a necessary medium through
which the learners’ reflexive ability is developed.


Critique 2—approaching the multilevel character non‑affirmatively

Our second critique is that many current approaches either appear to run the risk of provid-
ing universal languages covering several levels of any societal practice, thereby making
the nature of education invisible, or generating a particular vocabulary limited to specific
levels or aspects in isolation, thereby missing the big picture. We requested a third position,
providing a vocabulary that is (a) relevant for the leadership of educational institutions and
(b) addressing the pedagogic character of leadership and governance initiatives across the
different levels of HEL. We illustrate this dialogue in Fig. 2.
   The formal HEL hierarchy, as illustrated in Fig. 2, operates in the symbiotic tension
between the scientific community and various external stakeholders, but at the same time,
universities contribute to the self-construction of these stakeholders. HEL is a hierarchy

                                                                                      13

1290                                                               Higher Education (2023) 85:1281–1298




Fig. 2  HEL as a multilevel and multi-actor phenomenon (developed from Uljens & Elo, 2020)



and a rhizomatic network simultaneously (Välimaa et. al., 2016), with individual actors
located at specific levels, interacting with actors at other levels in dynamic and changing
networks. Any actor can participate in a leadership process that emerges in these networks.
The circular arrows between actors on different levels represent the reciprocal influences
between these actors.
    NAT brings a system perspective to the forefront, arguing that understanding the peda-
gogic dimensions of HEL cannot be limited to focusing on individuals in isolation, nor the
activities of any particular group in an entitizing sense. Grasping HEL requires seeing it
as a part of a larger dynamic process of creating direction collaboratively, spanning sev-
eral leadership levels, including a multitude of actors. This means that when a single study
focuses on PL between two individuals or within a group, for example, this interaction can-
not be meaningfully understood in isolation from the pre-existing larger context, while this
larger context simultaneously is discursively co-constructed by micro-processes (Crevani
et al., 2010).
    EL covers a wide range of tasks including economy, law, organisation, distribution of
work, or communication. One of these tasks is to create conditions for the learning of oth-
ers, both directly and indirectly, and educational theory helps us conceptualise this peda-
gogical dimension. From a PL perspective, a formal leader or actor, or more broadly, a

13

Higher Education (2023) 85:1281–1298                                                            1291


level of leadership, must recognise summons from many actors, levels, and directions.
These influences and initiatives may be contradictory or point in different directions and
be driven by different interests. Affirming all of them is not an option. Instead, the actor
must make a judgement of an appropriate course of action given the cultural and historical
context at hand. Different levels of EL are thus not entirely sub- nor superordinate to each
other but maintain a certain space and capacity for autonomous action, as they reciprocally
influence each other in complex, rhizomatic webs of summons.
    As leadership in general often includes mediation, this certainly holds true for the peda-
gogical dimensions of leadership. When others are summoned to self-activity, the actor
must recognise the life-realities, values, and aims of the other while maintaining a capacity
to challenge the Other to transcend the current state by not affirming them. Affirming the
other ‘all out’ would entail uncritically accepting every aspect of the other’s understanding
of the world and render pedagogic influence impossible. PL is a process of interpretative
mediation involving the recognition of external influences without affirming them, as well
as the recognition but not affirmation of the other. In PL, actors control certain degrees of
freedom to deliberately engage others when co-constructing a mediational space whereby
Others are invited to self-transcending activity.
    As an analytical concept, affirmation is not a binary question of yes or no, but rather a
continuum of different degrees and forms of affirmation. Different actors, institutions, or
nations in different contexts presumably have different prerequisites and capabilities for, as
well as practices of, recognising and responding to summons in more or less non-affirma-
tive ways. As an analytical concept, non-affirmative summoning provides a tool to analyse
in what ways and to what extent pedagogic actors, leaders, or institutions affirm either hori-
zontal or vertical interests in their collaboratively mediating leadership activity in a mul-
tilevel-networked system. It also provides a tool for analysing to what extent pedagogical
summons are affirmative in character, i.e. to what extent they require affirmative response.

Critique 3—a language of non‑affirmative education for the what and how of EL

Our third critique states that although research on leadership, EL, and PL often claim that
leadership is about influencing people or influencing learning, this pedagogical influence is
undertheorized. Typically, EL research does not elaborate further on how we could concep-
tualise this influence or the pedagogical relation. Previously, we pointed at the two consti-
tutive principles of NAT, providing us with a language to address PL influence regardless
of context.
   First, this position draws on philosophical anthropology as developed within the Ger-
man and Nordic tradition of Bildung.1 Philosophical anthropology elaborates on assump-
tions of what a human being is. Bildung, a complex concept as such, was originally devel-
oped by emphasising that the human being is not determined by anything innate or by
external conditions, thus moving from a premodern, teleological view of the subject and
the world. One of the core concepts in this tradition, Bildsamkeit, points out that being
in the world features a subject–world relation referring not to the external object as such,
or the isolated experiential dimension within the subject, but to the world as actively
experienced, constituted by meaning making activity. The process operates in both direc-
tions: while the subject embraces culture in this process, coming to share it with others,
the individual simultaneously develops her unique identity or personality in this process.
1
  The concept of Bildung was developed by seminal thinkers like Rousseau, Kant, Herder, von Humboldt,
Fichte, Schleiermacher, and Herbart.


                                                                                         13

1292                                                          Higher Education (2023) 85:1281–1298


Thus, personalisation (to develop a unique identity) and socialisation (to come to share the
culture with others) are interrelated phenomena. When the individual makes culture her
own, she makes it her own, interpreting and relating to it in unique ways. While a Bildung
tradition analyses human growth and learning in terms of the experiential cultural con-
tents rather than through psychological processes such as cognitivist learning theory, it still
accepts that education may develop general capabilities such as critical thinking or ethical
responsibility.
   Bildung’s idea of education goes back to J. G. Fichte’s (1796/1992) critique on Kantian
transcendental idealism. Kant had argued that a human being’s awareness of herself as free
and indetermined is made possible by her a priori awareness of the categorical imperative
in the form of moral principles, as well as innate structuring categories such as time and
space. In contrast, Fichte argued that while a human being is indeed born indetermined,
her awareness of herself as culturally free results from being treated as such by the empiri-
cal other. Fichte’s idea was that our awareness of ourselves as culturally free depends on
that we are recognized and treated as such by others. In other words, we come to realise
ourselves as free by being summoned to self-active engagement with the world. In this
light, the modern paradox of education is to treat the Other as if the other already would be
somebody or something that she may become by her own activity, in the relational peda-
gogical process.
   This relational tradition of thought, which emphasises the importance of the empirical
other, began with Fichte but was further developed by Hegel, Vygotsky, Mead, Dewey,
Habermas, Honneth, and Taylor and manifests itself today in non-entitative, processual
approaches to leadership research and communication. In this interpretation, being and
becoming human builds upon a relational social philosophy that is processual in nature.
Being is thus constantly about becoming, where the individual continuously establishes
and reforms her relation to others, the world, and herself. There are no immanent sources
determining the direction or end of human activity. Rather, ‘determining direction’, often
considered central in leadership theory, is an inherent dimension of the process of Bildung;
namely, to live with the question of which direction to choose as an open one. Assum-
ing that the future is not predefined, but something that follows from indetermined human
action, the question of direction requires permanent engagement and position taking.
   Pedagogical activity builds upon the recognition of the Other, within a cultural space
that is already shared. Within this space, an already self-active Other is summoned to redi-
rect her attention by engaging in activities that may lead to the Other transcending her cur-
rent way of understanding some aspect of the world, herself, or her relation to the world.
In other words, in this shared process, PL initiates conditions for learning. NAT empha-
sises that pedagogical influence is not linear; it is not the summons that leads to learn-
ing, but rather the activities of the summoned that may result in learning and a change of
perspective.
   NAT accepts that no leadership theory is devoid of values. The normative dimen-
sion of the theory manifests itself in educational ideals to support the development of
a mature, critically reflecting, self-determinate citizen and subject in an autonomous
nation-state able to actively collaborate and contribute to a non-determined develop-
ment of society in a globalized world. The distinction between negative and positive
liberty (Berlin, 1969) clarifies this educational ideal. While negative liberty refers to
freedom from external restraints or limitations, positive liberty refers to the capacity or
possibilities to self-determination and practicing one’s intentions in relation to other’s
interests. Formally recognising civil rights (negative liberty) does not guarantee that an
individual has the true capacity to execute these rights productively. For this to occur,

13

Higher Education (2023) 85:1281–1298                                                    1293


positive liberty is necessary—the citizen must be recognized as having the right to be
offered the cultural tools for acting in one’s own interests as related to others’ interests.
Education is central for reaching this capacity for self-determination in practice.
    The processual character of PL is visible in three ways. First, from a Bildung theo-
retical perspective, each subject is in a lifelong open processual relation to the world.
Being constantly ‘in the making’, PL intervenes in this ongoing process, providing
necessary input without determining the outcomes. Second, the PL relation itself is
an open processual relation being both symmetrical and asymmetrical with respect to
roles and experiences. The result of a pedagogic summons is not knowable beforehand,
as it evolves in the interplay between the summoner, the summoned, and the context.
Thirdly, the processual character of PL is visible in the processual nature of the devel-
opment of organisational culture. Directing others’ self-activity in a way that results
in learning, regardless of whether this occurs on an interpersonal or organisational
level, is an act of ‘shaping movement and courses of action’, which is at the core of
leadership work (Crevani, 2018, p.89). Non-affirmative PL, understood as a multilevel
socially shared phenomenon, is therefore in line with a process ontology of leadership.
    Approaching PL in HE in this manner portrays it as a processually evolving mul-
tilevel and multi-actor phenomenon that is not strictly tied to traditional positions of
leader and follower or academic and professional staff. Bildung-based PL reminds us
of what Crevani (2018) describes as a processual production of direction in various
forms of relations and interactions evolving over time, as well as over organisational
space. The direction of the development, shaped in the interplay of summons between
actors, is not predetermined.
    Our argument is that being able to conceptualise pedagogic influence has three
advantages. First, it enables us to conceptualise one of the core activities in HE,
namely teaching, and thus conceptualise one of the core objects of HEL. We argue that
academics and professional staff engaged in leading in HE are more capable and suc-
cessful if they can theoretically conceptualise the work carried out within the organisa-
tion—in this case, teaching. To lead pedagogical praxis pedagogically is a very spe-
cific type of leadership.
    Secondly, being able to conceptualise PL influence provides us with a language for
understanding the leadership influence that occurs within and between actors at all lev-
els in HE, NAT gives us a language to talk about PL influence regardless of level or
context. Using NAT to approach PL in HE provides a language and framework for
studying PL interaction as an ongoing process of production of direction, and thus a
theoretical foundation to talk about PL influence, which is rarely theorised in research
hitherto. The non-affirmative concept directs our attention to degrees of freedom cre-
ated in a pedagogic summons, be them on a local, national, or global level.
    Finally, leadership and management are increasingly related to the development of
organisations’ operative culture. Leadership of such change processes is pedagogi-
cal, as it aims at influencing and developing culture through the learning processes of
groups of individuals. Developmental leadership is thus an object for educational the-
ory to study. We believe the above argumentation provides strong reasons to approach
EL, especially the pedagogical dimensions of it, utilising a theory of education. We
argue that a non-affirmative approach can overcome some of the difficulties identified,
avoiding the typical dilemmas of both functional-reproductive and ideological-trans-
formative approaches to education.




                                                                                  13

1294                                                         Higher Education (2023) 85:1281–1298


Discussion and conclusions

Based on three critiques of perceived shortcomings in HEL research, this article elabo-
rated how non-affirmative theory of education and Bildung apply to overcome them. NAT
originally developed within German and Nordic theories of education, drawing on a long-
standing tradition of Bildung and a related concept of education, where human and soci-
etal development are intertwined and interdependent. Political democracy and a liberal
economy thus influence education, but are, at the same time, dependent on citizenship and
professional education. They are thereby related to EL emphasising individual self- and
co-determination, visible in the principles of freedom in research, teaching and studying.
    Consequently, education of university students and related leadership supporting faculty
and staff require a deliberational and processual notion of leadership activity. NAT makes
pedagogical qualities of HEL explicit by asking to what extent such practices are non-
affirmative in character. In its normative stance, NAT argues that while external legitimate
interests need to be recognized, they should not be affirmed one-sidedly, as affirmative
leadership instrumentally subordinate higher education to external interests, which violates
the idea of Western universities. Thus, NAT suggests that EL research should incorpo-
rate the idea of a non-hierarchical relation between education and other societal practices.
Accepting a non-hierarchical view as a point of departure for understanding HEL, NAT
offers a leadership language that incorporates dynamics across levels (i.e. bottom-up and
top-down) and within distinct levels of administration. HEL mediates and transforms exter-
nal interests, providing various degrees of freedom for enactment processes on other levels.
In short, non-affirmative leadership allows for non-affirmative curriculum work, teaching,
and research.
    The approach maintains a distinction between EL and PL. From a structuralist systems
perspective, EL refers to a multilevel networked phenomenon concerning the governance
(management, leadership, and development) of institutionalised education. EL involves
leading educational institutions at a teacher-, programme-, faculty-, university-, national,
or supranational level. Working at any of these levels, EL can include all aspects of what
it means to manage, lead, and develop an educational institution (e.g. legally, organisation-
ally, economically, relationally, pedagogically, or technologically). One of the aspects of
EL is PL, leadership interventions with pedagogical interaction at the core. Recent mana-
gerial leadership policy reforms (Gunter et al., 2016) obviously favour affirmative lead-
ership, thus jeopardising those non-affirmative education principles historically of central
concern and principal aims of universities.
    Originally, the terminology developed to understanding teaching as related to Bildung
(summoning to self-activity and Bildsamkeit) described dyadic teaching, studying, and
learning processes. In this context, we extend the usage of summoning the other. Both the
summoning agent and the ‘other’ can be understood both as a ‘generalised other’, such as
an individual, organisation, a board, a policy, or a nation. One implication is that PL occurs
in many places, beyond traditional pedagogical situations. Defining PL in this manner is
not in conflict with but goes beyond the mainstream interpretation of PL concerning lead-
ing practices of teaching and learning in a school context (Male & Palaiologou, 2015). The
direct or indirect engagement of others’ self-directed activities to reach beyond a present
state through a process of learning can occur in any societal field or organisation where
human resources are crucial for the organisation’s activity. Defined in this manner, neither
EL nor PL are thus necessarily ‘types’ of leadership, such as transformative, transactional,
authentic, or distributed leadership.


13

Higher Education (2023) 85:1281–1298                                                                           1295


   Adopting a Bildung theoretical point of departure, where the subject’s relation to the
world, others, and herself is constitutively open, provides a processual view of being
human. In Bildung, being is an unending process of becoming but always in relation to
something other than the subject herself (English, 2013). For the individual, this processual
view includes reflection of the direction of one’s own development. In essence, Bildung is
connected to a non-teleological view of societal development. There are no inherent ideals
or determinations directing individual or cultural development, and the future is radically
open. Thus, ‘being as becoming’ is not reducible to either sociality or subjectivity, but a
relational concept. Following such a relational and processual social ontology (Uljens &
Kullenberg, 2021), PL is an activity where roles take turns, but it is always an intervention
in the other’s relation to herself, to other human beings, and to the world. By invitational
summoning of the other, PL creates a temporally limited reflective, intersubjective, or
shared space aimed to enable the other to engage in switching her gaze, perhaps resulting
from a comparative reflection developing a renewed understanding.
   Our discussion highlights the importance of having a theoretical framework enabling
approaching and elaborating pedagogic influence and the extent of its coercive character,
namely, the degrees of non-affirmative action it renders possible, in a theoretically coherent
way. An important point of departure is seeing the relation between education and other
societal domains as non-hierarchical. This allows asking to what degree and in what ways
the relations between societal domains such as politics, economy, or religion allow HE an
autonomous space to recognise the interests directed at HE, but not affirm them, thereby
allowing HE to fulfil its task in a democracy.


Funding Open access funding provided by Abo Akademi University (ABO).

Declarations
Conflict of interest The authors declare no competing interests.

Open Access This article is licensed under a Creative Commons Attribution 4.0 International License,
which permits use, sharing, adaptation, distribution and reproduction in any medium or format, as long
as you give appropriate credit to the original author(s) and the source, provide a link to the Creative Com-
mons licence, and indicate if changes were made. The images or other third party material in this article
are included in the article’s Creative Commons licence, unless indicated otherwise in a credit line to the
material. If material is not included in the article’s Creative Commons licence and your intended use is not
permitted by statutory regulation or exceeds the permitted use, you will need to obtain permission directly
from the copyright holder. To view a copy of this licence, visit http://​creat​iveco​mmons.​org/​licen​ses/​by/4.​0/.




References
Alvesson, M. (2019). Waiting for Godot: Eight major problems in the odd field of leadership studies. Lead-
     ership, 15, 27–43. https://​doi.​org/​10.​1177/​17427​15017​736707
van Ameijde, J., Nelson, P., Billsberry, J., & van Meurs, N. (2009). Improving leadership in higher educa-
     tion institutions: A distributed perspective. Higher Education, 58, 763–779. https://​doi.​org/​10.​1007/​
     s10734-​009-​9224-y
Anderson, R. (2006). British universities past and present. Hambledon Continuum.
Apkarian, N., & Rasmussen, C. (2021). Instructional leadership structures across five university depart-
     ments. Higher Education, 81, 865–887. https://​doi.​org/​10.​1007/​s10734-​020-​00583-6
Benner, D. (2015). Allgemeine Pädagogik ­(8th edition). Beltz Juventa.


                                                                                                       13

1296                                                                       Higher Education (2023) 85:1281–1298


Benner, D. (forthcoming). On affirmativity and non-affirmativity in the context of theories of education and
     Bildung. In M. Uljens (Ed.), Non-affirmative Theory of Education and Bildung. Springer.
Benner, D., & Brüggen, F. (2004). Bildsamkeit / Bildung. In D. Benner & J. Oelkers (Eds.), Historisches
     Wörterbuch der Pädagogik. Beltz.
Berlin, I. (1969). Two concepts of liberty. In I. Berlin, Four essays on liberty, (pp. 118–172). Oxford Uni-
     versity Press.
Bolden, R., Gosling, J., & O’Brien, A. (2014). Citizens of the academic community? A societal perspective
     on leadership in UK higher education. Studies in Higher Education, 39, 754–770. https://​doi.​org/​10.​
     1080/​03075​079.​2012.​754855
Bolden, R., Petrov, G., & Gosling, J. (2008). Tensions in higher education leadership: Towards a multilevel
     model of leadership practice. Higher Education Quarterly, 62, 358–376. https://​doi.​org/​10.​1111/j.​
     1468-​2273.​2008.​00398.x
Bovill, C., & Woolmer, C. (2019). How conceptualisations of curriculum in higher education influence
     student-staff co-creation in and of the curriculum. Higher Education, 78, 407–422. https://​doi.​org/​10.​
     1007/​s10734-​018-​0349-8
Capano, G., & Pritoni, A. (2020). What really happens in higher education governance? Trajectories of
     adopted policy instruments in higher education over time in 16 European countries. Higher Education,
     80, 989–1010. https://​doi.​org/​10.​1007/​s10734-​020-​00529-y
Crevani, L. (2018). Is there leadership in a fluid world? Exploring the ongoing production of direction in
     organizing. Leadership, 14, 83–109. https://​doi.​org/​10.​1177/​17427​15015​616667
Crevani, L., Ekman, M., Lindgren, M., & Packendorff, J. (2015). Leadership cultures and discursive hybrid-
     isation: On the cultural production of leadership in higher education reforms. International Journal of
     Public Leadership, 11, 147–165. https://​doi.​org/​10.​1108/​IJPL-​08-​2015-​0019
Crevani, L., Lindgren, M., & Packendorff, J. (2010). Leadership, not leaders: On the study of leadership as
     practices and interactions. Scandinavian Journal of Management, 26, 77–86. https://​doi.​org/​10.​1016/j.​
     scaman.​2009.​12.​003
Croucher, G., & Lacy, W. (2022). The emergence of academic capitalism and university neoliberalism: Per-
     spectives of Australian higher education leadership. Higher Education, 83, 279–295. https://​doi.​org/​
     10.​1007/​s10734-​020-​00655-7
Czarniawska, B., & Sevón, G. (2005). Global ideas. How ideas, objects, and practices travel in the global
     economy. Liber.
English, A. R. (2013). Discontinuity in learning: Dewey, Herbart, and education as transformation. Cam-
     bridge University Press.
Fichte, J. G. (1796/1992). Foundations of transcendental philosophy (D. Breazeale, Trans.). Cornell Univer-
     sity Press.
Floyd, A., & Preston, D. (2018). The role of the associate dean in UK universities: Distributed leadership in
     action? Higher Education, 75, 925–943. https://​doi.​org/​10.​1007/​s10734-​017-​0178-1
Frost, J., Hattke, F., & Reihlen, M. (Eds.), (2016). Multilevel governance in universities. Strategy, structure,
     control. Springer.
Giroux, H. A. (1980). Beyond the correspondence theory: Notes on the dynamics of educational reproduc-
     tion and transformation. Curriculum Inquiry, 10, 225–247. https://​doi.​org/​10.​1080/​03626​784.​1980.​
     11075​221
Goodson, I. F., & Rudd, T. (2012). Developing a concept of ‘refraction’: Exploring educational change and
     oppositional practice. Educational Practice and Theory, 34, 5–24. https://​doi.​org/​10.​7459/​EPT/​34.1.​02
Gunter, H. M., Grimaldi, E., Hall, D., & Serpieri, R. (Eds.), (2016). New Public Management and the
     Reform of Education: European Lessons for Policy and Practice. Routledge. https://​www.​routl​edge.​
     com/​New-​Public-​Manag​ement-​and-​the-​Reform-​of-​Educa​tion-​Europ​ean-​lesso​ns-​for/​Gunter-​Grima​ldi-​
     Hall-​Serpi​eri/p/​book/​97811​38833​814
Hallinger, P. (2005). Instructional leadership and the school principal: A passing fancy that refuses to fade
     away. Leadership and Policy in Schools, 4, 221–239.
Honneth, A. (1995). The struggle for recognition. The moral grammar of social conflicts. Polity.
Horlacher, R. (2004). Bildung – a construction of a history of philosophy of education. Studies in Philoso-
     phy and Education, 23, 409–426.
Kasworm, C. E., & Bowles, T. A. (2012). Fostering transformative learning in higher education settings. In
     E. W. Taylor & P. Cranton (Eds.), The Handbook of Transformative Learning: Theory, Research and
     Practice (pp. 388–407). Wiley.
Koeslag-Kreunen, M., Van den Bossche, P., Van der Klink, M., & Gijselaers, V. (2021). Vertical or shared?
     When Leadership Supports Team Learning for Educational Change,. Higher Education, 82, 19–37.
     https://​doi.​org/​10.​1007/​s10734-​020-​00620-4




13

Higher Education (2023) 85:1281–1298                                                                          1297


Leithwood, K. A., & Riehl, C. (2003). What we know about successful school leadership.National College
      for School Leadership.
Lenzen, D. (1997). Lösen die Begriffe Selbstorganisation, Autopoiesis und Emergenz den Bildungsbegriff
      ab? Zeitschrift Für Pädagogik, 43, 949–967.
McArthur, J. (2010). Achieving social justice within and through higher education: The challenge for criti-
      cal pedagogy. Teaching in Higher Education, 15, 493–504.
McLendon, M. K. (2003). The politics of higher education: Toward an expanded research agenda. Educa-
      tional Policy, 17, 165–191. https://​doi.​org/​10.​1177/​08959​04802​239291
Male, T., & Palaiologou, I. (2015). Pedagogical leadership in the 21st century: Evidence from the field.
      Educational Management Administration & Leadership, 43, 214–231. https://​doi.​org/​10.​1177/​17411​
      43213​494889
McLaren, P. (2014). Life in schools: An introduction to critical pedagogy and the foundations of education
      ­(6th Edition). Paradigm Publishers.
Mezirow, J. (1991). Transformative dimensions of adult learning. Jossey-Bass.
Niesche, R., & Gowlett, C. (2019). Critical perspectives in educational leadership: A new ‘theory turn’? In
       Niesche, R. & Gowlett, C. (2019). Social, critical and political theories for educational leadership,
       (pp. 17–34). Springer.
O´Reilly, D., & Reed, M. (2010). ‘Leaderism’: An evolution of managerialism In UK public service reform.
       Public Administration, 88, 960–978. https://​doi.​org/​10.​1111/j.​1467-​9299.​2010.​01864.x
Rhoades, G., & Sporn, B. (2002). Quality assurance in Europe and the U.S.: Professional and political eco-
       nomic framing of higher education policy. Higher Education, 43, 355–390.
Robertson, P. (1969). Students on the barricades: Germany and Austria, 1848. Political Science Quarterly,
       84, 367–379.
Schmidt, V. A. (2008). Discursive institutionalism: The explanatory power of ideas and discourse. Annual
       Review of Political Science, 11, 303–326. https://​doi.​org/​10.​1146/​annur​ev.​polis​ci.​11.​060606.​135342
Shaked, H. (2020). Instructional leadership in higher education: The case of Israel. Higher Education Quar-
       terly, 75, 212–226. https://​doi.​org/​10.​1111/​hequ.​12274
Shields, C. M. (2014). Leadership for social justice education: A critical transformative approach. In I.
       Bogotch & C. Schields (Eds.), International handbook of educational leadership and social (in) justice
       (pp. 323–339). Springer.
Siljander, P., Kivelä, A., & Sutinen, A. (Eds.), (2012). Theories of Bildung and growth. Rotterdam: Sense.
Stark, J. S., Briggs, C. L., & Rowland-Poplawski, J. (2002). Curriculum leadership roles of chairpersons in
       continuously planning departments. Research in Higher Education, 43, 329–356.
Stes, A., Coertjens, L., & Van Petegem, P. (2010). Instructional development for teachers in higher edu-
       cation: Impact on teaching approach. Higher Education, 60, 187–204. https://​doi.​org/​10.​1007/​
       s10734-​009-​9294-x
Taylor, C. (1989). Sources of the self: The making of the modern identity. Harvard University Press.
Tolman, S. (2019). Considerations for using critical pedagogy as the vehicle to promote social justice in
       higher education. In J. Hoffman, P. Blessinger & M. Makhanya (Eds.), Strategies for fostering inclu-
       sive classrooms in higher education: International perspectives on equity and inclusion. Emerald.
Uljens, M. (1997). School didactics and learning. Psychology Press.
Uljens, M. (2015). Curriculum work as educational leadership: Paradoxes and theoretical foundations. Nor-
       dic Journal of Studies in Educational Policy, 1, 22–30. https://​doi.​org/​10.​3402/​nstep.​v1.​27010
Uljens, M., & Elo, J. (2020). Reflecting refraction in higher education. In P. Sikes & Y. Novakovic (Eds.),
       Storying the public intellectual. Commentaries on the impact and influence of the work of Ivor Good-
       son (pp. 119–130). Routledge.
Uljens, M., & Ylimaki, R. (2017). Non-affirmative theory of education as a foundation for curriculum
       studies, Didaktik and educational leadership. In M. Uljens and R. Ylimaki, (Eds.), Bridging educa-
       tional leadership, curriculum theory and Didaktik—Non-affirmative theory of education (pp. 3–145).
       Springer. https://​link.​sprin​ger.​com/​book/​10.​1007%​2F978-3-​319-​58650-2
Uljens, M., & Kullenberg, T. (2021). Non-affirmative school didactics and life-world phenomenology – con-
       ceptualizing missing links. In A. Qvortrup, E. Krogh, & S. T. Graf (Eds.), Didaktik and curriculum in
       ongoing dialogue (pp. 185–203). Routledge.
Välimaa, J., Papatsiba, V., & Hoffman, D. M. (2016). Higher education in networked knowledge societies.
       In D. M. Hoffman & J. Välimaa (Eds.), Re-becoming universities—Higher education institutions in
       networked knowledge societies (pp. 13–39). Springer.
Varga, J. (2006). The role of labour market expectations and admission probabilities in students’ application
       decisions on higher education: The case of Hungary. Education Economics, 14, 309–327. https://​doi.​
       org/​10.​1080/​09645​29060​07775​35




                                                                                                      13

1298                                                                  Higher Education (2023) 85:1281–1298


Wang, Y. (2018). The panorama of the last decade’s theoretical groundings of educational leadership
     research: A concept co-occurrence network analysis. Educational Administration Quarterly, 54, 327–
     365. https://​doi.​org/​10.​1177/​00131​61X18​761342
Wang, Y., Bowers, A., & Fikis, D. (2017). Automated text data mining analysis of five decades of educa-
     tional leadership research literature: Probabilistic topic modelling of EAQ articles from 1965 to 2014.
     Educational Administration Quarterly, 53, 289–323. https://​doi.​org/​10.​1177/​00131​61X16​660585
Wiles, J. (2009). Leading curriculum development. Corwin Press.
Williams, J. (1992). Recognition: Fichte and Hegel on the Other. SUNY Press.

Publisher’s Note Springer Nature remains neutral with regard to jurisdictional claims in published maps and
institutional affiliations.




13