International Research Journal of Management, IT & Social Sciences
                   Available online at https://sloap.org/journals/index.php/irjmis/
                   Vol. 8 No. 2, March 2021, pages: 155-162
                   ISSN: 2395-7492
                   https://doi.org/10.21744/irjmis.v8n2.1350


     Character education strategies in improving students' spiritual
                              intelligence

                                                                                                        M. I. Suhifatullah a
                                                                                                                Sutarman b
                                                                                                          Mastur Thoyib c

Article history:                          Abstract

                                          Education is an effort to foster student character. Purpose Want to know the
Submitted: 27 December 2020               character education management strategy in increasing the spiritual
Revised: 18 January 2020                  intelligence of students. The research method used qualitative instruments,
Accepted: 09 February 2021                namely (1). Focus (2). Observation and interviews (4) Data analysis collection.
                                          Conclusion: (1). Environmental observations at three schools have conducted
                                          a SWOT analysis (2). Formulation of a strategy regarding the vision and
                                          mission, based on the values of faith (3). Strategy implementation with intra
Keywords:                                 and curricular based programs (4). Strategy evaluation serves to monitor
education strategies;                     learning (5). The learning strategy management process is very conducive.
character education;                      Implication (1). Strategic application has implications for the awareness of all
student spiritual intelligence;           school residents (2). The process of positive habituation has implications for
                                          school culture (3). The implementation of full-day school has implications for
                                          the creation of a school with character (4). Enforcement of discipline has
                                          implications for the commitment to school management.


                                              International research journal of management, IT and social sciences © 2021.
                                                              This is an open access article under the CC BY-NC-ND license
                                                                        (https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0/).
Corresponding author:
Sutarman,
Syekh Yusuf Islamic University, Indonesia.
Email address: sutarman@unis.ac.id




a
  Syekh Yusuf Islamic University, Indonesia
b
  Syekh Yusuf Islamic University, Indonesia
c
  Syekh Yusuf Islamic University, Indonesia
                                                                                                                         155

156                                                                                                     ISSN: 2395-7492

1 Introduction

Education is essential as an effort to empower the various personalities of students to grow and develop optimally and
naturally so that it can be beneficial for their personal life and the environment in the future (Sutarman & Radiyanto,
2010; Hifza et al., 2020; Hifza, 2020). Therefore learning or education in schools is not only an activity of knowledge
transformation or intellectual development of students but also as an activity of internalizing the values that can shape
the character of students. The delivery of subject matter is only one of the various activities in learning as a dynamic
process in all phases and processes of student development.

Educational concept

The concept of education above illustrates the integration of cognitive (knowledge), affective (attitude), and
psychomotor (skills). Therefore, in educating students, it is obligatory to build competencies that integrate a unity of
thoughts, attitudes, and actions. Therefore, the vision of national education is formulated in the 2010-2014 National
Education Strategic Plan, namely "The implementation of excellent national education services to form comprehensive
intelligent Indonesians". As for what is meant by Indonesian people who are comprehensively intelligent, namely
spiritual intelligence, emotional intelligence, social intelligence, intellectual intelligence, and kinesthetic intelligence.
(Suderadjat, 2011; Aslan & Suhari, 2018). The pattern of education is described to practice good deeds, or "get used
to the truth" so that noble moral values are "embedded" (internalized) in the value system in the heart and accustomed
to being carried out by the five senses (hand). Learning that is oriented towards accepting noble moral values through
intelligence or thinking skills (head) which are then stored in the value system in the heart.
    The phenomenon, human existence at this time is often measured by "to have" (whatever material it has) and "to
do" (whatever has been successful/unsuccessful to do) rather than the personal existence concerned ("to be" or "being
"his). For this reason, education must be able to instill from an early age that the existence of a person is much more
important and certainly not the same as what belongs to him and what he has done. Because humans are not only
owners of wealth and also carry out a certain function. Humanist education emphasizes the importance of preserving
human existence, in the sense of helping humans to be more humane, more cultured, as fully developed human beings
(Broadbent & Poon, 2015; Meurice et al., 2007).

Spiritual intelligence

Spiritual intelligence is an important part that must be developed in the educational process. Even spiritual intelligence
is seen as a higher intelligence than other intelligence. This is as expressed by Zohar (2012): “SQ is the foundation
needed to function IQ and EQ effectively. Even SQ is our highest intelligence”.
    Students who have spiritual intelligence will avoid bad, evil, persecuted, immoral behavior. Because the
characteristics of a spiritually intelligent person, among others, are happy to do good, like to help others, feel that they
have a noble mission, feel connected to a source of power in the universe, and have a good sense of humor (Ali, 2013;
Hifza, Suhardi et al., 2020; Dewi & Aslan, 2015; Oskar Hutagaluh, 2019; Hutagaluh et al., 2020). When facing
problems in life, a person who has spiritual intelligence does not only prioritize rational and emotional ways, but he
relates them to the meaning of life spiritually. Thus, the steps are more mature and meaningful in life. This is the reason
for the importance of developing the spiritual intelligence of students in character education in schools (Mei-Ju et al.,
2014; Cheung & Lee, 2010; Sanjaya, 2017).

Intellectual intelligence development

Educational orientation that puts forward the development of intellectual intelligence has resulted in the mental and
moral weakness of the nation's children. In various regions, many deviant behaviors are ranging from elementary
school, junior high school, high school, students, and university students. Abuse of drugs, psycho-tropics, and other
addictive substances (NAFZA), violence in the form of student brawls, bullying between students (bullying) as well
as an increasing quantity of accessing porn and free sex sites. Luxurious lifestyle with a culture of hedonism has
increasingly penetrated the urban and rural youth generations, as the influence of both print and electronic mass media
such as; magazines, television, internet, and others.
    It is an indication that education in schools generally emphasizes the development of intelligence in a narrow sense
(intellectual intelligence) and pays less attention to the development of other potentials such as spiritual, emotional,


IRJMIS                                                                         Vol. 8 No. 2, March 2021, pages: 155-162

IRJMIS                                            ISSN: 2395-7492                                                  157
and adversity intelligence as part of character education or noble morals of students. Education in schools tends to be
pragmatism and materialism which ignore the importance of internalizing moral or spiritual values towards students.
Educational conditions like this are certainly not able to protect students from the influence of a global culture that
tends to be hedonistic (looking for pseudo-pleasures) and in turn, will diminish the authenticity of the Indonesian
nation.

Student behavior problems

The behavior is shown by the students, students, and officials above reflect the low spiritual intelligence which
becomes the authenticity of the human being. Intellectual intelligence will be very dangerous if it is not controlled by
the spiritual and emotional intelligence that resides in the conscience because it will lead to the destruction of a nation
(Charkhabi et al., 2014; Koohbanani et al., 2013). Lickona (2012), identifies ten signs of a nation on the way to
collapse. The signs include the following; increasing violence among adolescents, use of bad language and words, the
influence of strong peer groups in acts of violence, increased self-destructive behavior, such as drug use, alcohol, and
casual sex, the increasingly blurred guidelines for good and bad morals, decreased work ethic, the lower the respect
for parents and teachers, low sense of individual and citizen responsibility, a culture of dishonesty and there is mutual
suspicion and hatred between each other.
    The above phenomenon demands serious attention and efforts from all parties, especially educational institutions
or schools to conduct introspection and improvement in the character education process (Lickona, 2004; Aslan, 2017;
Aslan, 2017; Aslan & Setiawan, 2019; Aslan et al., 2019). Principals, teachers, and education personnel must realize
that educational activities are not only directed at developing students' intellectual intelligence, but also for developing
other intelligence, including spiritual, emotional, and adversity intelligence, in order to form a complete or perfect
student personality.


2 Materials and Methods

The research approach uses qualitative as the instrument, namely the researchers themselves. The focus of the research
becomes clear, and it is developed so that it is expected to complement the data and compare it with the data found
through observation and interviews (Bazeley, 2013; Beest et al., 2009; Berg, 2001). Researchers took to the field on the
grand tour question, at the focused and selection stage, collected data, analyzed, and made conclusions.
    The techniques used to collect data are observation, interviews, and documentation study, which are described as
follows.
    a) Observation, the researcher is involved in the daily activities of the person being observed or used as a data
       source;
    b) The interview is a data collection technique through direct interaction between researchers and data sources or
       respondents
    c) Documentation Studies Data in naturalistic research are mostly obtained from human sources or human resources
       through observation and interviews;
    d) Data sources of school resource research subjects related to character education management;
    e) Data analysis techniques are obtained and analyzed to obtain useful information for research.


3 Results and Discussions

The results of research on character education management at the three YPHB Plus Senior High School, Senior High
School, Indonesian Republic Teachers Association Cibinong Plus Senior High School, and Motahhari Plus Senior High
School, to improve students' spiritual intelligence, have been analyzed and interpreted, then a discussion is conducted.
By using strategic management analysis which includes four basic elements: (1). Environmental analysis (2). Strategy
formulation (3). Strategic implementation (4). Evaluation. Then the next discussion is with the theological foundation,
the philosophical foundation, and the theoretical basis and compares it with the research results that are relevant to the
discussion.
    The results in all three schools qualitatively indicate strengths rather than weaknesses, as well as many opportunities
but also challenges. This condition is very favorable because it has strength and opportunity (Muchtarom et al., 2020).

        Suhifatullah, M. I., Sutarman, S., & Thoyib, M. (2021). Character education strategies in improving students’
                       spiritual intelligence. International Research Journal of Management, IT and Social Sciences,
                                                              8(2), 155-162. https://doi.org/10.21744/irjmis.v8n2.1350

158                                                                                                       ISSN: 2395-7492

With the strategy implemented, namely supporting aggressive growth policies and market expansion in recruiting
students. However, the challenges faced are to diversify products, by creating new programs, namely innovative
educational programs that can meet the needs of the community for quality education. Product diversification as an
effort to increase innovative product programs, develop existing products.

                                                           Table 1
                                     Results of the third vision for senior high schools

                                                Vision Senior High School Plus              Vision Senior High School
 Vision Senior High School Plus YPHB            PGRI Cibinong                               Plus Muthahhari
 The realization of tough students in           Excellent in Quality and                    To prepare human resources
 Imtaq and Science and Technology who           Achievement, Global Mindful,                who are useful and
 are environmentally friendly in facing         Religious Entrepreneurs as Agents of        competitive in the global
 the era of globalization                       Change, National Cultural Education.        market


Strategy formulation

The strategy formulation stage is a very important process for all strategic management activities. Because it involves
the products of strategic formulation in the form of vision, mission, goals, strategies, and policies, the three schools
will be the basis for implementing the strategy through the preparation of activity programs, budgeting, and standard
operating procedures.
    a) The policies at the three schools have demonstrated and have a strong commitment to providing character
       education by building a conducive school system or culture. The difference is that Senior High School Plus
       YPHB and Senior High School Plus Motahhari reflect more as a Nationalist Islamic school, while Senior High
       School Plus Motahhari reflects more as a Religious Nationalist school.
    b) Policies have been established in the implementation of education in the three schools, which must support the
       achievement of the school's vision and mission. What is very important from the three schools is that they both
       have a typical school curriculum as national curriculum development. Through a typical school curriculum, it
       is hoped that it can strengthen the character education efforts of students. The three schools also implement full-
       day schools, in addition to reducing students being out of school which can trigger brawls, as well as various
       additional learning programs, both in the form of a typical school curriculum, as well as student extracurricular
       activities.

Strengthening character education, Senior High School Plus YPHB is developing a religious curriculum as an effort
to understand the Islamic creed. Also, it stipulates the importance of cultivating a caring attitude or empathy for
students towards marginalized communities, determining efforts to optimize religious activities in schools to foster
student morals, establishing YPHB High School as an environmentally friendly, clean, green, and healthy school, and
establishing SOP as a reference in the implementation of various activities at YPHB High School that lead to character
building.
    The policy of High School Plus PGRI Cibinong in strengthening character education efforts is to determine the use
of quantum learning, quantum teaching, brain-based learning, accelerated learning, and remedial teaching methods. In
the Development of Teaching and Learning Activities which are based on the theories of intelligence, namely; multiple
intelligence, intellectual intelligence, emotional intelligence, spiritual intelligence. In the spiritual guidance of students,
various religious activity programs are arranged and implemented to increase learning activities in class. And in
creating a conducive process, SOPs are established for both teachers and students.

Strategy implementation

The strategic implementation stage is a core process in the implementation of strategic management (Muchtarom et
al., 2020). Because it involves everything that has become a policy to achieve the vision, mission, goals, and strategies
of the school, it must be able to be stated in various school activity programs and implemented properly with adequate
budget support, as well as rules for carrying out tasks properly. Many character values must be developed through
education in schools. The Research and Development Center for the Curriculum Center of the Ministry of National


IRJMIS                                                                          Vol. 8 No. 2, March 2021, pages: 155-162

IRJMIS                                              ISSN: 2395-7492                                                   159
Education identified 18 pillars of character, namely; Religious, Honesty, Tolerance, Discipline, Hard work, Creative,
Independent, Democracy, Curiosity, National spirit, Love for the motherland, Respect for achievement, Friendly and
cumulative, Love of peace, Love to read, Care for the environment, Care for social and Responsibility.
    The pillars of the character mentioned above will automatically be formed when one's spiritual intelligence
develops optimally. For this reason, Senior High School Plus YPHB, Senior High School Plus PGRI Cibinong, and
Senior High School Plus Motahhari have formulated various educational programs that are expected to develop
students' spiritual intelligence. The interesting thing about the three schools is that they both create programs based on
religious values, both structured in intracurricular activities and extracurricular activities, and implement full-day
schools.
    Senior High School Plus YPHB, for example, applies a school-specific curriculum that emphasizes efforts to
develop the Islamic faith. In every learning activity integrating Islamic science sourced from the al-Quran and the
Hadits of the Prophet. This school also implements the Environmental Education program or the Adi Wiyata Program
to develop a caring attitude and responsibility towards the environment. To foster social or interpersonal attitudes, this
is done through 5-S habituation at school, namely smiling, greeting, greeting, polite and courteous towards everyone,
especially school members. To foster a religious attitude, this is carried out through the implementation of
congregational prayers starting from the duha, duhur and asar prayers, cult, and the night of fostering takwa. These
activities are carried out by prioritizing teacher exemplary and applying the Active, Innovative, Creative, and Fun
Learning approach. Meanwhile, to foster an attitude of empathy, compassion for others, carried out through the
homestay program. This activity is carried out by placing three students in one family in the village for five days. The
purpose of the activity is to increase social awareness by directly participating and being involved in the daily life
activities of the new foster family.

Strategic control

Control is an important part of management activities (Lesmi et al., 2020). To ensure that the implementation of a
program, the use of the budget, and the functionalization of regulations are following the direction of the vision,
mission, objectives, strategies, and policies, it is necessary to carry out monitoring or control through structured and
systematic monitoring or monitoring mechanism. In general, the supervision and monitoring of the three SMAs are
carried out regularly by supervisors from the District /City Education Office.
    Each school carries out regular internal monitoring of the learning process in class. At Senior High School Plus
YPHB monitoring is carried out two times a year by the Principal and Deputy Principals. Whereas at Senior High
School Plus PGRI Cibonong specifically has a Quality Control Group to control all types of learning activities at
school. Monitoring activities at Senior High School Plus PGRI Cibonong are daily, weekly, monthly, and semester
with very objective monitoring instruments.
    Control or monitoring should be done not to find mistakes and then give punishment but must prioritize efforts to
provide motivation and improve performance. Therefore, the things that need to be considered in control are as follows:
1) Control should involve the least amount of information needed to provide a reliable picture; 2) Control should
supervise only activities and meaningful results; 3) Control should be timely; 4) Control should be used in the long
term and short term, 5) Control should show something exactly without exception. 6) Control should be done using
reward rather than punishment.

Strategic evaluation

The strategy that has been implemented needs to be evaluated. This is necessary to study and ascertain whether the
strategy that was implemented was successful or failed. Through evaluation activities, it is hoped that it can provide
feedback for the organization for the formulation of the next strategy. In this regard, Senior High School Plus YPHB
and Senior High School Plus Muthahari integrate with regular monitoring or supervision activities to obtain feedback
on teacher performance in various aspects. Meanwhile, Senior High School Plus PGRI Cibinong carries out different
activities between control and evaluation. Evaluation of teacher performance to obtain feedback on whether various
policies in the teaching and learning process have been implemented well or not, especially in the use of the Quantum
Teaching method. This is related to the school's commitment to building a school image with a superior and enjoyable
learning process.
    Evaluation is also carried out by students towards teachers, this is to measure how much student satisfaction is with
teacher performance and school services. A good assessment must be able to see the success of the strategy from

        Suhifatullah, M. I., Sutarman, S., & Thoyib, M. (2021). Character education strategies in improving students’
                       spiritual intelligence. International Research Journal of Management, IT and Social Sciences,
                                                              8(2), 155-162. https://doi.org/10.21744/irjmis.v8n2.1350

160                                                                                                    ISSN: 2395-7492

several factors (Ramang & Sutarman, 2018). The school organization must be able to see an increase in customer
(student/parent) satisfaction, increased user community attention, better school financial conditions after the strategy
is implemented.
    Evaluation activities are very necessary for organizational activities, this is to find out information as feedback
which can then become a basis for consideration in further development. This is as expressed by Dunn (2015) that "In
general, the term evaluation can be equated with appraisal, rating, and assessment, words that express efforts to analyze
policy results in terms of units of value. In a more specific sense, evaluation is concerned with the production of
information about the value or benefits of the policy results.
    If the findings of this study are compared with relevant previous research findings, then some things are considered
to have in common, including 1) the importance of cultivating core values in character education based on religious
teachings, 2) the importance of implementing governance order in daily life at school as a process of habituation, 3)
the importance of exemplary principals and teachers to become models for students, 4) the importance of a conducive
school environment for the development of student character.


4 Conclusion

Conclusions from the findings and discussions related to the function of strategic management in character education
to improve students' spiritual intelligence as follows:
    a) The environmental observation function in the three schools, Senior High School Plus YPHB, Senior High
       School Plus PGRI Cibinong, and Senior High School Plus Motahhari, has carried out strategic issues in the
       implementation of character education in schools. And has conducted a SWOT analysis, made use of the
       strengths and weaknesses that are owned, and recognized the opportunities and challenges faced.
    b) The formulation of strategies in the three schools formulated a vision and mission, namely to create a generation
       that is strong, entrepreneurial, and has competitive benefits based on faith and devotion or religious values.
    c) The implementation of the strategy in the three schools has relatively similar programs in the effort of character
       education, namely in the form of learning programs both intra and eccurricular in nature based on religious
       values, although each school also has a unique program.
    d) Strategic control at the three schools regularly conducts internal monitoring, which is carried out by the principal
       and his representatives, as well as by the education supervisors from the local education office.
    e) Strategy evaluation is only at Senior High School Plus PGRI Cibinong which has a Quality Control Group. This
       cluster functions to control through daily, weekly, monthly, and semester monitoring of the course of learning
       activities.
    f) The process of character education strategy management in three schools has found four conductivities, namely
       (1). Leadership conductivity (2). The conductivity of the learning process (3). The conductivity of facilities and
       infrastructure (4). Environmental conductivity.


Conflict of interest statement
The authors declared that they have no competing interests.

Statement of authorship
The authors have a responsibility for the conception and design of the study. The authors have approved the final
article.

Acknowledgments
To the Director of the Postgraduate Program, and the Chair of the Society for Research and Community Service, Syekh
Yusuf University of Islam, Tangerang, Indonesia. Because it has been supported, especially in disbursing funds for
research purposes, so that this research can run as expected. Do not forget to thank fellow lecturers who have supported
this research so that it is complete.




IRJMIS                                                                       Vol. 8 No. 2, March 2021, pages: 155-162

IRJMIS                                             ISSN: 2395-7492                                                 161
References
Ali, E. M. (2013). Kepemimpinan Integratif Dalam Konteks Good Governance. PT. Multicerdas Publising.
Aslan, A. (2017). Makna Pendidikan Karakter Dalam Strategi Pembelajaran Di Setiap Sendi-Sendi
    Pendidikan. Madinah: Jurnal Studi Islam, 4(2).
Aslan, A. (2017). Strategi Pembelajaran Dalam “Go Sport” Kurikulum Pendidikan Karakter. Madinah: Jurnal Studi
    Islam, 4(1), 10-19.
Aslan, A., & Setiawan, A. (2019). InternalIzatIon of Value educatIon In temajuk-melano malaysIa Boundary
    school. Edukasia: Jurnal Penelitian Pendidikan Islam, 14(2).
Aslan, A., & Suhari, S. (2018). Pembelajaran Sejarah Kebudayaan Islam.
Aslan, A., Setiawan, A., & Hifza, H. (2019). Peran Pendidikan dalam Merubah Karakter Masyarakat Dampak
    Akulturasi Budaya di Temajuk. FENOMENA, 11(1), 11-30.
Bazeley, P. (2013). Qualitative data analysis: Practical strategies. Sage.
Beest, F. V., Braam, G. J. M., & Boelens, S. (2009). Quality of Financial Reporting: measuring qualitative
    characteristics.
Berg, B. L. (2001). Qualitative research methods for the social sciences, Allyn and Bacon. Boston et al, 238-267.
Broadbent, J., & Poon, W. L. (2015). Self-regulated learning strategies & academic achievement in online higher
    education learning environments: A systematic review. The Internet and Higher Education, 27, 1-13.
    https://doi.org/10.1016/j.iheduc.2015.04.007
Charkhabi, M., Mortazavi, A., Alimohammadi, S., & Hayati, D. (2014). The effect of spiritual intelligence training on
    the indicators of mental health in Iranian students: An experimental study. Procedia-Social and Behavioral
    Sciences, 159, 355-358. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.sbspro.2014.12.387
Cheung, C. K., & Lee, T. Y. (2010). Improving social competence through character education. Evaluation and
    program planning, 33(3), 255-263. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.evalprogplan.2009.08.006
Dewi, N. C., & Aslan, A. (2015). Psikologi Belajar Pada Pendidikan Anak Usia Dini. Madinah: Jurnal Studi
    Islam, 2(1).
Dunn, W. N. (2015). Public policy analysis. Routledge.
Hifza, A. (2020, June). The Model of Competitive Advantage Development in Private Islamic Education Institutions.
    In BASA 2019: Proceedings of the Third International Seminar on Recent Language, Literature, and Local Culture
    Studies, BASA, 20-21 September 2019, Surakarta, Central Java, Indonesia (p. 205). European Alliance for
    Innovation.
Hifza, H., Suhardi, M., Aslan, A., & Ekasari, S. (2020). Kepemimpinan Pendidikan Islam Dalam Perspektif
    Interdisipliner. NidhomulHaq: Jurnal ManajemenPendidikan Islam, 5(1), 46-61.
Hifza, J., Palapa, A., & Maskur, A. (2020). The Strategic Foundation for Competitive Excellent Development in
    Integrated Islamic Primary Schools in Indonesia.
Hutagaluh, O., Aslan, P. P., & Mulyono, A. W. S. S. (2020). Situational Leadership On Islamic Education. IJGIE
    (International Journal of Graduate of Islamic Education), 1(1), 1-7.
Koohbanani, S. E., Dastjerdi, R., Vahidi, T., & Far, M. H. G. (2013). The relationship between spiritual intelligence
    and emotional intelligence with life satisfaction among birjand gifted female high school students. Procedia-Social
    and Behavioral Sciences, 84, 314-320. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.sbspro.2013.06.558
Lesmi, K., Wasliman, I., Mulyasa, E., Hanafiah, Triono, W., & Sutarman. (2020). Strategic Improving the Quality
    Graduates of Private Teacher in Bandung. Journal of Advanced Research in Dynamic and Control Systems, 12(8),
    424–431.
Lickona, T. (2004). Character matters: How to help our children develop good judgment, integrity, and other essential
    virtues. Simon and Schuster.
Lickona, T. (2012). Educating for character: Mendidik untuk membentuk karakter. Jakarta: Bumi Aksara, 20-28.
Mei-Ju, C., Chen-Hsin, Y., & Pin-Chen, H. (2014). The beauty of character education on preschool children's parent-
    child       relationship.     Procedia-Social         and      Behavioral        Sciences,       143,      527-533.
    https://doi.org/10.1016/j.sbspro.2014.07.431
Meurice, J. C., Ingrand, P., Portier, F., Arnulf, I., Rakotonanahari, D., Fournier, E., ... & Group, T. A. W. (2007). A
    multicentre trial of education strategies at CPAP induction in the treatment of severe sleep apnoea–hypopnoea
    syndrome. Sleep medicine, 8(1), 37-42.https://doi.org/10.1016/j.sleep.2006.05.010
Muchtarom, Wasliman, I., Mulyasa, E., Rostini, D., & Sutarman. (2020). Islamic Religious Education Strategy in
    Developing Good Student Characters. Journal of Advanced Research in Dynamic and Control Systems, 12(9), 01–
    12.

       Suhifatullah, M. I., Sutarman, S., & Thoyib, M. (2021). Character education strategies in improving students’
                      spiritual intelligence. International Research Journal of Management, IT and Social Sciences,
                                                             8(2), 155-162. https://doi.org/10.21744/irjmis.v8n2.1350

162                                                                                       ISSN: 2395-7492

Oskar Hutagaluh, A. (2019). Pemimpin Dan Pengaruh Geo Politik Terhadap Lahirnya Sumber Daya Manusia Yang
   Berkarakter. Jurnal Studi Islam Lintas Negara (Journal of Cross Border Islamic Studies), 1(2), 23-29.
Ramang, D., & Sutarman, S. (2018). Analisa Peningkatan Mutu Pendidikan Karakter Dan Tahapan-Tahapannya Pada
   SMK BPPI Baleendah Di Kabupaten Bandung. Sinau: Jurnal Pendidikan dan Humaniora, 3(2).
Sanjaya, D. B. (2017). Reconstructing local wisdom based character education for sekaa teruna teruni in Desa
   Pakraman Ubud Bali. International Research Journal of Management, IT and Social Sciences, 4(2), 190-197.
Suderadjat. (2011). Manajemen Peningkatan Mutu Berbasis Sekolah (MPMBS), Peningkatan Mutu PendidikanMelalui
   Implementasi KBK. Cipta Cekas Drafika.
Sutarman & Radiyanto. (2010). Manajemen Peningkatan Mutu Sekolah Menengah Kejuruan. YPSIM Yayasan
   Pendidikan dan Sosial Indonesia Maju.
Zohar, D. (2012). Spiritual intelligence: The ultimate intelligence. Bloomsbury publishing.




IRJMIS                                                              Vol. 8 No. 2, March 2021, pages: 155-162