New Zealand Journal of Educational Studies (2024) 59:769–777
https://doi.org/10.1007/s40841-024-00354-2

    ARTICLE



Reshaping Educational Leadership Learning: Adding
Politics to Practice

Michele Morrison1

Received: 18 August 2024 / Accepted: 17 October 2024 / Published online: 28 October 2024
© The Author(s) 2024



Abstract
During a distinguished academic career, Professor Martin Thrupp alerted diverse
audiences to the politics shaping educational practice in Aotearoa New Zealand and
beyond. The focus of this commemorative article is on Martin’s teaching legacy, in
particular, the re-design and enduring impact of a compulsory postgraduate leader-
ship paper at Te Kura Toi Tangata, University of Waikato. Key themes include the
three neoliberal policy technologies of markets, managerialism and performativity,
and the contested notion of context. Qualitative data from this year’s online student
cohort illustrate in representative ways the profound influence that adding politics
to practice has had on their educational leadership thinking and practice. This at-
tests to the ongoing importance of sociopolitical insight in informed, responsive and
successful leadership praxis.

Keywords Context · Educational leadership · School leaders · Leadership
preparation · Neoliberalism · New Zealand



Introduction

Education is a political act, the significance of which eludes many at the chalkface
who rightly focus on the learners in front of them, and school leaders preoccupied
with academic press and site-specific matters. Concern for the wider education sys-
tem and teaching profession often takes a back seat, yet their configuration shapes
daily practice in transparent and obscure ways. Political nous is essential if edu-
cational leaders are to discern and challenge discourses and policies deemed anti-
thetical to practice that seeks to relate, motivate and liberate. Throughout his career,



      Michele Morrison
      michele.morrison@waikato.ac.nz

1
      Division of Education, The University of Waikato, Private Bag 3014, Hamilton
      3240, New Zealand


                                                                                           13

770                                 New Zealand Journal of Educational Studies (2024) 59:769–777


Professor Martin Thrupp’s research, writing, and public intellectualism exposed the
downside of neoliberal policy, thereby attuning academic, practitioner and commu-
nity audiences to political and societal forces constraining teacher and leader agency.
In this retrospective piece, I outline my professional association with Martin, with
particular emphasis on our reshaping and co-teaching of a compulsory educational
leadership paper within the Master of Educational Leadership and Master of Educa-
tional Management qualifications at the University of Waikato. I reflect on the impact
this subsequently had on my own thinking and that of our postgraduate students, the
majority of whom are practising and aspiring leaders in educational settings across
the early childhood, formal schooling, tertiary and community organisation sectors.


Teachers Together

Martin’s and my professional paths first crossed in 1987 when Martin, as a beginning
teacher and geographer, was appointed to the social sciences department in which I
taught history. Shared commitment to New Zealand’s bicultural history saw us serve
as foundation members of the school’s Taha Māori committee, an initiative seek-
ing recognition of tangata whenua as equal partners and validation of Māori culture
and language. Through various actions designed to raise the mana and achievement
of rangatahi in our care, we endeavoured to make Māori culture visible within the
school gates and attune our monocultural Pākeha teacher colleagues to the knowl-
edge and sensitivities necessary to better meet the needs of their Māori students. In
addition to meeting nationally espoused goals, we attempted to ease the formidable
burden shouldered by our sole Māori colleague in providing pastoral care for Māori
students, mentoring staff in all matters Māori, and liaising with our Māori commu-
nity. While some of this mahi can, in retrospect, be characterised as well-intentioned,
tokenistic, and short-lived, other actions precipitated gradual awakening to endemic
educational disparities and the epistemic violence inflicted by monocultural, mono-
lingual colonisation of the education system. Of arguably greatest import was the
assault on personal and professional sensibilities that formed part of the kōrero at the
school’s first ever staff noho marae. There, renowned iwi educator Whatarangi Win-
iata forcefully argued that Aotearoa’s history “screams out the proposition that it is
not possible for people of one culture to formulate and implement policies for people
of another culture and get it right” (Winiata, 1998, para. 4) and that the best thing
we could do as teachers would be to “hand over the resources and let Māori get on
with it.” This confronting wero compelled us as a staff, individually and collectively,
to grapple with our complicity in perpetuating systemic injustice and consider how
best to address this. Reflecting on the noho marae experience in the school magazine
that year, Martin wrote, “What we saw, heard and spoke of was generally thought-
provoking, often inspirational and sometimes challenging.” The same can be said of
Martin’s political commentary as a public intellectual in years to come.
   At the end of his two-year provisional registration period, Martin moved to Wel-
lington and went on to pursue postgraduate study and an academic career, while I
took on successive and increasingly senior leadership roles in the secondary school
sector. Fast forward 20 years to 2007, and our paths converged once again, this time

13

New Zealand Journal of Educational Studies (2024) 59:769–777                        771


at Te Kura Toi Tangata, School of Education, University of Waikato, Hamilton. Mar-
tin had not long returned from the United Kingdom to take up a professorship in
education and I was a newly appointed senior lecturer in educational leadership.
   The second chapter in our professional relationship saw us co-teach PROF502
Educational Leadership: Issues and Perspectives, one of two 30-point compulsory
papers in what was then a 240pt Master of Educational Leadership qualification.
Having completed this qualification the year before, I was familiar with paper content
and keen to retain the micro level focus on leadership identity work and ethical deci-
sion making that had helped me theorise my deputy principal practice. Conversely,
Martin seized the opportunity to heighten awareness and critique of the macrolevel
discourses shaping that very practice.

Paper Review

In the design overhaul undertaken during the month preceding co-teaching of the first
iteration, paper learning objectives (Ngā Whāinga Paetae) were revised to communi-
cate our collective commitment to providing students with opportunities to:

● Explore and critique perspectives, theories and concepts of leadership.
● Locate educational leadership ideas and debates within the broad education lead-
  ership arena and education more generally.
● Understand the influence on educational leadership of the neo-liberal technolo-
  gies of markets, managerialism and performativity and possible leadership re-
  sponses to these.
● Understand the importance of local historical, social and economic contexts on
  the work of education leaders.
● Reflect on their own approaches to leadership.

This necessitated a rethink of content, sequencing and assessment, with the decision
made to examine leadership through three inter-related study modules.
   Framed by the overarching question, What is educational leadership and how has
this been understood over time? the first module distinguished critical and problem-
solving approaches to the study of educational leadership, and traversed traditional,
evolving, and contradictory theoretical perspectives including transactional, trans-
formational, distributed, learning centred, and situated leadership. New additions to
what Leithwood et al. (1999) termed “adjectival leadership” included Gronn’s (2002,
2003) notion of designer leadership and Wright’s (2001) ‘bastard leadership’, both
of which also featured in the second module. Students were supported to critically
reflect on the explanatory strengths and shortcomings of each theoretical lens in rela-
tion to their lived practice, thereby engaging in sense making that extended beyond
the pragmatic and “decisions to be made and implemented at 9:00 a.m. on a Monday
morning” (Gunter, 2010, p. 520).
   The second module investigated the question, How have political reforms shaped
educational leadership over the last two decades? Central to this was foundational
work on the history and key tenets of neoliberalism, the introduction in 1989 of
Tomorrow’s Schools legislation, and the subsequent impact on New Zealand educa-

                                                                            13

772                                 New Zealand Journal of Educational Studies (2024) 59:769–777


tional settings. While Martin and I had, as teachers, experienced the seismic ideologi-
cal shift that saw the fourth Labour government deviate from its social democratic
roots to mandate free-market principles, we were mindful that most postgraduate
students were largely oblivious to the political, professional, and societal ferment
that accompanied public sector privatisation and the re-forming of schools as self-
governing autonomous entities. As teachers, aspiring and incumbent leaders, our
New Zealand students had, for the most part, been enculturated into a new order in
which education was positioned as a private rather than public good, principals as
chief executive officers rather than headteachers, and stakeholders as consumers and
clients rather than parents and students.
   Having considered the leadership phenomenon at the personal or microlevel, and
then shifted inquiry to the socio-political or macrolevel, the third module challenged
students to consider, What shapes leadership in local contexts? Situating the personal
and national/global in the organisational or mesolevel setting in which they worked
required students to undertake a situational analysis. In this, they identified wide
ranging demographic, geographic, economic, cultural and institutional factors that
variously enabled and constrained their leadership endeavours. Assessment of these
factors generated heightened contextual awareness, a re-evaluation of change priori-
ties and the determination of appropriate leadership responses.
   In the intervening years since 2007, the paper (now coded EDLED501) has under-
gone annual review, with more recent iterations examining policy shifts including
the introduction of charter schools in 2014 and their reinvention in 2025, and the
Tomorrow’s Schools Independent Taskforce Review (Haque et al., 2019). Seventeen
years on, students are conversant with the vagaries of competition and managerial-
ism, hence a reduced focus on the mechanics of these neoliberal policy technologies
and literature from the early 2000s. There is, however, a timelessness to the three
overarching questions that makes them as pertinent now as they were in 2007.


The Importance of Context: Convergence and Divergence

Martin was a key proponent of what he termed the ‘contextualisation agenda’ for
educational leadership, research and practice, arguing that analysis of the local social
and political contexts of schools would generate “less neutral and politically naïve”
(Thrupp, 2008b, p. 13) interpretations that enable nuanced leadership responses.
While we both agreed that context is critical to the exercise of leadership, we con-
ceptualised this in very different ways. Acknowledging “a narrower working defini-
tion of what constitutes context than some” (Thrupp, 2018, p. 93), Martin perceived
context as a milieu of factors “clearly not created by existing staff or reflective of
their agency because they cannot be easily changed” (2018, p. 93), whereas I view
context and leading as a false dichotomy. Far from being detached observers, I argue
that leaders both embody and are embedded in context (Morrison, 2017, 2019). As
such, the discursive construction of personal habitus is as important to the exercise of
professional agency as prevailing government policy.
   Martin’s primary motivation in limiting context to external and historical factors
lay in countering neoliberal ‘discourses of blame’ that held educators accountable for

13

New Zealand Journal of Educational Studies (2024) 59:769–777                         773


structural and societal factors beyond their immediate control. He reasoned that dis-
cerning elements of context that were advantageous or disadvantageous, then adapt-
ing leadership responses accordingly enabled leaders to recognise “what is within
their power to change and how they can best respond to contexts they cannot change”
(Thrupp, 2018, p. 93). In the educational structure-agency debate (Bourdieu & Passe-
ron, 1977), it could be argued that Martin lent towards a structural account that over-
rides the agency of individual actors within the field. Early publication titles such as
Schools Making a Difference: Let’s be Realistic (Thrupp, 1999) lend some credence
to charges of determinism, however, close reading of the text reveals limits to, rather
than the impotence of, teacher agency. In subsequent teaching and research, Martin
drew on Grace’s (2004) concept of complex hope, outlining overt and covert ways in
which educational leaders can respond to policy imperatives that perpetuate middle
class advantage and thwart social justice and equity goals (Thrupp, 2008a; Thrupp &
Wilmott, 2003).
   Grappling with the notion of context, discerning key situational factors, and con-
templating appropriate leadership responses added nuance to the leadership think-
ing that informed my subsequent doctoral study. The different lenses through which
Martin and I viewed context invited greater interrogation of the leadership literature,
critical reflection on practice and respectful academic debate. Contestation was never
something Martin shied away from, publicly or privately. In class, dynamic point and
counterpoint exchanges modelled for students the contested nature of reified knowl-
edge, surfacing the discourses underpinning educational policy, and highlighting the
importance of professional critique.


Postgraduate Teaching

In what transpired more as a division of labour than authentic co-teaching, Martin
led the second paper module, introducing students to the three “neoliberal policy
technologies of markets, managerialism and performativity” (Thrupp, 2008a, p.
121). Competition between schools, marketing campaigns, and per capita operational
grants were certainly familiar to students, in particular, school principals who had
faced the ethical dilemmas arising when “markets and morals collide” (Stevenson,
2007, p. 769). Do you, for example, enrol a child from a neighbouring school know-
ing that the loss of one student will necessitate the loss of a teacher? Do you allocate
scarce resources to producing a glossy school prospectus when you can least afford
it, but most need the students that an enrolment campaign might attract? Questions
such as these invited consideration of current versus future student cohorts and the
educational triage that occurs when schools compete for survival, along with com-
mitment to students within a single school versus commitment to students in every
school, and more.
    Students in early iterations of the paper were more than familiar with workload
intensification, although far less knowledgeable about the importation and cultural
impact of the private sector management practices underpinning this. They had also
given little thought to the influence of governments on the design and formation of
educational leaders. Martin’s experience in the UK meant he was well positioned to

                                                                             13

774                                New Zealand Journal of Educational Studies (2024) 59:769–777


sound several cautionary notes, one of which was the potential for professional stan-
dards and mandatory national qualifications “to act as relaying devices for manageri-
alism” (Thrupp & Wilmott, 2003, p. 179). This prompted fresh examination of New
Zealand leadership policy documents, including the Kiwi Leadership Programme for
Principals (Ministry of Education, 2008), the School Leadership Best Evidence Syn-
thesis (Robinson et al., 2009) which Martin deemed “not so scholarly but certainly
on message” (Thrupp, 2010, p. 4), Tū Rangatira (2010), Leading from the Middle
(2012), and The Leadership Strategy for the Teaching Profession of Aotearoa New
Zealand (Education Council, 2018). As a consequence, students who have completed
EDLED501 are well positioned to discern both the scope and levels of prescription
in professional standards and engage in informed public debate.
   While my presence in every class throughout the semester enabled coherent dia-
logic leadership learning throughout the paper, Martin confined his involvement to
the second module. When I gently chided him on what I perceived as a managerialist
rhetoric/practice irony, I was met with a smile that I would like to think signalled
recognition, but nonetheless communicated a matter-of-factness that nothing would
change. In the event, workload limited Martin’s teaching involvement to 2007–2008.
His influence, however, remains strong and his contribution an enduring one.


Impact on Student Learning

Although Martin and I experienced the political and industrial upheaval accom-
panying Tomorrow’s Schools reform, few of our students were teaching at that
time. Those who were, recalled alarm over successive bulk funding proposals and
the ability of elected parent representatives to govern schools but were largely
oblivious (as was I) to the paradigm shift that positioned education as a private
rather than public good. Nor did we fully foresee ways in which managerialism
and performativity would impact professional relationships and practice. Stu-
dents appointed to schools in subsequent years were thus enculturated into a
system in which neoliberal ways of leading, organising and teaching had become
increasingly commonplace and taken for granted.
   For many, the second paper module prompted a political awakening that alerted
them to hegemonic discourses, the ideology underpinning current government policy,
and the seemingly innocuous language that makes policy contestation challenging.
They came to realise that while words like ‘efficiency’, ‘choice’, and ‘performance’
hold universal public appeal, their neoliberal manifestations are far from neutral. In
the guise of solving real world educational problems and identifying ‘what works’,
students discovered that these terms conceal systematic intervention in educational
power relations at all levels (Foucault, 1972).
   The following excerpts from this year’s online discussion, shared with student
permission and the use of pseudonyms (Ethics approval FEDU029/24), serve
to illustrate how profound this learning has been. Ruby found herself “noticing
more the ‘language’ that we use around education and questioning a bit more our
purpose in this.” Amelia admitted she “had not realised how crucial context was
in ensuring leadership decisions were responsive and effective within a specific

13

New Zealand Journal of Educational Studies (2024) 59:769–777                             775


educational setting.” Maia “appreciated the dive into neo-liberalism as I never
truly understood the term let alone the effects it had on education” and was leav-
ing the paper “with a deeper understanding of my own practices in leadership and
teaching, and appreciate the history and work that came before that.”
    In a similar vein, Jessica found neoliberal content “fascinating” in answering
“a lot of wonderings I have always had as to why ECE in New Zealand is the way
it is. Certainly, some ignorance has been dispelled!” To Vanessa’s “surprise,” she
“thoroughly enjoyed learning about the historical impact of politics on education.
This exploration clarified the historical context of our current educational land-
scape.” Realising that education is a political act proved insightful for Amelia:
“I did not think I had any opinion on politics until I watched Civilised Society
(Barry, 2006) and read about neoliberalism. That certainly opened my eyes to
how politics have had an influence over education– good and bad.”
    The whakatauki, Ka mua, ka mui (walking backwards into the future) provides
an apt summation of the light cast on current policy shifts. Ruby commented
that “with the current changes afoot in education, this has given me insight that
I did not previously have around union action, impacts on teachers and rationale
behind the teacher action.” Echoing this sentiment and expressing hope in profes-
sional agency, Kate wrote:
    Learning about our educational history and what previous teachers and leaders
have been through, gave me a better understanding of current educational issues.
It is fascinating how many issues, strategies, and narratives in education have
come full circle. We are seeing them again with our current government. The
path is currently rocky for education in New Zealand, but I have faith the that our
profession will find its way.


Conclusion

For leaders to fulfil their crucial role as educators committed to the self-actuali-
sation of every student in their individual and collective care, it is imperative that
leadership learning surfaces praxis and exposes political agendas. Knowing what
they now know better positions our aspiring and practising educational leaders to
discern enablers and constraints at local and national levels and respond accord-
ingly. They are better able to critique education policy, apprise their communi-
ties of actual and potential consequences, and engage in informed public debate.
Adding politics to practice was Martin’s gift to the students in this paper, the
educational leadership programme, and the wider profession. Kua hinga he tōtara
i Te Waonui a Tāne.

Funding Open Access funding enabled and organized by CAUL and its Member Institutions

Data availability Participant consent precludes the public sharing of raw data.




                                                                                        13

776                                          New Zealand Journal of Educational Studies (2024) 59:769–777

Declarations

Competing interests The author has no competing interests to declare that are relevant to the content of
this article.

Open Access This article is licensed under a Creative Commons Attribution 4.0 International License,
which permits use, sharing, adaptation, distribution and reproduction in any medium or format, as long
as you give appropriate credit to the original author(s) and the source, provide a link to the Creative
Commons licence, and indicate if changes were made. The images or other third party material in this
article are included in the article’s Creative Commons licence, unless indicated otherwise in a credit line
to the material. If material is not included in the article’s Creative Commons licence and your intended use
is not permitted by statutory regulation or exceeds the permitted use, you will need to obtain permission
directly from the copyright holder. To view a copy of this licence, visit http://creativecommons.org/
licenses/by/4.0/.




References
Barry, A. (2006). A civilised society [Video]. Community Media Trust.
Bourdieu, P., & Passeron, J. C. (1977). Reproduction in education, society and culture. (R. Nice, Trans.).
     Sage.
Education Council. (2018). The leadership strategy for the teaching profession of Aotearoa New Zealand.
Foucault, M. (1972). The archaeology of knowledge. Routledge.
Grace, G. (2004). Urban education and the culture of contentment: The politics, culture and economics of
     inner-city schooling. In N. Stromquist (Ed.). Education in urban areas: Cross-national dimensions
     (pp. 45-59). Praeger.
Gronn, P. (2002). Designer leadership: The emerging global adoption of preparation standards. Journal of
     School Leadership, 12(5), 552–578. https://doi.org/10.1177/105268460201200505
Gronn, P. (2003). The new work of educational leaders: Changing leadership practice in an era of school
     reform. Paul Chapman.
Gunter, H. (2010). A sociological approach to educational leadership. British Journal of Sociology of
     Education, 31(4), 519–527. https://doi.org/10.1080/01425692.2010.484927
Haque, B., Ala’alatoa, B., Berryman, M., O’Neill, J., & Wylie, C. (2019). Our schooling futures: Stronger
     together, Whiria Nga Kura Tuatintini: Final report by Tomorrow’s Schools Independent Taskforce.
     Ministry of Education.
Leithwood, K. A., Jantzi, D., & Steinbach, R. (1999). Changing leadership for changing times. Open
     University.
Ministry of Education. (2008). Kiwi leadership for principals: Principals as educational leaders.
Ministry of Education. (2010). Tū Rangatira: Māori medium educational leadership. Huia.
Ministry of Education. (2012). Leading from the middle: Educational leadership for middle and senior
     leaders. Learning Media.
Morrison, M. (2017). Conceiving context: The origins and development of the conceptual framework. In P.
     S. Angelle (Ed.), A global perspective of social justice leadership for school principals (pp. 43–65).
     Information Age Publishing.
Morrison, M. (2019). Context counts: Leading educational reform in New Zealand secondary schools
     [Doctoral thesis, The University of Waikato]. The University of Waikato Research Commons. https://
     hdl.handle.net/10289/13119
Robinson, V., Hohepa, M., & Lloyd, C. (2009). School leadership and student outcomes: Identifying what
     works and why: Best evidence synthesis iteration [BES]. Ministry of Education.
Stevenson, H. P. (2007). A case study in leading schools for social justice: When markets and morals collide.
     Journal of Educational Administration, 45(6), 769–781. https://doi.org/10.1108/09578230710829937
Thrupp, M. (1999). Schools making a difference: Let’s be realistic. School mix, school effectiveness and
     the social limits of reform. Open University.
Thrupp, M. (2008a). Education’s inconvenient truth’: Part two– the middle classes have too many friends
     in education. New Zealand Journal of Teachers’ Work, 5(1), 54–62.



13

New Zealand Journal of Educational Studies (2024) 59:769–777                                          777

Thrupp, M. (2008b). Secondary teaching, social contexts and the lingering politics of blame. https://www.
    cpag.org.nz/publications/politics20of20blamepdf
Thrupp, M. (2010). Not so scholarly but certainly on-message: The Leadership BES and its significant
    silences. Journal of Educational Leadership Policy and Practice, 25(1), 4–10.
Thrupp, M. (2018). A socially contextualised approach to professional learning for school leaders. Leading
    & Managing, 24(2), 92–100.
Thrupp, M., & Wilmott, R. (2003). Education management in managerialist times: Beyond the textual
    apologists. McGraw-Hill Education (UK).
Winiata, W. (1998). Reducing the socio-economic disparities in housing, employment, health and educa-
    tion. Retrieved 13 December 2009 from http://www.wairaka.net/ubinz/Hikoi/MaoriSolutionWiniata.
    html
Wright, N. (2001). Leadership, ‘bastard leadership’ and managerialism: Confronting twin paradoxes in the
    Blair education project. Educational Management & Administration, 29(3), 275–290. https://doi.org
    /10.1177/0263211X010293003

Publisher’s Note Springer Nature remains neutral with regard to jurisdictional claims in published maps
and institutional affiliations.




                                                                                             13