Technology, Knowledge and Learning (2023) 28:407–427
https://doi.org/10.1007/s10758-022-09631-9

    ORIGINAL RESEARCH



Same, but Different? Digital Transformation in Swiss
Vocational Schools from the Perspectives of School
Management and Teachers

Martina Rauseo1 · Andreas Harder2 · Deborah Glassey-Previdoli3 ·
Alberto Cattaneo1 · Stephan Schumann2 · Serge Imboden3

Accepted: 10 November 2022 / Published online: 5 December 2022
© The Author(s) 2022


Abstract
The COVID-19 pandemic has further highlighted the importance of the digital transforma-
tion of educational organizations. The effects of this transformation process are not limited
to the classroom level but extend into various areas of the school, such as Equipment and
Technology, Strategy and Leadership, Organization, Employees, and Culture. Against this
background, we assessed the status quo of the digital transformation in Swiss vocational
schools from the perspective of both school management members and teachers. For this
endeavor, two surveys were conducted: the first one in the period from November 2019
to January 2020 (school management members) and the second one between June and
September 2020 (teachers). In total, 202 school management members and 1,739 teach-
ers from 62 schools participated in the study. The results of the analyses indicate that the
digitization-related dimensions of Strategy and Leadership, as well as Pedagogical IT
Support, were perceived better by school management members, whereas teachers con-
sidered the areas of Digital Competencies, Attitudes, and Culture to be more advanced.
Furthermore, linear regression models show that the dimensions considered important
when assessing the status quo of digital transformation differ between the groups. The re-
sults emphasize the importance of communication between and the inclusion of all school
stakeholders for the successful management of the digital transformation.

Keywords Digital Transformation · Vocational Education · Switzerland · School
Improvement · School Management · Teachers




Martina Rauseo and Andreas Harder have contributed equally to this work and share first authorship.
Martina Rauseo
martinarauseo@hotmail.com
1
      Swiss Federal University for Vocational Education and Training, Lugano, Switzerland
2
      University of Konstanz, Konstanz, Germany
3
      University of Applied Sciences HES-SO Valais-Wallis, Sierre, Switzerland


                                                                                             13

408                                                                               M. Rauseo et al.


1 Introduction

Digital transformation is a global trend that permeates and influences private life as well
as the world of work (e.g., World Economic Forum, 2016; Arnold et al., 2016; Cijan et al.,
2019). The term “digital transformation” describes the profound structural change of the
working world through digital technologies such as mobile, networked devices, cloud com-
puting, digital networking, social media, internet of things, big data, artificial intelligence,
and robotics (Bosch et al., 2018). It leads to new business models, work processes, and job
profiles, and therefore to new requirements regarding the competence profiles of employees
and apprentices (Genner, 2017). In line with the broad transformation processes in the world
of work, the digital transformation also encompasses extensive changes in the school sec-
tor. These changes are thematically diverse and complex and are not limited to technologi-
cal aspects, such as the digital infrastructure or equipment of a school or a classroom, but
also include, among other things, a digital school organization, curricular adaptations, other
competence requirements for school management members and teachers, and generally an
adaptation of the school culture. Only by taking this holistic view, the digital transformation
can reach the teaching level in a sustainable way (Petko et al., 2018a). In this context, the
Swiss Federal Council (2018) has developed a strategy for a digital Switzerland, with one
of the pillars being the area of education.
    Consequently, the Swiss State Secretariat for Education, Research and Innovation
(SERI) (2017) compiled an action plan with the intention of enhancing competencies in
education and research in Switzerland. The concept distinguishes between eight different
dimensions, of which the first four areas are relevant for upper secondary education (includ-
ing vocational schools): (1) improving digital literacy, (2) using information and communi-
cation technology (ICT) in teaching and learning, (3) rapidly adapting the education system
to market requirements, and (4) improving coordination and communication in education
cooperation. The primary objective of education in this field, particularly in vocational
schools, is to enable students to acquire the digital competencies necessary to carry out their
professional activities. Genner (2017) argued that, in the context of digital transformation,
the dual training system (i.e., vocational training alternating a company-based and a school-
based track) plays an important role in providing the necessary competencies due to its close
connection between the educational institution, on the one hand and the working reality on
the other hand.
    A key factor in achieving these digitalization-related educational goals is teachers
that have appropriate digital competencies (e.g., Petko et al., 2018b). Thus, the European
Commission has launched various initiatives to assess the status quo regarding the digital
competencies of teachers. Based on their theoretical competence framework – the Digital
Competence Framework for Educators (DigCompEdu) – they developed a self-assessment
tool, which again decomposes the construct of “digital competence” into six dimensions
(Carretero et al., 2017; Redecker & Punie, 2017), further illustrating the scope and complex-
ity of this concept.
    However, digital transformation is not limited to the classroom level. The successful
achievement of digitalization-related educational goals requires appropriate framework
conditions in schools, which are considered complex institutions (e.g., Eickelmann et al.,
2019). Therefore, it is important to take the impact of digital transformation on schools at
various levels into account (Ifenthaler & Egloffstein, 2020). Petko et al. (2018b) addressed


13

Same, but Different? Digital Transformation in Swiss Vocational Schools…                  409


this topic by defining the concepts of teacher readiness and school readiness in the context
of teachers’ use of ICT. Thus, in addition to the attitudes and competencies of the teachers
(teacher readiness), certain school-level conditions are also necessary; for example, suf-
ficient technological infrastructure and equipment, functioning IT support, or the prioritiza-
tion of the digital transformation in general (school readiness). The International Computer
and Information Literacy studies (ICILS), which focus on measuring the digital competen-
cies of eighth graders, also highlight the need for appropriate school conditions and empha-
size the special role of school management in this context (Fraillon et al., 2014, 2020).
School management, in fact, is primarily responsible for initiating and implementing school
development processes and can help ensure that the framework conditions are conducive
through its leadership behavior (e.g., Bonsen 2016a).
    In addition to an increasing trend toward digitalization, the COVID-19 pandemic has
accelerated this development even further. Following the Federal Council’s (2020) deci-
sion of school closures in the spring of 2020, the schools only had a few days to propose an
appropriate solution for the following weeks and months, which has led to challenges for
both school management and teachers. From a scientific point of view, the school closures
represent a situation in which the digitalization of schools can be observed in a very special
context. In some studies, this situation was the basis for examining how well schools were
digitally positioned to deal with the pandemic-related challenges at that point in time. The
pandemic can therefore be seen as a trigger that has once again brought digital transforma-
tion into sharper focus.
    In summary, both school management and teachers play important roles in achieving
digitalization-related educational goals and supporting the digital transformation of the
educational system. Whereas school management should ensure the necessary framework
conditions and initiate and design corresponding school development processes, teachers
are responsible in the classroom for ensuring that learners are prepared for the digitalized
world of work in the best possible way. In this context, ICT’s potential for teachers in the
classroom is multifaceted: on the one hand, ICT can foster pedagogical diversity of meth-
ods for teaching subject-specific content, and on the other hand, the development of digital
competencies is promoted through critical engagement with them. However, to the best of
our knowledge, there are no studies investigating how these two points of view – the school
management members’ and the teachers’ – position themselves in the process of digital
transformation, especially regarding vocational education. Therefore, this study focuses
on the perceptions of school management members as well as teachers regarding various
aspects of digital transformation to identify the potential for optimization and to derive
evidence-based, appropriate recommendations for practice.


2 Theoretical Background

The first part of this section presents the advantages and disadvantages of different static
model approaches in the context of digital transformation. Static models allow us to assess
the status quo of educational institutions at a specific point in time. However, since digital
transformation is in doubt about long-term development processes, a dynamic view is also
essential to classify the development status of the respective schools. This circumstance will
be briefly addressed in the second part of the section.


                                                                                  13

410                                                                                M. Rauseo et al.


    Development processes in schools are not limited to the classroom level. Rolff’s (2010)
triad of school improvement is one of the most prominent models dealing with this topic, at
least in German-speaking countries. In this context, organizational, personnel and instruc-
tional development are defined as the three core dimensions of school improvement. In the
light of digitalization, several models have been developed to approach the topic from a
school improvement perspective and to define relevant content areas for this field (Waffner,
2021). Rolff’s (2010) general approach was then further expanded by including the dimen-
sions concerning technology and cooperation development (Schulz-Zander, 1999; Eickel-
mann & Gerick, 2017).
    Another well-known model focusing on the implementation of good practices within a
school and its relevant stakeholders is the so-called Innovative Digital School (IDI) model
(Ilomäki & Lakkala, 2018), in which the pedagogical and school-level knowledge practices
as well as the digital resources form the foundation of the digital development of the school.
Furthermore, the practices of the teaching community on the one hand, as well as the vision
of the school in connection with adequate leadership on the other hand, are necessary for
successfully shaping digital development processes. Although this approach focuses pre-
dominantly on the practices of the different stakeholders, organizational, school cultural, or
strategic elements of digital transformation are addressed only implicitly.
    A model that explicitly addresses the relatively abstract approach of Rolff (2010) as well
as the rather low differentiation of organizational and personal resources of the IDI model
(Ilomäki & Lakkala, 2018) is the so-called Maturity Model for Educational Organizations
(MMOE) (Ifenthaler & Egloffstein, 2020). The MMOE does not put the specific practices
in the schools in the foreground but tries to define areas to determine the digital status quo
of an organization. Although this model originally does not explicitly refer to schools but to
educational organizations in general, it can be used as a holistic concretization of the abstract
dimensions of the previously mentioned models, with a special focus on digital transforma-
tion. The MMOE outlines six main dimensions: Equipment and Technology, Strategy and
Leadership, Organization, Employees, Culture, and Digital learning and teaching. Based
on these parameters, it is possible to determine how ‘mature’ the school organization is in
terms of digital transformation. In the second step, these dimensions are then operational-
ized with several indicators that illustrate the broad spectrum of some of the dimensions. A
visualization of the model and its components is presented in Table 1.
    Regardless of the question of which of these models depicts digital school improvement
best, all approaches mentioned above can be classified as static, as they primarily aim to
delineate relevant dimensions and do not focus process-related aspects in the first place.
In addition to these static models, there are some approaches that attempt to map school
improvement processes against the backdrop of digital transformation from a dynamic per-
spective. For example, Gräsel et al. (2020) defined input, processual, and output factors
based on existing school improvement models to successfully shape corresponding digital
development processes. Classic change management approaches from the world of work
can also help in this context, serving as a theoretical basis for the successful implementation
of these models (e.g., Kotter 2012).
    In both static and dynamic models, all school stakeholders – that is, school management
members, teachers, and students – contribute to the successful implementation of these devel-
opment processes (e.g., Ilomäki & Lakkala, 2018). At the individual school level, teachers
are directly responsible for building digital literacy among students, whereas school man-


13

Same, but Different? Digital Transformation in Swiss Vocational Schools…                                 411

Table 1 Dimensions of the            Dimension             Indicators/content
Maturity Model for Educational
                                     Equipment and         Equipment with digital devices, software
Organizations (Ifenthaler &
                                     Technology            Up-to-date infrastructure
Egloffstein, 2020)
                                                           Homogeneous technology landscape, standards
                                     Strategy and          Existence and implementation of a digital
                                     Leadership            strategy
                                                           Managers promote digitalization with priority
                                                           Analysis of new technologies
                                                           Democratic leadership style, creative freedom
                                                           granted
                                     Organization          Sufficient financial resources
                                                           Technical support (internal vs. external service
                                                           providers)
                                                           Efficient procurement and maintenance
                                                           Pedagogical support
                                     Employees             Knowledge/Skills in dealing with digital
                                                           technologies
                                                           Usage of devices and services
                                                           Attitudes
                                                           Readiness for further training
                                     Culture               Openness to new technologies
                                                           Openness for change
                                                           Open communication, mutual support
                                     Digital learning      Digital platforms, e-learning offerings
                                     and teaching          Working with digital devices in classroom
                                                           settings
                                                           Digital education as an overall goal
                                                           Data-driven teaching and learning


agement takes on a special role by initiating and sustainably shaping the framework condi-
tions and setting the right direction. This was corroborated by Petko et al. (2018b), who
stated that technology integration depends on teacher readiness, which in turn is influenced
by school readiness. From a more practical perspective, a specialized agency commissioned
by the Swiss Confederation and the cantons, called Educa (2021), published a report that
also addresses the important factors that enable the successful implementation of digital
resources. Among other things, the report states that a strategy implemented by the school
in the long term has a positive effect on school success. Furthermore, the report emphasizes
the centrality of teachers’ beliefs and competence in the use of ICT in learning and teaching.
This must also be fostered by a school environment that promotes digitalization (Educa,
2021). These elements can again be found in the MMOE (Ifenthaler & Egloffstein, 2020).
    Regarding the COVID-19 crisis, empirical results indicate that, in entering the crisis,
schools had different starting positions in terms of digital prerequisites; in other words,
the readiness of some schools was better developed than that of other schools (Feldhoff
et al., 2021). The respective schools were able to deal better with the various challenges
caused by the pandemic. If we compare the situation in the German-speaking countries of
Switzerland, Germany, and Austria, studies show that Swiss schools were comparatively
better prepared in terms of digital resources than schools in the other two countries (Huber
et al., 2020), although the general level of teachers’ digital competence aligned with the
international average (Cattaneo et al., 2022). These findings are also confirmed by the longi-
tudinal S-Clever study, which surveyed school management members in all three countries,
although the school management members addressed the challenges of the pandemic in


                                                                                               13

412                                                                             M. Rauseo et al.


similar ways. However, the perception of specific challenges shows that the field of digital
transformation is still topical and has not yet been settled by the pandemic, since there
have been no significant improvements over time in dealing with teachers’ emotional or
motivational burdens or the digital equipment in schools in all three countries (Feldhoff et
al., 2022).
    In summary, the different approaches and ideas demonstrate the complexity of school
improvement, especially regarding digital transformation. Furthermore, the indispens-
able necessity to further develop schools digitally becomes apparent. In this context, the
COVID-19 crisis has served as an eye-opener for many schools.


3 Research Question

In the context of the SERI action plan (2017), the first focus of our study lies on the gen-
eral state of development of digital transformation of vocational schools in Switzerland. In
the next step, we refer to the portrayed MMOE, which shows from a theoretical perspec-
tive how multilayered and differentiated the digital transformation in the school context
is. However, whether and to what extent the various dimensions actually contribute to the
perception of the digitization-related status quo remains open. In line with these theoretical
considerations, three central research questions can be derived:

1) What is the status quo of the general state of development of digital transformation in
   Swiss vocational schools from the perspective of both school management members
   and teachers?
2) Are there differences in the perception of the various sub-areas of digital transformation
   in schools between the two groups?
3) Which of these sub-areas are predictive of the perceived digitalization-related state of
   development?

Many studies examine the digital transformation from the perspective of one particular
school actor, i.e., either the school management, the teachers, or the learners. The content-
related focus of these studies often differs: While school management members are more
likely to be asked questions about organizational development, studies with teachers often
deal with elements of instructional or classroom development. Since the successful design
of school development processes in general – and the digital transformation in particular
– requires the sustained participation of all school stakeholders, we will examine whether
differences can be identified between school management members and teachers in terms
of their perceptions regarding all three research questions. The principal aim of our study is
to combine the two perspectives and thus to obtain a broader picture of the digitalization-
related status quo from both groups. On this basis, implications that can support vocational
schools in successfully shaping school development processes regarding digital transforma-
tion will be developed.




13

Same, but Different? Digital Transformation in Swiss Vocational Schools…                 413


4 Methods

4.1 Design

The presented study is the result of a cooperation between the Swiss Federal University for
Vocational Education and Training (SFUVET), the University of Applied Sciences HES-SO
Valais-Wallis and the University of Konstanz from Germany. It is based on a collaboration
between two existing projects conducted independently by the University of Applied Sci-
ences HES-SO Valais-Wallis and the University of Konstanz on the one hand, and SFUVET
on the other.
   Both projects are based on cross-sectional surveys which assess the various dimensions
of digital transformation from the perspectives of the two groups (school management and
teachers). The survey of the first project was conducted from November 2019 to January
2020, and therefore immediately before the start of the COVID-19 pandemic in Europe.
Among other things, the selection of these schools relied on the Smart School Competi-
tion 2019 of the German digital association Bitkom e.V. (Harder et al., 2020). Given that
the composition of the school management team can vary within schools, the teams were
allowed to decide who would be considered a school management member in their schools
and therefore participate in the survey.
   The second project by SFUVET was launched in January 2020. The main goal was to
assess the digital competencies of teachers in vocational education and training in Switzer-
land. The survey took place from June to September 2020 and was primarily based on the
European DigCompEdu Framework (Carretero et al., 2017; Redecker & Punie, 2017).
   Since the cooperation between all three institutions started in April 2020, we were able
to integrate several items of the instrument used for the school management members in
the survey for the teachers. However, due to the different orientations of the projects and
organizational reasons (i.e., the length of the instrument), the number of possible common
items was limited.

4.2 Sample

According to the Federal Statistical Office (2021), there are 382 public schools for voca-
tional education and training in Switzerland which employed 15,698 teachers (57.6% male)
in the school year 2019/2020. There are no specific figures for the vocational education sec-
tor in terms of the number of extended school management members.
    A total of 202 school management members and 1,739 teachers from 62 vocational
schools from the three main language regions in Switzerland voluntarily and anonymously
participated in both cross-sectional surveys. Regarding the population, this corresponds to
a rate of 16.2% of Swiss vocational schools and 11.1% of the teachers employed there. Fur-
thermore, the majority of the participants lived in the German-speaking part of Switzerland
(68%), followed by the French (20%) and Italian (12%) language regions. We also found
a significantly larger proportion of male participants among school management members
(80%), while gender was roughly balanced among teachers. A detailed sample description
is presented in Table 2.




                                                                                  13

414                                                                                      M. Rauseo et al.

Table 2 Sample description
                                       School Management (SM)           Teachers (T)          Total
                                               n = 202                    n = 1.739
                                          Male        Female         Male           Female
Language Region           German1      100 (50%)     31 (15%)      539 (33%)      556 (35%)     1.226
                                                                                                (68%)
                          French2       42 (21%)          9 (4%)   176 (11%)     142 (9%)        369
                                                                                                (20%)
                          Italian3       18 (9%)          1 (1%)    75 (5%)      121 (7%)        215
                                                                                                (12%)
Total                                   160 (80%)    41 (20%)      790 (49%)     819 (51%)      1.810
                                                                                               (100%)
Note. Deviations result from missing values (n = 1.942)
1
  Argovia, Basel-Country, Basel-City, Berne, Glarus, Grisons, Lucerne, Nidwald, Obwald, Schwyz,
Soleure, St. Gall, Thurgovia, Uri, Zoug, Zurich
2
    Friburg, Geneva, Jura, Neuchatel, Vaud, Wallis
3
    Tessin

4.3 Instrument

In line with the research questions, our goal was to assess the status quo of digital transfor-
mation from the perspectives of school management members and teachers. In view of the
items that the two surveys had in common, the MMOE (Ifenthaler & Egloffstein, 2020) was
chosen as the framework for the study, which became the common denominator on which
the analyses were conducted.
   The instrument used in the school management survey, which had already attempted to
cover the broad spectrum of digital transformation as well as possible, served as the starting
point for the design of the joint instrument. Following the teacher survey and the subsequent
data processing, an attempt was made to summarize the items in a plausible way in terms of
content using an exploratory factor analysis. This resulted in some dimensions being repre-
sented by only one item, while others were operationalized with multiple scales. In the sec-
ond step, the internal consistency of the potential scales was tested. Afterwards, individual
items, as well as the newly formed scales, could be assigned to the superordinate dimensions
of the MMOE (Ifenthaler & Egloffstein, 2020). During this process, it turned out that the
dimension Digital teaching and learning could not be mapped empirically. This is particu-
larly due to the target group of the first survey. Since it was directed at school management
members, the focus was placed more on the dimensions of organizational and personnel
development, while instructional development was only examined in a rudimentary way.
   This resulted in a total of five MMOE dimensions being used to answer the second and
third questions: The first dimension, Equipment and Technology, was covered by one item
dealing with the satisfaction of the same. The Strategy and Leadership dimension was oper-
ationalized with a three-item scale. In addition to the satisfaction with the school’s digital
strategy, the items used related to the structural framework of the school, i.e., the extent
to which teachers are offered incentives by school management to adapt their teaching to
digital transformation or to what extent they are offered opportunities to acquire digital
competencies. The Organization dimension was operationalized with two subscales of three
items each. The Pedagogical IT Support scale comprises content aspects relating to the
provision of relief hours for planning instructional innovations with digital teaching and


13

Same, but Different? Digital Transformation in Swiss Vocational Schools…                   415


learning methods, the introduction of working groups on pedagogical, digital innovations
and the overall satisfaction with pedagogical support in the school. The second subscale
Technological IT Support includes aspects of satisfaction, availability of first-level support
(technological support within ten minutes), and sufficient technical support for the school’s
use of teachers’ own devices. The Employees dimension was mapped with two subscales
and an additional single item. The first scale consists of four items and addresses teachers’
Digital Competencies. The items relate to different competence facets, such as application
competence, informatics competence, competencies in the area of data protection, and rules
of conduct on the topic of IT security. The other two scales can be assigned to the area
of attitudes. The negative Attitudes, i.e., the fear of doing something wrong when using
digital technologies, of reaching one’s own limits or of worrying that digitization may over-
whelm one, were operationalized with three corresponding items. The positive Attitudes
were mapped with one single item on how the respondents feel about digitally supported
teaching and learning methods. The last of the five dimensions, Culture, was also mapped
with one single item, dealing with the perceived acceptance of digital teaching and learning
methods among the teaching staff. Table 3 shows the scales with illustrative items as well
as the single items used according to their assignment to the dimensions of the MMOE. All
scales show acceptable to good Cronbach’s alphas.




4.4 Analysis

To answer the research questions, t-tests for independent samples as well as two linear
regression models for both school management members and teachers were used. Since
the participants in the study were from different schools (n = 62), independent and identi-
cally distributed data could not be assumed with certainty. For this reason, a standard error
correction was performed using the statistics software STATA 15. Robust standard errors
account for this multilevel structure and filter out potential cluster-related effects (McNeish
et al., 2017). Missing values were not imputed. Accordingly, the multivariate analyses were
subject to the principle of listwise deletion.


5 Results

First, we explored the question of the extent to which perceptions differ between school
management members and teaching staff regarding the various dimensions of digital trans-
formation. Due to sample sizes of n > 30 in both subgroups (school management members
and teachers), the parametric test procedures could be performed despite a violation of the
normal distribution assumption (Field, 2009). A detailed overview of the results is presented
in Table 4.
   The analyses identified significant differences between the school management mem-
bers and the teaching staff in various aspects of the digital transformation. Only the vari-
ables Equipment and Technology and the subscale Technological IT Support, which can
be assigned to the content dimension Organization, showed no significant effects. The
findings also indicate that Pedagogical IT Support (d = 0.199) and Strategy and Leader-


                                                                                   13

416                                                                                                  M. Rauseo et al.

Table 3 Operationalization and reliability analysis
Variable / Scale                             M (SD)           Alpha Illustrative Items
(Number of Items)
Equipment and Technology
Satisfaction with infrastructure and        4.53             ---       How satisfied are you with the digital
equipment (1)1                              (1.15)                     infrastructure and equipment in your
                                                                       school?
Strategy and Leadership
Scale: Strategy and Leadership (3)2              4.10        0.78      How satisfied are you with your school’s
                                                 (1.04)                digital strategy?
Organization
Pedagogical IT Support (3)2                      3.64        0.68      Our school provides release hours for
                                                 (1.10)                planning instructional innovations with
                                                                       digital teaching-learning methods.
Technological IT Support (3)3                    3.90        0.82      There is sufficient technical support
                                                 (1.14)                for the school’s use of teachers’ own
                                                                       devices.
Employees
Digital competencies of teaching staff           3.80        0.71      Application competence (e.g., use of
(4)3                                             (0.85)                Microsoft Office, communication via
                                                                       e-mail, etc.)
Attitude (Fear) (3)4                             2.58        0.87      The idea of doing something wrong
                                                 (1.12)                when using digital technologies scares
                                                                       me.
Attitude (Positive) (1)4                         4.48        ---       I am generally positive about digi-
                                                 (1.09)                tally supported teaching and learning
                                                                       methods.
Culture
Acceptance of digital teaching and learn- 4.24               ---
                                                             How do you assess the acceptance of
ing methods (1)5                          (0.96)             digital teaching and learning methods
                                                             among the teaching staff at your school?
Note. M: Mean, SD: Standard Deviation, α: Cronbach’s alpha, 6-point Likert scale
1
    1 ‘Not at all satisfied’ to 6 ‘Very satisfied’
2
    1 ‘Not at all satisfied’ to 6 ‘Very satisfied’; 1 ‘Does not apply at all’ to 6 ‘Fully applies’
3
    1 ‘Not at all satisfied’ to 6 ‘Very satisfied’; 1 ‘Do not agree at all’ to 6 ‘Totally agree’
4
    1 ‘Do not agree at all’ to 6 ‘Totally agree’
5
    1 ‘Very low acceptance’ to 6 ‘Very high acceptance’



ship (d = 0.218) were rated better by school management members than by teachers. The
reverse was true for the basic assessment of the Developmental State of Digital Transfor-
mation (d = 0.228), Digital Competencies of the Teaching Staff (d = 0.278), Attitudes (Fear)
(d = 0.133), and Culture (d = 0.201). According to Ellis (2010), these effects can be classified
as small. By contrast, a large effect can be found for the variable Attitudes (Positive), which
was operationalized using the item “[Teachers are] I am generally positive about digitally
supported teaching and learning methods.” (d = 0.688). The positive Attitudes of teachers
toward digitally supported teaching and learning methods was rated significantly higher by
the teaching staff than by the members of the school management.
   The second research question examined whether the model of Ifenthaler and Egloffstein
(2020) could be validated empirically, that is, the extent to which the individual content
dimensions are related to the general state of development of the digital transformation.


13

Same, but Different? Digital Transformation in Swiss Vocational Schools…                                   417

Table 4 T-tests between school management members and teachers on various aspects of digital
transformation
Dependent Variable                      SM         TS             T              p           d
                                      M (SD)    M (SD)
Development State of the Digital    4.09      4.32         − 3.355          0.001       − 0.228
Transformation                      (0.93)    (1.05)
Equipment and Technology            4.42      4.54         − 1.492          n.s.        ---
                                    (1.03)    (1.16)
Strategy and Leadership             4.31      4.08         3.103            0.002       0.218
                                    (0.94)    (1.04)
Organization: Pedagogical IT        3.84      3.62         2.925            0.004       0.199
Support                             (0.97)    (1.12)
Organization: Technological IT      3.92      3.90         0.239            n.s.        ---
Support                             (1.12)    (1.14)
Employees: Digital Competencies     3.58      3.82         − 4.354          0.000       − 0.278
                                    (0.69)    (0.86)
Employees: Attitudes (fear)         2.45      2.60         − 2.018          0.045       − 0.133
                                    (0.94)    (1.14)
Employees: Attitudes (positive)     3.81      4.55         − 11.635         0.000       − 0.688
                                    (0.78)    (1.09)
Culture                             4.49      4.65         − 3.262          0.001       − 0.201
                                    (0.62)    (0.82)
Note. SM = School Management; TS = Teaching Staff; M = Mean; SD = Standard Deviation; measured
with 6-point Likert scales


Thus, we also assessed whether different effects could be identified between school man-
agement members and teachers. A multivariate approach in the form of linear regression
analysis was chosen for this purpose. Table 5 presents the regression model for school man-
agement members. Table 6 presents the same regression model for the teaching staff.
   With an explained variance of R² = 0.339, regression Model I shows a large effect
(Ellis, 2010). A closer look at the predictors indicates that both Equipment and Technology
(β = 0.281) and the subscale Digital Competencies (β = 0.180) of the Employees dimension


Table 5 Regression Model I –                                        B      Robust    Beta       T      p
School Management Members                                                   SE
(DV: Development State of
                                     Equipment and               0.247     0.068    0.281     3.60   0.001
Digital Transformation)
                                     Technology
                                     Strategy and Leadership      0.123    0.082     0.128     1.50 0.140
                                     Organization: Peda-         − 0.047   0.078    − 0.049   − 0.60 0.548
                                     gogical IT Support
                                     Organization: Techno-       0.064     0.081    0.081     0.79   0.431
                                     logical IT Support
                                     Employees: Digital          0.239     0.111    0.180     2.16   0.035
                                     Competencies
                                     Employees: Attitudes        − 0.039   0.072    − 0.041   − 0.55 0.586
                                     (Fear)
                                     Employees: Attitudes        − 0.036   0.102    − 0.032   − 0.35 0.727
                                     (positive)
R² = 0.339; n = 184; F (9;
                                     Culture                     0.274     0.140    0.191     1.96   0.055
60) = 9.88; p < .001; a 1 ‘male’ 2
‘female’                             Gendera                     0.020     0.147    0.009     0.13   0.894



                                                                                                13

418                                                                                    M. Rauseo et al.


were significant contributors to the variance explanation in the dependent variable. The
Culture factor (β = 0.191) also made a significant contribution at an α = 10% level, indicating
a statistical tendency here. The beta coefficients of the significant predictors indicate small
to medium effects.
   Compared to the first model, which was calculated only with the subsample of school
management members, regression Model II (Table 6), in which only the teachers were con-
sidered, showed an even higher variance explanation (R² = 0.509). This can also be classi-
fied as a large effect or a high model quality. Considering the individual predictors, again
Equipment and Technology (β = 0.319) and Digital Competencies (β = 0.071) were signifi-
cant contributors to the variance explanation. Although the effect was slightly higher for
Equipment and Technology compared to Model I, it decreased to a small effect for Digital
Competencies. The variable Culture (β = 0.099), for which a statistical trend was found in
Model I, was also significant in Model II, with a small effect.
   In contrast to the school management members, however, two key differences emerged in
regression Model II (teaching staff). First, the predictor Attitudes (Fear) (β = 0.066) showed
a significant result, with a small effect. Second, there was a major change in the Strategy
and Leadership variable (β = 0.483) between the models. Although it did not make a signifi-
cant contribution to the variance explanation in the first model for the school management
members, Strategy and Leadership showed up here as a significant predictor, with the larg-
est effect size of all variables included in the model. The effect can be classified as large
(Ellis, 2010). Compared to the school management members, it is thus clear that Strategy
and Leadership had a significant influence on the perceived state of development of digital
transformation among the teachers surveyed.




Table 6 Regression Model                                    B       Robust    Beta       T       p
II – Teaching Staff (DV:                                             SE
Development State of Digital
                                Equipment and             0.288     0.031    0.319     9.31    0.000
Transformation)
                                Technology
                                Strategy and Leadership    0.485    0.033     0.483    14.58 0.000
                                Organization: Peda-       − 0.046   0.030    − 0.050   − 1.53 0.132
                                gogical IT Support
                                Organization: Techno-     − 0.030   0.024    − 0.033   − 1.24 0.219
                                logical IT Support
                                Employees: Digital        0.086     0.026    0.071     3.37    0.001
                                Competencies
                                Employees: Attitudes      0.061     0.021    0.066     2.97    0.004
                                (Fear)
                                Employees: Attitudes      − 0.007   0.018    − 0.007   − 0.38 0.703
                                (positive)
R² = 0.509; n = 1.697; F (9;
                                Culture                   0.126     0.034    0.099     3.72    0.000
61) = 132.60; p < .001; a 1
‘male’ 2 ‘female’               Gendera                   0.035     0.025    0.027     1.40    0.167



13

Same, but Different? Digital Transformation in Swiss Vocational Schools…                    419


6 Discussion

The overarching goal of our study was to assess the digitization-related development state
of vocational schools in Switzerland. Through the cooperation of the three institutions
involved, it was possible to look at both the perspective of school management members
and that of teachers on various aspects of digital transformation.
   The first research question of this study sought to define the status quo in the develop-
ment of transformation in Swiss vocational schools. The assessment of the general devel-
opment state of the digital transformation revealed that teachers assessed the status quo
somewhat better than school management members; therefore, both groups perceived it as
advanced. This is in line with the conclusions of the report of Educa (2021), which ascribe
a comparatively positive picture to vocational schools regarding the digital transformation,
although differences between individual schools undoubtedly exist. The differentiated per-
ception can have various reasons. One possible reason for the digitalization-related status
quo could be the different range of tasks performed by school management members com-
pared to teachers. The role of school management members is significantly more complex
and overarching, as they must look at the school from a holistic perspective. In addition to
classroom activities, this includes, among other things, strategic or personnel aspects that
can be assigned to the area of leadership. Furthermore, it is the duty of school management
members to consider external influences, such as digitalization-related decisions of the edu-
cation policy, and to account for and implement necessary measures in the best possible
way. In the sense of Fend’s (2008) multi-level theory, school management must keep an
eye on developments at the macro, meso, and micro levels. A higher number of task areas
increases the likelihood that digitalization-related weaknesses will be noticed more and with
a higher granularity. It can be assumed that teachers primarily focus on what happens in the
classroom, where strategic or organizational aspects of the digital transformation are not
addressed so strongly (primary focus on the micro level).
   Another reason for the different perceptions could be that school management members
serve as a point of contact for many teachers when digitalization-related aspects are not
going as well as they should. The school management is regularly informed of ICT mal-
functions by the teachers; however, school management is given very little feedback when
ICT works. It is therefore possible that school management has an incorrect perception of
the functioning of ICT. Further, it is also up to the school management if some teachers
express complete reservation toward the digital transformation or reject it as such. Although
this situation certainly has an impact on the school as a whole, it has no direct effect on
individual teachers in their day-to-day work. Overall, it can be assumed that teachers are
more likely to approach school management members with negative aspects and problems,
and that school management is not necessarily as strongly confronted with positive aspects
regarding digital transformation.
   We must also question whether it might be socially desirable for school management
members to be more reticent about the general level of digital development so that develop-
ment processes can continue. However, a social desirability effect could be present in the
teachers’ responses, as they might feel directly exposed. In this regard, the idea of a distrib-
uted responsibility for the school management could have led to limit a possible overestima-
tion of the state of the art. Additionally, school management could serve as a kind of “critical




                                                                                    13

420                                                                             M. Rauseo et al.


friend” who identifies optimization potential in the dimensions of digital transformation and
develops these aspects further.
    Differences between the two groups can also be identified by considering the individual
dimensions of digital transformation. Whereas the areas of Pedagogical IT Support and
Strategy and Leadership were perceived better by the school management members, the
opposite was true for the dimensions of Digital Competencies of the teaching staff, Attitudes,
and Culture. One possible reason for the differentiated perceptions is the self-assessment or
external assessment of these aspects. Individuals with high self-esteem tend to evaluate
themselves more positively than others do (e.g., Atwater & Yammarino, 1992; Nilsen &
Campbell, 1993; Lindeman et al., 1995). For example, it seems plausible that members of
the school management assessed Pedagogical IT Support and Strategy and Leadership bet-
ter, as these can be assigned to organizational development, for which the school manage-
ment members are primarily responsible. Conversely, aspects such as Digital Competencies
or the Attitudes of teachers are better assessed by the same. The different perceptions of
the digitalization-related school culture may also be due to the situation described above,
in which school management members tend to be informed significantly more often about
difficulties or shortcomings regarding the digital transformation. Considering the approach
by Petko et al. (2018b), it is noteworthy that aspects assigned to school readiness are rated
better by school management, while those assigned to teacher readiness are rated better by
teachers.
    The second research question investigated the differences between the school manage-
ment members and teachers regarding the various dimensions of the MMOE. In this respect,
we found that certain dimensions of the MMOE are generally well suited for explaining
the general digitalization-related state of development. Equipment and Technology, Digital
Competencies, and Culture appeared to be of particular importance. In contrast to the regres-
sion model for school management members, however, the greatest effect in the model for
teachers was observed for the variable Strategy and Leadership. It therefore appears that
the Strategy and Leadership dimension is a very important aspect from the perspective
of the teachers regarding the general status quo of digital transformation. Conversely, this
circumstance did not seem to be the case for the school management members themselves.
In an attempt to elaborate characteristics of so-called “digital optimal schools”, Eickel-
mann and Drossel (2020) identify satisfaction with digital infrastructure and equipment,
advanced training for teachers, and IT support as the most important factors. While the first
two aspects also appear to be important in our study, insofar as we see digitization-related
advanced training in the context of increasing digital competencies, with our data we can-
not confirm the importance of IT support for the perception of the digitization-related state
of development. Regarding the aspects related to the Strategy and Leadership dimension,
the authors do not make any explicit statements. For the successful design of digitalization-
related school development processes, however, it is important that school management
members are aware of their special role, in particular regarding their perceived importance
in digital transformation processes from the teachers’ perspective. It is their task to drive
and sustain digital transformation through appropriate transformational leadership. Without
a corresponding commitment on the part of school management members and also consid-
ering sufficient organisational resources, the transformation cannot succeed. This is in line
with the argumentation of Seufert and Tarantini (2022), who also emphasize the importance
of school management members or leadership and highlight their significant role in the


13

Same, but Different? Digital Transformation in Swiss Vocational Schools…                  421


development of a culture conducive to innovation as well as the proactive design of change
processes. At the same time, it must be considered that school management members also
have organizational hurdles to overcome and are constrained by certain restrictions, for
example in budgeting or a lack of culture for project-base work in some school environ-
ments. This may result in the situation that certain measures can only be implemented to
a limited extent, which can diminish the influence of the school management to a certain
degree.
    We deduced from the results that the inclusion of all school stakeholders – especially
school management members and teachers – is indispensable to successfully shape the digi-
tal transformation of schools. Scholkmann (2021) also identifies the “individual” (i.e., in
our context, both school management members and teachers) as the problem source and
at the same time solution regarding sustainable change. Following Graf-Schlattmann et al.
(2019, p. 19), they state that a “collective willingness to change” is needed to drive digital
transformation. Thus, only a collaborative approach that involves all relevant school stake-
holders will result in a successful digital transformation. Stronger communication could be
the key to developing a common understanding of digital transformation and, building on
this, to further developing the various digital dimensions collaboratively. In this context,
Tołwińska (2021) noted that the quality of work in schools can be improved if teachers con-
tribute their knowledge and skills to these processes. The digital competencies of teachers
play an important role in related change processes, since teachers who have a higher level
of digital competencies perceive the ease of use of ICT (and consequently its usefulness)
better (Baturay et al., 2017). It is the task of school management members to promote this
exchange by getting teachers to be proactive and not afraid of making mistakes. Thus, col-
laboration between school stakeholders is perhaps the most important aspect to consider in
principle in change processes, and digital transformation as well.


7 Limitations

For an adequate interpretation of the results, it is necessary to address the limitations of
the study. First, the different sample sizes within the two subgroups, which was to be
expected given the significantly smaller population of school management members, need
to be mentioned. Nevertheless, the relatively small number of school management mem-
bers per school means that analyses at the individual school level are only possible to a
limited extent. Furthermore, we cannot exclude the possibility of positive selection regard-
ing the sample in both surveys. Participation in the study was voluntary for both school
management members and teachers, which means that a corresponding bias seems possible.
Moreover, both school management members and teachers from certain schools were more
strongly represented in the sample than others. In the multivariate analyses, this clustering
problem was accounted for using standard error correction. Another aspect connected to the
sample itself, with special regard to vocational education and training, is that companies
also represent an important stakeholder in digital transformation processes in vocational
schools. Assessing their role and their perspective on digital transformation in vocational
schools could be one focal point of future research.
    The second key limitation of the study relates to the measurement of selected character-
istics regarding self-assessment or social desirability. It can be assumed that when asked


                                                                                  13

422                                                                              M. Rauseo et al.


about their leadership behavior, school management members can choose response behav-
iors that are socially expected, which can lead to bias. Further, the survey contained aspects
such as the digital competencies of the teachers, which can be better measured by using a
corresponding competency test that could afford an increase in both reliability and validity.
All measured variables are perceptions of the school management members or teachers; it is
therefore not an objective assessment of the digitization-related state of development based
on external standards (Educa, 2021).
    Another aspect that needs to be mentioned in this context is the difficulty of operational-
izing the underlying MMOE (Ifenthaler & Egloffstein, 2020); while the individual dimen-
sions of the model are very complex in terms of content, these cannot be viewed separately
from one another. For example, the dimension of Culture has many interfaces with other
dimensions, such as those of Employees. In this context, our operationalization of the model
is limited to a certain extent, as the respective theoretical dimensions are not fully mapped.
Against the background of our findings, the question arises as to possible limitations regard-
ing the chosen theoretical framework. The results suggest that the dimensions of the model
may not have equal value, i.e., individual dimensions may appear more important than oth-
ers. In addition, there is a possibility that important content aspects are not included in the
model. One example could be the establishment of a feedback culture, which might play an
important role in successfully shaping the digital transformation (cf. Delcker & Ifenthaler,
2022).
    Further, the individual project-related organizational conditions meant that the surveys
could not take place during the same period. This circumstance was further compounded
by the fact that the survey of school management members was conducted before, and the
survey of teachers shortly after the onset of the COVID-19 pandemic. During this period,
the issue of digitalization in schools developed a particular dynamic. The measures resulting
from the pandemic may have led to a change in certain aspects related to digitalization. This
should also be considered when interpreting the results.
    Finally, adding the learners’ perspective in future studies could provide an even broader
picture of the relevant school stakeholders. In this context, the SELFIE tool of the European
Commission (2022) could – especially regarding the assessment of digital competencies –
serve as a basis, since it was developed in accordance with the DigCompEdu Framework
(Redecker & Punie, 2017) and already combines the perspectives of school management
members, teachers and learners.


8 Conclusions and Implications

The first objective of this study was to assess the status quo of digital transformation from
the perspective of school management members and teachers at vocational schools in Swit-
zerland. The results showed that both status groups generally assessed the digitalization-
related state of development as advanced. However, a small effect was observed in that
the teachers rated the status quo slightly better than the school management members did.
A detailed examination of various aspects of the digital transformation revealed that the
individual dimensions of change were perceived differently by school management mem-
bers and teachers. In the cases of Equipment and Technology, which were rated as good by
both groups, and Technological IT Support, which was also in the satisfactory range, no


13

Same, but Different? Digital Transformation in Swiss Vocational Schools…                   423


significant differences in perception could be identified. Although the school management
members showed more positive assessments in the areas of Strategy and Leadership, Peda-
gogical IT Support, and fear-related Attitudes toward digital transformation, the opposite
effects were observed regarding the Digital Competencies, the positive Attitudes of teach-
ers toward digital transformation, and the anchoring of digital transformation in the school
culture. In the case of positive attitudes, the effect could be classified as medium to large.
    The second objective of this study was to determine which dimensions of the digital
transformation can be used as predictors for assessing the digitalization-related status quo of
schools. In the model for the school management members, the digital competencies of the
teaching staff were identified as a significant predictor, along with equipment and technol-
ogy, which showed the greatest effect. Both variables remained significant in the teachers’
model as well, with the effect of digital competencies being reduced due to multivariate cor-
relations. Further, both the fear-related attitudes of the teachers, with a comparatively small
effect, as well as the anchoring of the digital transformation in the school culture and the
dimension of Strategy and Leadership, are predictive for the digitalization-related state of
development at a significant level. In the case of Strategy and Leadership, the effect can be
classified as medium to large. In other words, we can conclude that the teachers, in contrast
to the school management members, perceived Strategy and Leadership as a significant fac-
tor regarding the assessment of the digitalization-related development status. This suggests
a different level of importance for this dimension in the context of digitalization between the
two groups. However, the relevance of this dimension is enormous, as teachers perceive the
willingness of school management to promote innovation or change as one of the strongest
predictors of school quality (Bonsen et al., 2002; Imboden, 2017).
    In summary, our study shows, on the one hand, that the different dimensions of digital
transformation are perceived differently by the two observed status groups. On the other
hand, some of these dimensions are considered more important than others regarding the
perception of the general digitization-related status quo. In this context, differences between
school management members and teachers could also be identified. In principle, we focused
on obtaining a holistic view of digital transformation by both school management members
and, in particular, by teachers, whereas in many other studies the content focus of studies
with teachers is often reduced to instructional development, i.e., their digital competencies
or the use of ICT in the classroom.
    Thus, the question arises as to what implications for the successful design of the digi-
talization-related school improvement process can be derived from these results. First, it
is important that teachers are actively involved in digitalization-related development pro-
cesses by school management. Based on a jointly developed vision or strategy, common
values must be defined that determine both the content-related and the “moral” framework.
It is of importance that all school stakeholders agree on what digital transformation means
for their school and what part the individual status groups must contribute so that the trans-
formation process can be shaped successfully. A constructive trial-and-error culture can help
to quickly solve potential problems and optimize the transformation process (Tołwińska,
2021).
    To support these findings, further studies are needed on the digital transformation of
vocational schools that look beyond the classroom level to the entire school development
process. It is necessary to observe how schools evolve in the different theoretical dimen-
sions of digital transformation, or whether some of these dimensions emerge as more impor-


                                                                                   13

424                                                                                            M. Rauseo et al.


tant than others when assessing the digital status quo. In this regard, it would be helpful to
consider the individual dimensions in more detail to better examine the interrelationships
between them. Additionally, the school management’s leadership competence should also
be included in these thoughts, as school management members with advanced leadership
competence will find it easier to drive change (Hallinger & Heck, 2010; Bonsen, 2016b).
Comparisons between vocational and general education schools, and between different
countries can also help identify potential and formulate recommendations for action. It will
be interesting to see how digital transformation in schools progresses over time, particularly
in light of the complex dynamics of the topic, which was accelerated by the COVID-19
pandemic.

Acknowledgements The authors would like to thank Chiara Antonietti and Francesca Amenduni for their
support in the preliminary phase of the analyses. This work was supported by the Swiss State Secretariat for
Education, Research and Innovation (grant number 19-2550).

Contributions Martina Rauseo: Conceptualization; Methodology; Investigation; Formal analysis; Writing –
Original Draft; Writing – Review & Editing;
Andreas Harder: Conceptualization; Methodology; Writing – Original Draft; Writing – Review & Editing;
Formal analysis;
Deborah Glassey-Previdoli: Conceptualization; Methodology; Writing – Original Draft; Writing – Review
& Editing;
Alberto Cattaneo: Conceptualization; Supervision; Writing – Review & Editing; Project administration;
Funding acquisition.
Stephan Schumann: Conceptualization; Supervision; Writing – Review & Editing;
Serge Imboden: Conceptualization; Supervision; Project administration; Funding acquisition.

Funding Open access funding provided by Swiss Federal University for Vocational Education and Training
(SFUVET)

Declarations

Conflict of interest The authors declare that they have no competing interests that are relevant to the content
of this article.

Open Access This article is licensed under a Creative Commons Attribution 4.0 International License, which
permits use, sharing, adaptation, distribution and reproduction in any medium or format, as long as you give
appropriate credit to the original author(s) and the source, provide a link to the Creative Commons licence,
and indicate if changes were made. The images or other third party material in this article are included in the
article’s Creative Commons licence, unless indicated otherwise in a credit line to the material. If material is
not included in the article’s Creative Commons licence and your intended use is not permitted by statutory
regulation or exceeds the permitted use, you will need to obtain permission directly from the copyright
holder. To view a copy of this licence, visit http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/.




References
Arnold, D., Arntz, M., Gregory, T., Steffens, S., & Zierahn, U. (2016). Herausforderungen der Digitalisier-
    ung für die Zukunft der Arbeitswelt. ZEW policy brief nr. 8. Zentrum für Europäische Wirtschaftsforsc-
    hung (ZEW).
Atwater, L. E., & Yammarino, F. J. (1992). Does Self-Other Agreement on Leadership perceptions moderate
    the validity of Leadership and performance predictions? Personnel Psychology, 45(1), 141–164. https://
    doi.org/10.1111/j.1744-6570.1992.tb00848.x.




13

Same, but Different? Digital Transformation in Swiss Vocational Schools…                                      425

Baturay, M. H., Gökçearslan, Ş., & Ke, F. (2017). The relationship among pre-service teachers’ com-
      puter competence, attitude towards computer-assisted education, and intention of technology accep-
      tance. International Journal of Technology Enhanced Learning, 9(1), 1–13. https://doi.org/10.1504/
      IJTEL.2017.084084.
Bonsen, M. (2016a). Wirksame Schulleitung. In H. Buchen, & H. G. Rolff (Eds.), Professionswissen Schul-
      leitung (pp. 193–226). Beltz.
Bonsen, M. (2016b). Schulleitung und Führung in der Schule. In H. Altrichter, & K. Maag Merki
      (Eds.), Handbuch Neue Steuerung im Schulsystem (pp. 301–323). Springer VS. https://doi.
      org/10.1007/978-3-531-18942-0_11.
Bonsen, M., von der Gathen, J., & Pfeiffer, H. (2002). Wie wirkt Schulleitung? Schulleitungshandeln als
      Faktor für Schulqualität. In H. G. Rolff, H. G. Holtappels, K. Klemm, H. Pfeiffer, & R. Schulz-Zander
      (Eds.), Jahrbuch der Schulentwicklung (pp. 287–322). Beltz Juventa.
Bosch, U., Hentschel, S., & Kramer, S. (2018). Digital offroad: Erfolgsstrategien für die digitale Transfor-
      mation. Haufe-Lexware.
Carretero, S., Vuorikari, R., & Punie, Y. (2017). DigComp 2.1: the Digital competence Framework for Citi-
      zens with eight proficiency levels and examples of use. Publications Office of the European Union.
      https://doi.org/10.2760/38842.
Cijan, A., Jenic, L., Lamovsek, A., & Stemberger, J. (2019). How digitalization changes the workplace.
      Dynamic Relationships Management Journal, 8(1), 3–12. https://doi.org/10.17708/DRMJ.2019.
      v08n01a01.
Cattaneo, A. A. P., Antonietti, C., & Rauseo, M. (2022). How digitalised are vocational teachers? Assessing
      digital competence in vocational education and looking at its underlying factors. Computers & Educa-
      tion, 176. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.compedu.2021.104358
Delcker, J., & Ifenthaler, D. (2022). Digital distance learning and the transformation of vocational
      schools from a qualitative perspective. Frontiers in Education, 7, 908046. https://doi.org/10.3389/
      feduc.2022.908046.
Educa. (2021). Digitalisierung in der Bildung. Educa.
Eickelmann, B., & Drossel, K. (2020). Digitales Potenzial. Erfolgreiche Förderung digitaler Kompetenzen
      von Schülerinnen und Schülern an nicht-gymnasialen Schulen der Sekundarstufe I. Vodafone Stiftung.
Eickelmann, B., & Gerick, J. (2017). Lehren und Lernen mit digitalen Medien - Zielsetzungen, Rahmen-
      bedingungen und Implikationen für die Schulentwicklung. In K. Scheiter, & T. Riecke-Baulecke (Eds.),
      Lehren und Lernen mit digitalen Medien. Strategien, internationale Trends und pädagogische Orien-
      tierungen (pp. 54–81). Oldenbourg.
Eickelmann, B., Gerick, J., & Vennemann, M. (2019). Unerwartet erfolgreiche Schulen im digitalen Zeitalter.
      Eine Analyse von Schulmerkmalen resilienter Schultypen auf Grundlage der IEA-Studie ICILS 2013.
      Journal for educational research online, 11(1), 118–144. https://doi.org/10.25656/01:16790.
Ellis, P. D. (2010). Effect sizes and the interpretation of research results in international business. Journal of
      International Business Studies, 41, 1581–1588. https://doi.org/10.1057/jibs.2010.39.
European Commission (2022). SELFIE. Retrieved October 4, 2022, from https://education.ec.europa.eu/it/
      selfie
Federal Council (2018). Strategie “Digitale Schweiz”. Retrieved March 8, 2022, from https://www.dig-
      italdialog.swiss/de/
Federal Council (2020, March 17). Coronavirus: Bundesrat erklärt die «ausserordentliche Lage» und ver-
      schärft die Massnahmen. Retrieved March 8, 2022, from https://www.admin.ch/gov/de/start/dokumen-
      tation/medienmitteilungen.msg-id-78454.html
Federal Statistical Office (2021). Obligatorische Schule, Sekundarstufe II, Tertiärstufe - höhere Fachschulen.
      Retrieved March 8, 2022, from https://www.bfs.admin.ch/bfs/de/home/statistiken/bildung-wissen-
      schaft/personal-bildungsinstitutionen/obligatorische-schule-sekundarstufe-II-tertiaerstufe-hoehere-
      fachschulen.html
Feldhoff, T., Jude, N., Radisch, F., Maag Merki, K., Brauckmann-Sajkiewicz, S., & Kriegbaum, K. (2021).
      Challenges schools face during the COVID-19 crisis and how they change over time [PowerPoint
      Slides]. EARLI Online 2021. https://www.researchgate.net/publication/354236426_Challenges_
      schools_face_during_the_COVID-19_crisis_and_how_they_change_over_time
Feldhoff, T., Radisch, F., Maag Merki, K., Jude, N., Brauckmann-Sajkiewicz, S., Maaz, K., Arndt, M.,
      Habeck, L., Suter, F., Wüst, O., Rettinger, T., Reschke, K., & Selcik, F. (2022). Erfahrungen von
      Schulleiter*innen in Deutschland, Österreich und in der Deutschschweiz während der COVID-
      19-Pandemie. Zentrale Ergebnisse der Längsschnittstudie «S-CLEVER. Schulentwicklung vor neuen
      Herausforderungen». Retrieved from www.s-clever.org.
Fend, H. (2008). Neue Theorie der Schule. Einführung in das Verstehen von Bildungssystemen. VS Verlag für
      Sozialwissenschaften. https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-531-91788-7.
Field, A. (2009). Discovering Statistics using SPSS. Sage.


                                                                                                    13

426                                                                                             M. Rauseo et al.

Fraillon, J., Ainley, J., Schulz, W., Friedman, T., & Duckworth, D. (2020). Preparing for Life in a Digital
      World. The IEA International Computer and Information Literacy Study 2018 International Report
      Springer. https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-030-38781-5
Fraillon, J., Ainley, J., Schulz, W., Friedman, T., & Gebhardt, E. (2014). Preparing for life in a digital age.
      The IEA International Computer and Information Literacy Study international report Springer. https://
      doi.org/10.1007/978-3-319-14222-7
Genner, S. (2017). Digitale Transformation: Auswirkungen auf Kinder und Jugendliche in der Schweiz –
      Ausbildung, Bildung, Arbeit, Freizeit. ZHAW Zürcher Hochschule für Angewandte Wissenschaften.
Gräsel, C., Schledjewski, J., & Hartmann, U. (2020). Implementation digitaler Medien als Schulentwicklung-
      saufgabe. Zeitschrift für Pädagogik, 66(2), 208–224. https://doi.org/10.25656/01:23629.
Graf-Schlattmann, M., Meister, D. M., Oevel, G., & Wilde, M. (2020). Kollektive Veränderungsbereitschaft
      als zentraler Erfolgsfaktor von Digitalisierungsprozessen an Hochschulen. Zeitschrift für Hochschulent-
      wicklung, 15(1), 19–39. https://doi.org/10.3217/zfhe-15-01/02.
Hallinger, P., & Heck, R. H. (2010). Collaborative leadership and school improvement: understanding the
      impact on school capacity and student learning. School Leadership & Management, 30(2), 95–110.
      https://doi.org/10.1080/13632431003663214.
Harder, A., Imboden, S., Glassey-Previdoli, D., & Schumann, S. (2020). Schulleitungshandeln in Zeiten der
      digitalen Transformation – „Business as usual” oder „Alles ist neu”? In K. Heinrichs, K. Kögler, & C.
      Siegfried (Eds.), Berufliches Lehren und Lernen: Grundlagen, Schwerpunkte und Impulse wirtschafts-
      pädagogischer Forschung. Digitale Festschrift für Eveline Wuttke zum 60. Geburtstag (pp. 1 – 17).
Huber, S. G., Günther, P. S., Schneider, N., Helm, C., Schwander, M., Schneider, J. A., & Pruitt, J. (2020).
      COVID-19 – aktuelle Herausforderungen in Schule und Bildung. Erste Befunde des Schul-Barometers
      in Deutschland, Österreich und der Schweiz. Waxmann.
Ifenthaler, D., & Egloffstein, M. (2020). Development and implementation of a maturity model of digital
      transformation. TechTrends, 64(2), 302–309. https://doi.org/10.1007/s11528-019-00457-4.
Ilomäki, L., & Lakkala, M. (2018). Digital technology and practices for school improvement: innovative
      digital school model. Research and practice in technology enhanced learning, 13(1), 1–32. https://doi.
      org/10.1186/s41039-018-0094-8.
Imboden, S. (2017). Leadership in der Berufsbildung: Eine Interventionsstudie zur Stärkung der Füh-
      rungskompetenzen [Dissertation, University of Konstanz]. KOPS. http://nbn-resolving.de/urn:nbn:de:
      bsz:352-0-409280
Kotter, J. P. (2012). Leading change. Harvard Business School Press.
Lindeman, M., Sundvik, L., & Rouhiainen, P. (1995). Under- or overestimation of self? Person variables and
      self-assessment accuracy in work settings. Journal of Social Behavior and Personality, 10(1), 123–134.
McNeish, D., Stapleton, L. M., & Silverman, R. D. (2017). On the unnecessary ubiquity of hierarchical linear
      modeling. Psychological Methods, 22(1), 114–140. https://doi.org/10.1037/met0000078.
Nilsen, D., & Campbell, D. P. (1993). Self–observer rating discrepancies: once an overrater, always an over-
      rater? Human Resource Management, 32(2–3), 265–281.
Petko, D., Döbeli Honegger, B., & Prasse, D. (2018a). Digitale Transformation in Bildung und Schule:
      Facetten, Entwicklungslinien und Herausforderungen für die Lehrerinnen- und Lehrerbildung. Beiträge
      zur Lehrerinnen- und Lehrerbildung, 36(2), 157–174. https://doi.org/10.25656/01:17094
Petko, D., Prasse, D., & Cantieni, A. (2018b). The interplay of school readiness and teacher readiness for
      educational technology integration: a structural equation model. Computers in the Schools, 35(1), 1–18.
      https://doi.org/10.1080/07380569.2018.1428007.
Redecker, C., & Punie, Y. (2017). European Framework for the Digital competence of educators: Dig-
      CompEdu. Publications Office of the European Union. https://doi.org/10.2760/159770.
Rolff, H. G. (2010). Schulentwicklung als Trias von Organisations-, Unterrichts- und Personalentwicklung.
      In T. Bohl, W. Helsper, H. G. Holtappels, & C. Schelle (Eds.), Handbuch Schulentwicklung. Theorie
      – Forschungsbefunde – Entwicklungsprozesse – Methodenrepertoire (pp. 29–36). Julius Klinkhardt.
Scholkmann, A. B. (2021). Resistance to (Digital) Change. In D. Ifenthaler, S. Hofhues, M. Egloffstein, & C.
      Helbig (Eds.), Digital Transformation of Learning Organizations (pp. 219–236). Springer. https://doi.
      org/10.1007/978-3-030-55878-9_13
Schulz-Zander, R. (1999). Neue Medien und Schulentwicklung. In E. Rösner (Ed.), Schulentwicklung und
      Schulqualität. Kongressdokumentation 1. Und 2. Oktober 1998 (pp. 35–56). IFS.
Seufert, S., & Tarantini, E. (2022). Gestaltung der digitalen Transformation in Schulen. Ein Reifegradmodell für
      die Berufsbildung. MedienPädagogik, 49, 301–326. https://doi.org/10.21240/mpaed/49/2022.07.15.X.
Swiss State Secretariat for Education, Research and Innovation (SERI) (2017). Aktionsplan im Bereich Bil-
      dung, Forschung und Innovation in den Jahren 2019–2020 Retrieved October 28, 2021, from https://
      www.sbfi.admin.ch/sbfi/de/home/bfi-politik/bfi-2021-2024/transversale-themen/digitalisierung-bfi/
      digitalisierung.html



13

Same, but Different? Digital Transformation in Swiss Vocational Schools…                               427

Tołwińska, B. (2021). The role of principals in learning schools to support Teachers’ Use of Digi-
    tal Technologies. Technology Knowledge and Learning, 26(1), 917–930. https://doi.org/10.1007/
    s10758-021-09496-4.
Waffner, B. (2021). Schulentwicklung in der digital geprägten Welt: Strategien, Rahmenbedingungen und
    Implikationen für Schulleitungshandeln. In A. Wilmers, M. Achenbach &, C. Keller (Eds.), Bildung im
    digitalen Wandel. Organisationsentwicklung in Bildungseinrichtungen (pp. 67–103). Waxmann. https://
    doi.org/10.25656/01:23605
World Economic Forum (2016). World Economic Forum White Paper. Digital Transformation of Industries:
    In collaboration with Accenture. Societal Implications. Retrieved March 8, 2022, from http://reports.
    weforum.org/digital-transformation/wp-content/blogs.dir/94/mp/files/pages/files/dti-societal-implica-
    tions-white-paper.pdf

Publisher’s Note Springer Nature remains neutral with regard to jurisdictional claims in published maps and
institutional affiliations.




                                                                                              13