Tarih Okulu Dergisi (TOD)                           Journal of History School (JOHS)
                                (2022), 15(58), 1773-1798
 Özgünlük kontrolü                                                Authenticity process

                    DOI No: http://dx.doi.org/10.29228/Joh.61935
 Makale türü: Araştırma makalesi                       Article type: Research article
                        Geliş tarihi     11.04.2022    Submitted date
                       Kabul tarihi      29.04.2022    Accepted date
             Elektronik yayın tarihi     30.06.2022    Online publishing date
                         Atıf Bilgisi / Reference Information
 Baydar, F. (2022). The Restructuring of School Management in the Effect of Change
       and Globalization. Journal of History School, 58, 1773-1798.


      THE RESTRUCTURING OF SCHOOL MANAGEMENT IN THE
            EFFECT OF CHANGE AND GLOBALIZATION1

                                    Fatih BAYDAR2
Abstract
Decision-makers and policymakers’ perspectives of school administrators have
significant changes as the responsibility and increasing influence of the school
administrator in fulfilling their functions following the school’s objectives became more
evident. Therefore, it is essential to review the school administrators’ training, selection,
and appointment policies in globalization and change. This study aims to review the
policies of choosing, training, and assigning school administrators under the influence of
globalization and change. For this purpose, interviews were conducted with 15 school
administrators. The obtained data were analyzed using a qualitative analysis program.
The criterion sampling method, which is one of the purposive sampling methods, was
preferred in the determination of the study group. The research study group consists of
15 education administrators working in Istanbul’s Kartal, Maltepe, and Sultanbeyli
districts in the 2021-2022 academic year. During the data collection process, face-to-face
interviews were conducted with the participants. According to the research data, the
themes and sub-themes created by the opinions of the education administrators about the
processes of selection, training, and appointment of education administrators in Turkey
are included. The most emphasized issue by the participants in this regard was the
complexity and inadequacy experienced in educational administration policies.
According to the findings, it has been stated that the Ministry of National Education
(MoNE) has made frequent changes in recent years, and this situation has created
confusion in education. In the theme of “new management approach,” the participants


1Bu  makalenin etik kurul onayı İstanbul Sabahattin Zaim Üniversitesi’nde, 25.03.2022 tarih,
2022/03 sayı ve toplantı numarası ile alınmıştır.
2Dr., Milli Eğitim Bakanlığı, İstanbul, fthbaydar@gmail.com, Orcid: 0000-0001-5090-4874



                                          [1773]

                                   Fatih BAYDAR

stated that school principals should follow the innovations in education. It was
emphasized that they should apply these innovations in the management processes.
Keywords: Globalization, Change, School Administration, Administrator Appointment.


INTRODUCTION
       In the education system, the possibilities of implementing, monitoring, and
testing the educational activities planned by the administrators are only noticed
in the school environment. In addition to the influence of teachers in the
transformation of school-level education programs into teaching activities and the
effectiveness of students’ learning, the role of educational leaders is strongly
emphasized (Anderson, 1991; Darling-Hammond, LaPointe, Meyerson, Orr &
Cohen, 2007). The key to good schools is school principals (IEL, 2000).
Decision-makers and policymakers’ perspectives of school administrators have
significant changes as the responsibility, and increasing influence of the school
administrator in fulfilling their functions following the school’s objectives
became more evident. In general, essential roles are expected from the school
administrator, such as setting goals, raising families’ awareness, working in
harmony with other regional schools, allocating school funds according to goals
and needs, determining the number and position of staff needed, and recruiting
staff according to the needs of the school in general (Güçlü, 2000). Many
scientists and practitioners outside of these roles argue that the job needs of school
administrators should be far beyond their current situation (Peterson, 2002,
Levine, 2005). Since their professional duties and competencies do not meet the
expectations, states have started to reconsider traditional manager training
policies.
       The changing conditions with the effect of globalization have caused the
roles and behaviors of school administrators to change because schools are
dynamic systems. In dynamic systems, as change is constant, the roles of the
school principal will also change (Wesson & Weaver, 2001). Historically, the
most basic task of the school administrator has been managing the school and
defining its vision and mission (Morrison, 2007; Usdan, 2000). Today, the
contemporary school administrator is a teaching leader, community leader,
visionary, architect of the organization, supporter, a leader with their cultural
background, and people who can manage and control the change and command
the legal resources related to education. School administrators should be able to
influence and direct the thoughts, feelings, value judgments, beliefs, and
behaviors of their colleagues (Şen, Ateşoğlu & Akdoğan, 2017). Educational
leaders are asked to communicate well with other people. They should involve

                                       [1774]

 The Restructuring of School Management in the Effect of Change and Globalization

other employees in the decision-making and participation processes through
effective communication. However critical decision-making is for management,
it is as crucial for communication in the organization (Bursalıoğlu, 2000).
Considering that decision-making is an important concept for the organization in
terms of management and communication, school principals must create effective
communication networks with decision-makers and the external environment
(Baydar, 2022). Managers who communicate well with the external environment,
students, teachers, parents, public and non-governmental organizations, and other
environmental factors will ensure that environmental opportunities are directed
to the school and will play an active role in resolving incompatibilities and
conflicts that will occur inside and outside the institution (Darling-Hammond et
al., 2007). In this way, administrators will be able to ensure that educational
organizations become more successful and effective (Huber, 2002; Bottoms et
al., 2003; Moos, Johansson, & Day, 2011; Şişman, 2012). It is a fact that the
competencies of school administrators have a critical role in creating the school
vision regarding school effectiveness and efficiency, planning the future, and
adapting educational organizations to change in the globalizing world
(Karabatak, 2015; Tschannen-Moran & Garies, 2005). The school administrator
is the person who is primarily responsible for the success of the organization by
organizing, influencing, directing, coordinating, and supervising other colleagues
to achieve the educational goals of the school. At the same time, school
administrators are expected to use a strategy to deal with crises, manage internal
conflicts, create an organizational vision, motivate employees, make valid and
reliable decisions, and have problem-solving skills (Çelikten, 2001). The
effectiveness and efficiency of education services and the sustainability of these
qualities depend on education administrators, especially school administrators,
being aware of lifelong learning, being aware of scientific developments, and
ultimately reflecting the models developed by scientists into practice (Hoy &
Miskel, 2010). For this, selecting, training, and appointing managers should be
supported by correct and appropriate policies, and highly qualified employees
should be designated as organizational leaders.
       The training of school administrators is a problem that remains in every
country. Similarly, in Turkey, there are many opinions on this area, and studies
have made many suggestions on the Turkish scale regarding the selection,
training, and appointment of school administrators (Acar, 2002; Ağaoğlu,
Gültekin, & Çubukçu, 2002; Akkuş, 2011; Aksoy, 2002; Bakioğlu, Özcan &
Hacıhafızoğlu,2002; Balcı & Çınkır, 2002; Balcı; 1998; Balyer & Gündüz, 2011;
Cemaloğlu, 2005; Çelenk, 2002; Erdoğan, 2000; Gümüseli, 2001; Şisman &
Turan, 2002; Yirci, 2009) . When these studies are examined, it is seen that the

                                     [1775]

                                  Fatih BAYDAR

disruptions experienced in the process of training and appointing administrators
in Turkey constitute a vital problem for the national education system. Some
developed countries, especially the United States, train school administrators in
theory-based schools. There is a widespread belief in Turkey that there should be
schools that train school administrators (Balcı & Çınkır, 2002). For this reason,
it is understood that comprehensive policies should be developed, and initiatives
should be taken in terms of training and appointing school administrators (Balyer
& Gündüz, 2011). On the other hand, there was no need for a professional training
process since school management is not seen as a profession in Turkey and is
carried out as teachers’ second duty. According to Gisberg, pre-vocational
training programs for school administrators have a history of nearly a century in
developed countries that accept management as a professional profession,
especially in the USA and Canada (Karip & Köksal, 1999). Despite this, the
problem of training and appointing education administrators is still seen as a
problem in Turkey. Although there are some developments regarding the training
of administrators, it is seen that these programs are not functional in raising
school leaders, are not qualified to solve the problem, and are far from meeting
the needs (Balcı, 2011). In Turkey, there is an understanding that individual
efforts such as trial and error and the apprenticeship model are involved after
school principals take office (Ağaoğlu, Altınkurt, Yılmaz & Karaköse, 2012). It
can be said that this situation may lead to undesirable results in terms of decision
and policy-making processes as well as educational organizations and society.
       When global competition and change are fast, the role of school
administrators should be questioned. For example, what kind of competencies
they should have, what kind of training process they should go through, and what
kind of appointment policy should be adopted should be determined for schools
to be effective generally and in the international arena. Due to the changes and
developments in education in the globalizing world, it is imperative to train
educational leaders according to age requirements (Aslan, 2012). Educational
leaders are the leaders of the execution of teaching activities and the teachers who
are one of the most important parts of teaching. Therefore, it is understood that
management is a professional task that requires different skills from teaching and
that the role confusion caused by the transition between teaching and
management should be avoided (Loder & Spillane, 2005). Unlike teaching, since
school principalship is not considered a professional profession in Turkey, it does
not have its own standards (Ağaoğlu, Gültekin & Çubukçu, 2012). For this
reason, school management should establish its own standards and be accepted
as a profession. This study evaluates the Ministry of National Education (MoNE)
policies regarding the restructuring of school administration under the influence

                                      [1776]

 The Restructuring of School Management in the Effect of Change and Globalization

of change and globalization based on education administrators’ views. It also
presents opinions and suggestions regarding these policies. For these purposes,
answers to the following questions were sought:
    1) Is a new approach to school management selection, training, and
       appointment processes necessary?
    2) What approaches should the Ministry of National Education use
       regarding the professional development of school administrators before
       and after their service?
    3) What are the competencies that school administrators should have? At
       what level do school administrators in Turkey have these competencies?
    4) What methods should be adopted regarding school administrators’
       selection, training, and appointment?


METHOD
      Research Model
       This research used a case study design, one of the qualitative research
methods, to reveal the thoughts of school principals about school management
under the influence of change and globalization in the Maltepe, Kartal, Pendik,
Tuzla, and Sultanbeyli districts of Istanbul. A case study is an in-depth
description of a limited system based on large and comprehensive datasets
(Creswell, 2007). Qualitative researchers, while researching a particular subject,
want to obtain a much broader perspective than to learn “how” or “how good”
that subject is (Büyüköztürk et al., 2012).

      Study Group
       In qualitative research, the concepts of universe and sample are replaced
by “participants” or “study groups” (Yıldırım & Şimşek, 2011). For this reason,
in the research, it will be preferred to use “study group” instead of “universe” and
“sample.” The purposive sampling method will be preferred in selecting the study
group. Purposeful sampling is the selection of information-rich situations in the
context of the purpose of the study to conduct in-depth research. The main tool
here is to reveal the common or divergent aspects between different situations
determined consistent with the purpose of the research and allow the problem to
be examined in a wider framework (Büyüköztürk et al., 2012). In this context,
the working group consists of school principals working in Istanbul’s Kartal,

                                      [1777]

                                 Fatih BAYDAR

Maltepe, and Sultanbeyli districts in the 2021-2022 academic year. Statistics of
the study group are shown in Table 1 below.


 Table 1.
 Descriptive Statistics of Principals in the Study Group
 Variables            Groups                        f                  %
                      Male                         16                  80
 Gender
                      Female                        4                  20
                      20-25                         2                  10
                      26-30                         8                  40
 Age                  31-35                         5                  25
                      36-40                         3                  15
                      41-45                         2                  10
                      Undergraduate                10                  50
 Education Status Masters                           9                  45
                      Doctoral                      1                   5
                      1-5                           5                  25
                      6-10                         10                  50
 Seniority
                      11-15                         3                  15
                      16-20                         2                  10

      Data Collection Tools and Procedures
       Face-to-face interviews were conducted with the school principals
participating in this research and a semi-structured interview form was used to
obtain their opinions. This form is more flexible than a structured interview form.
The researcher can support the interview with further questions to ensure that the
main questions are elaborated. It is seen that this technique is frequently used in
social sciences and educational research because it offers a standard and
flexibility (Ekiz, 2003).

      Data Analysis
       This study determined a working group among the school principals
working in Kartal, Maltepe, and Sultanbeyli who agreed to be interviewed. An
interview plan was created by making an appointment, and the participants were
informed that the interview would take between 40 to 60 minutes. The reflective
listening technique was used during the interviews. In this technique, the
researcher puts themself in the interviewee’s place and tries to maintain their
                                     [1778]

 The Restructuring of School Management in the Effect of Change and Globalization

neutrality and encourage conversation by focusing on the interviewee’s speech,
gestures, facial expressions, and tone of voice (Jentz & Murphy, 2005). The
confidentiality of the interview records was emphasized so that the participants
could freely express their thoughts during the interview.
       In this study which used a qualitative research design, content analysis was
performed on the data obtained from the semi-structured interview form. The
basic process in content analysis is gathering similar data within the framework
of certain concepts and themes and interpreting them by arranging them in a way
that the reader can understand. Accordingly, content analysis in qualitative
research is analyzed in four stages. These include coding the data, finding the
themes, organizing the codes and themes, and defining and interpreting the
findings (Yıldırım & Şimşek, 2011). The main headings were revealed from the
obtained data. The data were classified to be compatible with each other, and sub-
themes were created. Miles and Huberman's (2016) calculation formula was used
and a conclusion was reached in which consensus and disagreement were taken
into account. According to this result, it is known that the agreement between the
expert opinion and the researcher should be over 90% (Miles & Huberman,
2016). In this study, the compliance rate was calculated as 92%. This result is
important in terms of showing reliability. The MAXQDA 12 qualitative data
analysis program was used to analyze the data.


FINDINGS AND INTERPRETATION
      Manager Training, Selection, and Appointment
       The most emphasized point by the participants regarding the selection,
training, and appointment of education administrators in Turkey implemented by
the Ministry of National Education until today was the complexity and
inadequacy of the policies experienced in the process. They think that the
evaluations made in the manager selection and appointment process implemented
in Turkey are not made objectively. Furthermore, they stated that paying attention
to academic competence and merit in the manager evaluation process carried out
by the officials assigned by the Ministry of National Education and the interview
alone in the selection process is insufficient. They suggest that the interview
process, which is not conducted well, harms the sense of justice. Here are some
excerpts from the education administrators’ views:
      “What needs to be done is to find a way to place the concept of justice in
consciences through merit, experience, and examination. In addition to benefiting


                                     [1779]

                                 Fatih BAYDAR

from managers who are experienced in training, management should be taught
through seminars and meetings given by real experts in the field.” (P10)
       “School administrators should give importance to merit while being
selected. Not everyone who passes the exam should be an administrator.” (P4)
      “In addition, people who have a master’s degree in Educational
Management, 5 years of teaching experience, and those prone to technology
should be preferred.” (P5)
      “In terms of selecting a manager, I think that the current interview system
alone is not sufficient and that this situation, which shakes the sense of justice,
should be arranged as an exam plus interview, and the expertise, education level,
and performance levels of the people to be selected should come to the fore.”
(P2)
       “It is not possible for a few people to evaluate whether a person has the
qualifications of a manager in half an hour. Interviews in this sense are a
situation that is considered suspicious by everyone.” (P9)
       “When choosing a manager, I think the method they choose is completely
subjective. A manager cannot be chosen with two or three questions. I believe it
takes a long time.” (P4)
       The fact that the Ministry of National Education has changed its manager
appointment processes quite frequently in recent years has been criticized by a
significant part of the participants. It was emphasized that stability is necessary
for the manager appointment processes, permanence should be ensured, and
clarity should be revealed about what kind of education manager is wanted.
Education administrators express their thoughts on this situation as follows:
      “The Ministry’s inability to achieve stability in administrators’
appointment and selection policies constitutes the biggest problem. In this
regard, the fact that a state with a three-thousand-year-old tradition still
experiences confusion in appointing administrators and that the regulation on
administrator appointment is changed almost every year reveals the instability.”
(P10)
       “I think that our ministry does not have an administrator training policy.
It is possible to the extent that teachers can train and develop themselves as
administrators.” (P6)
       “The manager appointment system of the Ministry of National Education
is not well-established. It is a system that changes in short periods. The Ministry
of National Education should establish a permanent system as soon as possible.
                                     [1780]

 The Restructuring of School Management in the Effect of Change and Globalization

For this, a comprehensive study that conducts workshops and academic support
and considers education stakeholders’ opinions and suggestions should be
implemented and made permanent.” (P5)

      Authority-Responsibility-Wage Balance
       The current authorities, responsibilities, and wages of school
administrators working in educational institutions affiliated with the Ministry of
National Education are seen as a highly debated issue. It is thought that the
authority of school administrators in Turkey is low, but the responsibilities are
quite high. Besides, their authority is quite limited, and education administrators
are seen as the cause of all educational problems. It is thought that improvements
in salaries and payments are necessary to make management attractive for
managers due to their high working hours and responsibilities. It is stated that this
situation will also affect managers’ dignity. In addition, it is emphasized that
administrators have limited authority to impose sanctions in the face of problems
with teachers and students. Excerpts from the opinions of the managers on this
issue are as follows:
       “The responsibilities of school administrators are quite high. Other than
the responsibility of the school’s academic success, completing the physical
deficiencies, preparing the school for education, and providing financial
opportunities, they almost have no authority.” (P18)
       “School administrators have very few authorities and more
responsibilities. The administrator is responsible for whatever happens at the
school. Of course, they should be responsible, but there should be a measure of
this. For example, say a child is injured while running. The administrator is
responsible for this. Many parents immediately use this as an excuse to report a
crime.” (P4).
       “In addition, school principals have more working hours than teachers.
The school administrator’s salary and additional lesson salary should be
increased, and the authority and responsibility in their working conditions should
be reflected in the wage.” (P7)
        “As for wages, teachers’ salaries should be increased, and then a separate
salary system should be introduced to make management attractive. As a result,
it is desired to establish a balance between respect and reputation when it comes
to how much is being paid.” (P6)
      “School administrators are given great responsibilities, but little
authority, and wages are not paid in return. Teachers who work on courses,
                                      [1781]

                                   Fatih BAYDAR

support training, etc., earn much more income than the institution administrators.
Education administrators have serious problems meeting school needs and solve
these problems with almost no support from the state.” (P5)
       It is known that school administrators in public schools in our country work
to provide resources to institutions. There is a common opinion that the necessary
resources are insufficient to cover all the expenses of public schools. The opinions
of the education administrators regarding the situation in question in the study are
as follows:
       “In educational institutions where academic and social success is
important, the fact that administrators deal with parents, students, and teachers
in creating resources damages their reputation. In society, the perception that
the state meets all the needs of institutions puts administrators under suspicion.
In cases where administrators consult parents with decisions they care about, the
dignity of the administrator comes to the fore.” (P8)


      Professional Reputation
       Social awareness is very important in increasing the professional prestige
of school administrators. Education, educators, educational environments, and
leaders of educational environments should be respected in all segments of
society. It is thought that the news in the press affects the formation of positive
or negative thoughts about the professional dignity of education administrators in
society. The impact of violent attitudes toward educators damaging the reputation
of educational institutions is quite high. It is seen that the verbal or actual violent
behaviors that education employees are exposed to are increasing day by day. It
is seen that the echoes of the news about educational institutions in recent years
have continued for a long time. The institution that can take the biggest steps in
increasing the professional prestige of education administrators is the Ministry of
National Education. The statements of education administrators regarding the
effects of authorized persons’ statements on education are given below.
       “I believe that my managers should be conscious of society and give more
importance to education to increase their professional dignity. There is no
respect and love left in society. Hazrat Ali did not say, ‘I will be a slave for forty
years to anyone who teaches me a letter’ for nothing. Society should come to this
consciousness. If they do, prestige will come by itself.” (P4)
      “I think that the violence in recent years, negative news in the media, and
TV series have negatively affected this reputation.” (P10)

                                       [1782]

  The Restructuring of School Management in the Effect of Change and Globalization

      “The prestige of school administrators and educators in society is
decreasing day by day. There are many reasons behind this. Such as the media
coverage of negative situations in schools...” (P7)
      “If there is a social holiday, the teacher takes a vacation, or if civil servants
get a raise, teachers earn more, etc. are examples of news in the written and
visual media. Even though we do not want it to happen, some events in our
schools are making headlines, whereas when our teachers and administrators
are seriously battered and injured or even killed, it does not get much attention.”
(P6)
       “Unfortunately, statements made by politicians who do not defend
teachers or not stand by them have unfortunately led to a decrease in our prestige
in society because they take the student to the center and say that if even a single
hair of a student is damaged, they will know it from the teacher.” (P3)
      “At the same time, the existing government should abandon the statements
made in the past, abandon the behaviors that would harm the honor of the
teaching profession, and engage in discourses and actions that the teacher stands
behind.” (P8)
      “The recent attacks on school administrators, in particular, show that our
professional dignity is not in a heartwarming state which we have experienced in
parent-teacher dialogues.” (P9)
       For people to gain a respectable place in society, they need to meet many
criteria. It is stated that these characteristics, which should be found in managers,
are an important factor in gaining prestige. Opinions on the effect of school
principals’ personality traits on professional dignity are as follows:
      “Administrators can gain respect by explaining themselves to teachers,
students, and parents properly and by caring about them.” (P8)
       “Even though we do not want it to happen, some events in our schools are
making headlines, whereas when our teachers and administrators are seriously
battered and injured or even killed, it does not get much attention. Of course, we
teachers and administrators have a share in the current state of this situation. At
least some of us face these situations because we forget about ourselves, that we
are doing a very important job, or because we are lazy.” (P6)
      “To protect and increase managers’ professional dignity and social
reputation, good communication, being objective, analyzing society well, and
approaching the parents, students, and staff accordingly will bring dignity and
success.” (P1)
                                       [1783]

                                 Fatih BAYDAR

      Performance Evaluation Criteria
       The participants emphasized that in the performance evaluation of the
school administrators, it is necessary to determine many objective criteria; the
people who evaluate the performance are very important; the performance
evaluation should not seek faults and be punishing, but should be advisory and
guiding; whether the education administrator provides the conditions that will
allow the students to develop in the academic and social areas in the performance
evaluation should be assessed; that the school climate can be an important
performance criterion for education administrators; and that the school
administrator should be on top of their work and arrive on time. The statements
of the participants regarding these views are given below:
       “A valid and reliable performance evaluation should be made primarily in
the form of grades or as a recommendation only to school administrators, who
do not classify people and are not fault seekers.” (P2)
       “Many criteria should be included in this evaluation. During these studies,
criteria consisting of objective titles which can be expressed with quantitative
values should be used.” (P7)
      “This evaluation should be between teachers, vice principals, and
principals. The performance evaluation draft prepared by MoNE is dysfunctional
and humiliating. The videos recorded by students on social media lately are an
indication that we are deviating from the purpose of this subject.” (P11)
      “Social opportunities offered to students and environments where students
can develop themselves academically and socially should be created.” (P13)
      “The school performance should be evaluated by looking at the school
climate and its material-moral means.” (P10)
       “Performance evaluation criteria should be the work done at school
during the year. It should not be asked to anyone else. When asked, everyone will
evaluate it according to their personal opinion, closeness, and distance. This will
not be objective. As I said above, a valid and safe performance evaluation should
be the work done and will do.” (P15)
      “As a performance evaluation of school administrators, the school climate
created by school administrators and the students should be looked at.” (P18)




                                     [1784]

 The Restructuring of School Management in the Effect of Change and Globalization

      Professional Development
       The contribution of the Ministry of National Education to the professional
development of school administrators is not enough. For professional-academic
development, the Ministry of National Education has to offer opportunities for
the development of school administrators. It is said that creating these
opportunities and the support of managers should become a policy. It is said that
the school administrators’ lack of self-development opportunities and the fact that
the administrators are closed to development and are aimless are also influential
factors. It is emphasized in these themes that managers should constantly renew
and develop themselves and keep up with change and developing technology.
The statements of the participants regarding these issues are given below:
       “Unfortunately, it is not very sufficient. The ministry should offer its staff
opportunities that will contribute to their academic development to raise this
level. Such responsibilities should be made into government policies.” (P5)
       “School administrators complete their development with their own efforts,
but this is far from professionalism. This is possible with in-service training
studies and workshops with a quality goal offered by the ministry. However, most
of our administrators are closed to these developments and consider themselves
sufficient.” (P8)
       “I see that school administrators are not open to continuous improvement
academically. On the contrary, they are the people who resist development the
most. It is known that administrators who do not have a specific goal and ideal
will not want and will reject development. They cause disruption of functioning
rather than contributing to all kinds of innovations and changes.” (P11)
       “School administrators should be able to renew themselves and keep up
with the developing technology constantly.” (P13)


      Characteristics of School Administrator
       School administrators stated the characteristics that an administrator
should have in this theme. According to these characteristics, the characteristics
that the school administrator should have are shown in Table 2 together with the
frequency values.




                                      [1785]

                                   Fatih BAYDAR

 Table 2.
 Characteristics of School Administrators
 Characteristics                                                                 f
 To be open to change and development                                           14
 To be in harmony with their social environment                                 14
 To have a dynamic personality that constantly renews themselves                12
 To be fair                                                                     11
 To have time management skills and use time effectively and efficiently         9
 To be able to analyze the socio-cultural environment of the school well         9
 To be moral and cultured                                                        8
 To have managerial expertise and legislative knowledge                          8
 Communicate effectively                                                         8
 To have an academic side                                                        7
 To be a good book reader                                                        6
 To be a lover of the country and nation                                         5
 To be aware of the requirements of the age                                      5
 To be act in harmony with employees                                             5
 To have problem-solving skills                                                  5
 To have an entrepreneurial spirit                                               5
 To be respectful                                                                5
 To be willing and loving                                                        4
 To be aware of their own personal competencies                                  4
 To be supportive                                                                4
 Knowing a foreign language                                                      3
 To be accessible to teachers and students in the institution where they work    3
 To be loyal to the state                                                        3
 To know their employees well and empathize                                      3
 To be a good observer                                                           3
 To have leadership qualities that use the decision and supervision mechanism
                                                                                2
 correctly and appropriately
 To be aware of the importance of what they do                                  2
 To have a calm and constructive temperament                                    2
 To plan the future of the educational institution with all educators           2
 To be patient                                                                  2
 To be realistic and solution-oriented                                          2
 To be a researcher                                                             2
 Not avoiding taking responsibility                                             1
 Think scientifically                                                           1
 Protect their staff                                                            1
     Some of the participants’ statements about the characteristics that a school
administrator should have are as follows:


                                       [1786]

 The Restructuring of School Management in the Effect of Change and Globalization

     “First of all, school administrators must be moral, and they must be
capable of understanding people. They must have a good command of
administrative regulations and have culture even if it is minimum.”
     “First of all, school administrators must be moral, and they must be
capable of understanding people.”
      “School administration requires a dynamic personality that can constantly
renew themselves. Although the traditional understanding of school
administration is still maintained in some institutions today, it can no longer meet
the age requirements.”
      “…as for academic competence, managers who can keep themselves up-
to-date can be competent in their position.”
      “The administrators appointed to the schools that educate the society
should be religious, open to developments and changes, those who love, protect,
and develop their homeland, and always renew themselves.”
      “School administrators do not renew themselves after they are appointed.
This shows that they have difficulties in keeping up with developments. I am not
saying that everyone is like that. Some administrators constantly improve
themselves.”
      “I see that school administrators are not open to continuous improvement
academically. On the contrary, they are the people who resist development the
most.”
     “…In addition to this, a manager must complete their education by reading
academic books and attending seminars.”


      In-Service Training
      School administrators expressed their views on the in-service training
process in this theme. Accordingly, the opinions of the administrators and the
frequency values of the opinions are shown in Table 3.




                                      [1787]

                                 Fatih BAYDAR

 Table 3.
 Opinions of Administrators on the Theme of In-Service Training
 Opinions                                                                       f
 The quality of in-service training should be increased                        10
 In-service training should be qualified and equipped                           8
 In-service training should be promoted and announced well                      6
 They emphasized that school administrators should receive guidance
                                                                               5
 from experienced administrators from the moment they take office
 Should attend in-service training on new approaches and educational
                                                                               4
 technologies in education and problems encountered at school
 That in-service training quotas should be increased                           4
 In-service training may not always be optional but compulsory                 3
 Content-rich training should be provided that will benefit teachers and
                                                                               3
 administrators
 That all educators should be given equal opportunities in terms of
                                                                               3
 participation
 School administrators should be sent abroad for in-service training           2
 The planning of training and educators should be done well in advance
                                                                               2
 and systematically
      Some of the participant statements regarding in-service training are as
follows:
       “I also think that managers should be sent abroad for education to see
positive or different practices in education.”
       “School administrators should be required to attend in-service training on
topics such as school management, new approaches in education, educational
technologies, and problems encountered at school. These training should not
remain as theoretical pieces of training but should include field studies and
practical training.”
       “Moreover, in the in-service training I attended, I, unfortunately, observed
that the instructors’ knowledge of the subject was insufficient. I saw that some
people could not even fully answer the questions about the subject.”
       “Managers who attend in-service training only attend because they are
required to. Interesting and supportive training for personal development is very
rare.”




                                     [1788]

 The Restructuring of School Management in the Effect of Change and Globalization

      New Management Approach
      School administrators expressed their views on new management
approaches in this theme. Accordingly, the opinions of the administrators and the
frequency values of the opinions are shown in Table 4.

 Table 4.
 Managers' Ideas about New Management Approaches
 Ideas                                                                             f
 School principals should follow and implement the innovations in education        9
 A system should be established to distinguish between working and non-
                                                                                   9
 working.
 Managers should determine the team they will work with                            6
 Managers should increase their authority                                          5
 That school administration should be shaped as a primary profession rather than
                                                                                   4
 a secondary task
 That managers wages should be increased                                           4
 The relationship between the school and the social environment should be
                                                                                   3
 permanent
 The new management approach should be structured in a way that takes into
                                                                                   2
 account national values and is accepted in the international arena
 The manager appointment calendar should be announced and executed in a
                                                                                   2
 planned manner
 Inspectors need to increase their supervisory powers over their subordinates      2
       The expressions of the education administrators revealing these thoughts
are given below.
       “I think that school administrators’ authority should be increased to fulfill
their responsibilities.”
      “School principals’ ability to follow and implement innovations in
education and create teams that they can work in harmony with...”
       “Unfortunately, in today’s management system, managers who improve
themselves academically or make an effort in terms of professional development
and ordinary managers who do not make any development efforts but only do
their job receive the same reward (wage, reputation, etc.) ...”
      “School administration should be removed from being a secondary duty
and become a primary duty. Effective control methods that measure the
administrator’s performance should be introduced. The administrators should be
given authority to create a deterrent that will gain prestige against their
subordinates...”
                                       [1789]

                                 Fatih BAYDAR

      “…Therefore, it will be more beneficial for the Turkish National Education
system to choose from people who have the qualifications of management or have
received training for this task, which requires more responsibility.”
      “Education and school management should be accepted as a field of
expertise.”
       “School management should be considered as a separate profession from
teaching. The subjects you are interested in as a teacher are clear. Your only wish
is to have a good academic year with your students. In management, you try to
manage the human resources in the school and the financial opportunities you
have in the best way. Both are very different professions from this point of view.”


ARGUMENT, RESULT AND RECOMMENDATIONS
       The research aimed to review the Ministry of National Education policies
regarding the restructuring of school administration under the effect of
globalization and change. According to the findings, MoNE policies regarding
the selection, training, and appointment processes of education administrators in
Turkey are complex and inadequate. This situation has been emphasized by many
researchers (Balcı, 2008; Ağaoğlu, Altınkurt, Yılmaz & Karaköse, 2012). In
Turkey, school principalship is explained not by leadership but by management.
Managers are trained according to the master-interest model. Although the
examination model is applied in the appointing system, this model brings to mind
the traditional apprentice model in the manager training system (Şimşek, 2003).
For this, selecting, appointing, and training managers should be re-evaluated.
Objectivity should be ensured more clearly, especially in the appointing
processes. On the other hand, school administrators’ duties, authorities, and
responsibilities have become more complex than in the past, and expectations
from principals have changed (Korkmaz, 2005; Sezgin, 2014). School
administrators’ duties, authorities, and responsibilities are more complex than in
the past (Korkmaz, 2005; Sezgin, 2014). For this reason, it is important today to
determine the principles of high qualification and merit that should be possessed
in managerial appointments in accordance with age requirements. In the selection
process, it is understood that the interview alone is not sufficient for the
competencies; however, different areas of competency should also be considered.
If subjective approaches are exhibited during the interview evaluation phase, this
may harm the sense of social justice. For this, the process should be carried out
more objectively. In selecting and training managers, objectively revealing the


                                     [1790]

 The Restructuring of School Management in the Effect of Change and Globalization

qualities expected from managers can guide the training and evaluation
processes.
       Although the authority of school principals is limited, it is seen that their
responsibilities are higher (Başaran, 1996). It is a general acceptance that poorly
managed schools are at the root of the problems experienced in the education
system. It may not be possible for a school principal whose authority is limited
and weakened to achieve organizational efficiency. For this reason, school
administrators should be strengthened, their areas of authority should be
expanded, and they should be able to make more original decisions (Bursalıoğlu,
2000; Yılmaz, 2010). It is seen that the personal rights of the managers need to
be improved despite the limitations of authority. Although school principals have
more responsibilities than teachers, their wages are almost similar to teachers.
The managers’ salaries should be re-evaluated, considering the responsibility-
wage balance, and ensuring that they have a standard income according to their
duties (Gümüşeli, 2002; Taymaz, 2003). Due to the limited remuneration of
managers compared to their responsibilities, it can be thought that their
professional reputation will be damaged. MoNE officials and decision-makers
need to produce income-increasing policies to keep a highly qualified and well-
trained education leader and human capital in the organization. On the other hand,
for the dignity of the administrator, it should be ensured that social awareness is
raised, and every segment of the society should show respect to education,
educators, and education leaders. Looking at the research results, the words,
attitudes, and behaviors of the Ministry of National Education officials towards
the education staff are also very important to increase the social reputation and
professional prestige. In addition, the absence of any sanction within the law and
etiquette for the verbal or actual violent attitudes and behaviors applied to
educational staff can be shown among the situations that damage the professional
reputation of school principals.
       In the process of selecting and assigning school administrators, it is
important to determine the competencies expected from these administrators
(Celep, Ay & Göğüş, 2010). In an environment created by the effect of
globalization and where competition accelerates, educational organizations
should make reform-like changes to make education more effective (Özmen,
2002). Educational organizations should have a climate focused on continuous
learning and innovation (Baydar & Çetin, 2021). For this reason, it is important
to give importance to the professional development of managers. Efficiency and
effectiveness in education depend on educational administrators giving
importance to lifelong learning, being aware of scientific developments, and
applying new models to education (Hoy & Miskel, 2010). Looking at the Ministry
                                      [1791]

                                 Fatih BAYDAR

of National Education’s policies in this regard, it can be said that these policies
are not sufficient to ensure the professional development of school
administrators. It is important to carry out encouraging activities to ensure the
personal-professional development of managers.
       According to another research finding, there are some characteristics that
school administrators should have. According to them, managers should know a
good foreign language. At the same time, they should manage the decision-
making process correctly, be accessible, be highly devoted to their profession,
love their homeland and nation, understand the requirements and importance of
the profession, have moral and ethical values, have a dynamic personality that
cares about continuous development, follow change and act following the age,
should care about their academic development, be a good book reader, have a
calm and constructive temperament, adopt participatory management, have
knowledge of legislations, be fair, not avoid responsibility, be aware of their
personal competencies, communicate effectively, be a researcher, think
scientifically, be supportive, be entrepreneurial, and should be able to strengthen
school-environment communication. School administrators are expected to have
values and competencies in the communication process and reflect them in their
behaviors (Darling-Hammond et al., 2007). For the school principal, these
competencies are not only behaviors to be used in management processes but also
values that are personally internalized and connected. In recent years, due to the
new public management approach, managers are expected to follow the
developments in education and make their schools open to innovations under the
influence of change and globalization (Baydar & Çetin, 2021). For this reason, it
is important to increase the authority of managers and strengthen them. Therefore,
school management should be considered a profession with different roles and
responsibilities than teaching. Therefore, MoNE officials and policymakers
should review the school administrator employment models applied in the
international arena and implement a new model specific to Turkey (Balcı and
Çınkır, 2002). In today’s conditions, it is a necessity to put school management
in a position it deserves in the society and education system due to the idea that
the educational leaders have a critical role in the transformation of educational
programs into teaching activities and the effectiveness of students’ learning.


REFERENCES
Acar, H. (2002, Mayıs). Eğitim Yöneticileri Nasıl Yetiştirilmeli. 21.YY Eğitim
      yöneticilerinin yetiştirilmesi sempozyumu, Ankara.

                                     [1792]

 The Restructuring of School Management in the Effect of Change and Globalization

Ağaoğlu, E. Gültekin, M., & Çubukçu, Z. (2002). Okul Yöneticisi Yeterliliklerine
     Dayalı Eğitim Programı Önerisi. 21.YY Eğitim yöneticilerinin
     yetiştirilmesi sempozyumu, Ankara.
Ağaoğlu, E., Altınkurt, Y., Yılmaz, K., & Karaköse, T. (2012). Okul
     yöneticilerinin yeterliklerine ilişkin okul yöneticilerinin ve öğretmenlerin
     görüşleri (Kütahya ili). Eğitim ve Bilim, 37(164), 159-175.
Akkuş, F. (2011). Okul Yöneticisi Seçme ve Yetiştirme Modelleri: Tarih, Kültür
     ve Güncel Üzerine Düşünceler. http://fikirterazisi.blogspot.com/2011/10/
     okul-yoneticisi-secme-ve-yerlestirme.html, Erişim tarihi: 13.03.2022.
Aksoy, H. H. (2002, Mayıs). A.B.D.’de Okul Yöneticilerinin Istihdamında
     Aranan Nitelikler, Kosulları ve Ücretleri. 21.YY Eğitim yöneticilerinin
     yetiştirilmesi sempozyumu, Ankara.
Anderson, M. E. (1991). Principals How to Train Recruit, Select, Induct, and
     Evaluate Leaders for America’s Schools. Eric clearing house on
     educational management. College of Education, University of Oregon.
Bakioğlu, A., Özcan, K., & Hacıhafızoglu, Ö. (2002, Mayıs). Okul
     Yöneticilerinin Mentor Yoluyla Yetiştirilme Ihtiyacı. 21.YY Eğitim
     Yöneticilerinin Yetiştirilmesi Sempozyumunda sunulan bildiri. Ankara.
Balcı, A. (1998). Eğitim yöneticisinin yetiştirilmesi. Eğitim Bilimleri Fakültesi
       Dergisi, 21, 1-2.
Balcı, A. (2008). Türkiye’de eğitim yönetiminin bilimleşme düzeyi. Kuram ve
       Uygulamada Eğitim Yönetimi Dergisi, 54, 181-209.
Balcı, A. (2011). Eğitim yönetiminin değişen bağlamı ve eğitim yönetimi
      programlarına etkisi. Eğitim ve Bilim, 36(162), 196-209.
Balcı, A. & Çınkır, Ş. (2002, Mayıs). Türkiye’de Eğitim Yöneticilerinin
      Yetiştirilmesi. 21. Yüzyılın eşiğinde Türk eğitim sistemi ulusal
      sempozyumu, Ankara.
Balyer, A. & Gündüz, Y. (2011). Değişik ülkelerde okul müdürlerinin
      yetiştirilmesi: Türk eğitim sistemi için bir model önerisi. Kuramsal
      Eğitimbilim, 4(2), 182-197.
Başaran, İ. E. (1996). Türkiye Eğitim Sistemi. Yargıcı Matbaası.




                                     [1793]

                                 Fatih BAYDAR

Baydar, F. & Çetin, M. (2021). The model of relationships between intellectual
     capital, learning organizations, and innovation-oriented organizational
     structures in educational organizations. Eurasian Journal of Educational
     Research, 94, 265-294.
Baydar, F. (2022). The relationship between participation in administrative
     decisions and school effectiveness: An empirical study on teachers.
     International Journal of Psychology and Education Studies, 9(2), 143-152.
Bottoms, G., O’Neill, K., Fry, B., & Hill, D. (2003). Good Principals are the Key
     to Successful Schools: Six Strategies to Prepare More Good Principals.
     Southern Regional Education Board.
Bursalıoğlu, Z. (2000). Okul Yönetiminde Yeni Yapı ve Davranış. Pegem
      Yayınları.
Büyüköztürk, Ş., Çakmak, E., Akgün, Ö. E., Karadeniz, Ş., & Demirel, F. (2012).
     Bilimsel Araştırma Yöntemleri. Pegem Akademi.
Celep, C., Ay, F. K., & Göğüş, N. (2010, Mayıs). Türkiye, Finlandiya ve
      Kanada’daki lisansüstü düzeyde eğitim yöneticisi yetiştiren kurumların
      karşılaştırılması. V. Ulusal Eğitim Yönetimi Kongresi, Antalya.
Cemaloğlu, N. (2005). Türkiye’de okul yöneticisi yetiştirme ve istihdamı: Var
     olan durum, gelecekteki olası gelişmeler ve sorunlar. Gazi Eğitim Fakültesi
     Dergisi, 25(2), 249-274.
Creswell, J. W. (2007). Qualitative Inquiry & Research Design: Choosing Among
     Five Approaches. Sage.
Çelenk, S. (2002, Mayıs). Geleceğin Eğitim Yöneticilerinin Yetiştirilmesinde bir
     Model Önerisi. 21.YY Eğitim yöneticilerinin yetiştirilmesi sempozyumu.
     Ankara.
Çelikten, M. (2001). Etkili Okullarda Karar Süreci. Erciyes Üniversitesi Sosyal
      Bilimler Dergisi, 1(11), 1-12.
Darling-Hammond, L., LaPointe, M., Meyerson, D., Orr. M. T., & Cohen, C.
      (2007). Preparing School Leaders for a Changing World: Lessons From
      Exemplary Leadership Development Programs. Stanford University,
      Stanford Educational Leadership Institute.
Ekiz, D. (2003). Eğitimde Araştırma Yöntem ve Metotlarına Giriş.
Erdogan, İ. (2000). Çağdaş Eğitim Sistemleri. Sistem Yayıncılık.
Güçlü, N. (2000). Okula dayali yönetim. Milli Eğitim Dergisi, 148.
                                    [1794]

 The Restructuring of School Management in the Effect of Change and Globalization

Gümüşeli, A. İ. (2001). 2001 Yilinda Ilköğretim Okulu Müdürleri Çalışma Ortam
    ve Koşulları, Sorunları, Bireysel ve Mesleki Özellikleri. Yıldız Teknik
    Üniversitesi Vakfı Yayınları.
Hoy, W. K. & Miskel, C. G. (2010). Eğitim Yönetimi (Çeviri: S. Turan). Nobel
     Yayın Dağıtım.
Huber, S. G. (2002). Context of research, in Stephan Gerhard Huber (Ed.).
     Preparing School Leaders for the 21st Century, (pp.1-14). Taylor &
     Francis.
Institute for Educational Leadership (IEL) (2000). Leadership for Student
       Learning: Reinventing the Principalship. School leadership for the 21st
       century initiative, a report of the task force on the principalship.
       http://www.iel.org/programs/21st/reports/principal.pdf, Access date:
       15.03.2022.
Jentz, B. C., & Murphy, J. T. (2005). Embracing confusion: What leaders do
       when they don’t know what to do. Phi Delta Kappan, 86, 358-366.
Karabatak, S. (2015). Okul Yöneticisi Yetiştirmede Web Tabanlı Problem Temelli
     Öğrenmenin Katılımcıların Öz-Yeterlik Inançlarına ve Yöneticilik
     Mesleğine Ilişkin Tutumlarına Etkisi. Yayınlanmamış doktora tezi, Fırat
     Üniversitesi, Eğitim Bilimleri Enstitüsü, Eğitim Yönetimi, Teftişi,
     Planlaması ve Ekonomisi Ana Bilim Dalı.
Karip, E. & Köksal, K. (1999). Okul yöneticilerinin yetiştirilmesi. Kuram ve
      Uygulamada Eğitim Yönetimi, 5(18), 193-207.
Korkmaz, M. (2005). Okul yöneticilerinin yetistirilmesi: Sorunlar – çözümler ve
     öneriler. Gazi Eğitim Fakültesi Dergisi, 25(3) 237-252.
Levine, A. (2005). Educating School Leaders. The Education School Project.
Loder, T. L., & Spillane, J. P. (2005). Is a principal still a teacher? US women
      administrators’ accounts of role conflict and role discontinuity. School
      Leadership and Management, 25(3), 263-279.
Miles, M. B., & Huberman, A. M. (2016). Genişletilmiş bir Kaynak Kitap: Nitel
      Veri Analizi (S. Akbaba-Altun & A. Ersoy, Çev. Ed.). Pegem Akademi.
Moos, L., Johansson, O., & Day, C. (Eds.). (2011). How School Principals
     Sustain Success over Time: International Perspectives. Springer.
Morrison, H. (2007). Promising Leadership Practices, Changing Role of the
      Middle Level and High School Leader: Learning from the Past—Preparing

                                     [1795]

                                 Fatih BAYDAR

      for the Future. National Association of Secondary School Principals, 19-
      30.
Peterson, K. D. (2002). The professional development of principals: Innovations
      and opportunities. Educational Administration Quarterly, 38(2), 213-232.
Sezgin, F. (2014). Okul yöneticisi ve liderlik. Türk Eğitim Sistemi ve Okul
      Yönetimi (s. 124-157) içinde. Pegem Akademi.
Sisman, M., Turan S. (2002, Mayıs). Dünyada Eğitim Yöneticilerinin
     Yetiştirilmesine Ilişkin Başlica Yönelimler ve Türkiye için Çikarilabilecek
     Bazi Sonuçlar. 21.YY Eğitim yöneticilerinin yetiştirilmesi sempozyumu,
     Ankara.
Şen, E., Ateşoğlu, H., & Akdoğan, S. (2017). Okul Yöneticilerinin liderlik
      davranışları, performans uygulamaları ve kuramsallaşmaya ilişkin
      öğretmen görüşlerinin çeşitli değişkenler açısından incelenmesi. İşletme
      Araştırmaları Dergisi, 9(3), 572-593.
Şimşek, H. (2003). Eğitim Yöneticilerinin Yetiştirilmesi: Karşılaştırmalı
     Örnekler ve Türkiye için Çıkarsamalar. VII. Çağdaş Eğitim Sistemlerinde
     Öğretmen Yetiştirme Kongresi, Cumhuriyet Üniversitesi Kültür Merkezi,
     Sivas.
Şimşek, Y. ve Yıldırım, H. (2011). Sosyal Bilimlerde Nitel Araştırma Yöntemleri.
     Seçkin Yayıncılık.
Şişman, M. (2012). Eğitimde Mükemmellik Arayışı Etkili Okullar. Pegem A
     Yayıncılık.
Taymaz, H. (2003). Okul Yönetimi. Pegem A Yayıncılık.
Tschannen-Moran, M. & Gareis, C. R. (2005). Cultivating Principals’ Sense of
     Efficacy: Supports That Matter. In annual meeting of the university council
     for educational administration, Nashville, TN.
Usdan, M. (2000). Leadership for student learning: Reinventing the principalship.
     Institute For Educational Leadership, 1(24).
Wesson, L. & Weaver, J. (2001). Administration-educational standards: Using
     the lens of postmodern thinking to examine the role of the school
     administrator. In J. Kincheloe & D. Weil (Eds.). Standards and Schooling
     in the United States: An Encyclopedia, 3 vols. Santa Barbara. ABC-CLIO.



                                    [1796]

 The Restructuring of School Management in the Effect of Change and Globalization

Yirci, R. (2009). Mentorluğun Eğitimde Kullanılması ve Okul Yöneticisi
      Yetiştirmede Yeni Bir Model Önerisi. Yayınlanmamış yüksek lisans tezi,
      Fırat Üniversitesi Eğitim Bilimleri Enstitüsü.


                          EXTENDED ABSTRACT
Purpose: Purpose of this study evaluates the Ministry of National Education
(MoNE) policies regarding the restructuring of school administration under the
influence of change and globalization based on education administrators’ views.
It also presents opinions and suggestions regarding these policies. For these
purposes, answers to the following questions were sought: i) Is a new approach
to school management selection, training, and appointment processes necessary?
ii) What approaches should the Ministry of National Education use regarding the
professional development of school administrators before and after their service?
iii) What are the competencies that school administrators should have? At what
level do school administrators in Turkey have these competencies? iv) What
methods should be adopted regarding school administrators’ selection, training,
and appointment?
Method: This research used a case study design, one of the qualitative research
methods, to reveal the thoughts of school principals about school management
under the influence of change and globalization in the Maltepe, Kartal, Pendik,
Tuzla, and Sultanbeyli districts of Istanbul. In research, the purposive sampling
method will be preferred in selecting the study group. Purposeful sampling is the
selection of information-rich situations in the context of the purpose of the study
to conduct in-depth research. Face-to-face interviews were conducted with the
school principals participating in research and a semi-structured interview form
was used to obtain their opinions. In this study which used a qualitative research
design, content analysis was performed on the data obtained from the semi-
structured interview form.
Findings: Themes and sub-themes were created by content analysis of the
obtained data. These themes are: Manager Training, Selection, and Appointment,
Authority-Responsibility-Wage Balance, Professional Reputation, Performance
Evaluation Criteria, Professional Development, Characteristics of School
Administrator, In-Service Training, New Management Approach.
Result and Argument: The research aimed to review the Ministry of National
Education policies regarding the restructuring of school administration under the
effect of globalization and change. According to the findings, MoNE policies
regarding the selection, training, and appointment processes of education
                                     [1797]

                                  Fatih BAYDAR

administrators in Turkey are complex and inadequate. It is important to determine
the high qualifications and merit principles that must be possessed in appointing
managers following the age requirements. In the selection process, it is
understood that the interview alone is not sufficient for the competencies;
however, different areas of competency should also be considered. If subjective
approaches are exhibited during the interview evaluation phase, this may harm
the sense of social justice. For this, the process should be carried out more
objectively. In selecting and training managers, objectively revealing the qualities
expected from managers can guide the training and evaluation processes.
According to another research finding, there are some characteristics that school
administrators should have. According to them, managers should know a good
foreign language. At the same time, they should manage the decision-making
process correctly, be accessible, be highly devoted to their profession, love their
homeland and nation, understand the requirements and importance of the
profession, have moral and ethical values, have a dynamic personality that cares
about continuous development, follow change and act following the age, should
care about their academic development, be a good book reader, have a calm and
constructive temperament, adopt participatory management, have knowledge of
legislations, be fair, not avoid responsibility, be aware of their personal
competencies, communicate effectively, be a researcher, think scientifically, be
supportive, be entrepreneurial, and should be able to strengthen school-
environment communication. Moreover, it is important to increase the authority
of managers and strengthen them. Therefore, school management should be
considered a profession with different roles and responsibilities than teaching.
MoNE officials and policymakers should review the school administrator
employment models applied in the international arena and implement a new
model specific to Turkey. In today’s conditions, it is a necessity to put school
management in a position it deserves in the society and education system due to
the idea that the educational leaders have a critical role in the transformation of
educational programs into teaching activities and the effectiveness of students’
learning.




                                      [1798]